[BENGAL INDIGO CONTRACTS ACT, 1836.pdf - page 1]
                                       BENGAL INDIGO CONTRACTS ACT, 1836  
                                                      ACT NO. 10 OF 1836  
                                                                                                                            [11th April ,1836.]  
I.    It is hereby enacted, that Clause  Third, Section V., Regulation V I., 1823, of the Bengal Code, be  
repealed.  
 
II. And it is hereby enacted, that  whenever the  right to Indigo Plant may be contested, and an order                                             
shall be passed, under the provisions of  Clause  Ninth, Section III., Regulation VI., 1823, of the Ben gal 
Code, for the delivery of Indigo Plant to one of the parties claiming the same, such party shall not be allowed 
to cut or  remove the Indigo Plant  until be shall have given sufficient security  to the satisfaction of  Court  
trying  the case, to make good any claim that shall be ultimately established  to such Indigo Plant whether 
arising from a prior right  to the produce of the land, or from an arrear of rent due on account of the specific 
parcel of  land from which the Plant  may have been produced.  
 
III.   And it is hereby enacted, that when a lawful contract shall have been made between a ryut and 
another party, by which contract the ryut shall have bound himself to cultivate Indigo Plant for the other 
part, or to deliver Indigo Plant to the other p arty, and when the other party shall have advanced money to 
the ryut for the purpose of enabling the ryut to fulfil l such contract, then if any other person, knowing that 
such contract exist, and that such advance has been made, shall prevail upon the ryut  to break such contract, 
the party who made the advance shall be entitled to proceed by civil action against the person  who shall 
have so prevailed on the ryut, as well as against the ryut, and to recover from him or them, jointly or 
severally, damages t o the extent of the injury sust
<|CHUNK|>
[BENGAL INDIGO CONTRACTS ACT, 1836.pdf - page 1]
t, and to recover from him or them, jointly or 
severally, damages t o the extent of the injury sustained, together with  costs of suit.  
     Provided, always, that nothing in this Section contained shall be construed to give a right of action 
against any person in consequence of any act, which  that person may have done for the purpose of procuring 
payment of a debt, or performance of a lawful contract.  
IV.  And it is hereby enacted, that the Court trying any suit instituted  under the provisions of Regulation 
VI., 1823, of the Bengal Code, or under  the provisions of t his Act, shall be authorized to examine both the 
plaintiff and the defendant whenever the Court shall deem such examination necessary to the ends of justice; 
and if the award be in favor of the defendant, to assign to the defendant a  sum which may be a co mpensation 
to him for the expense and  loss of time occasioned by the proceeding.  
V.   And it is hereby enacted, that it shall be competent to a Zillah or  City Judge, to refer to a Principal 
Sudder Ameen or Sudder Ameen, according to the amount of their  respective jurisdictions, any  suit, 
whether regular or summary, which may be  instituted under the provisions of Regulation VI., 1823, or 
under the provisions of this Act, to be  enquired into and decided by the said Principal Sudder Ameen, or 
Sudder Ameen ,  in the same manner, and under the same rules,  as such suit may be enquired  into and 
decided by a Zillah or City Judge, any  thing in the existing Regulations to the contrary notwithstanding.  
 
                                             _______________ _________________  
<|CHUNK|>
[EASEMENTS (EXTENDING ACT V OF 1882).pdf - page 1]
1 EASEMENTS (EXTENDING ACT V OF 1882)  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTION  
________  
SECTION  
1. Extension of Act V, 1882, to Bombay and the North -Western Provinces and Oudh . 
<|CHUNK|>
[EASEMENTS (EXTENDING ACT V OF 1882).pdf - page 2]
2 EASEMENTS (EXTENDING ACT V OF 1882)  
ACT NO. 8 OF 18911 
[6th March , 1891 .] 
An Act to extend the Indian Easements Act, 1882, to certain areas in which that Act is not in 
force.  
WHEREAS  it is expedient to extend the Indian Easements Act, 1882  (5 of 1882), to certain areas in 
which that Act is not in force;  It is Hereby enacted as follows: — 
1. Extension of Act V, 1882, to Bombay and the North -Western Provinces and Oudh .—The 
Indian Easements Act, 1882 (V of 1882), is hereby ex tended to the territories respectively administered 
by the Governor of Bombay in Council and the lieutenant -Governor of the 2North -Western Provinces and 
Chief Commissioner  of Oudh.  
 
 
____________  
                                                           
1. Extended Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir and Union territor y of Ladakh by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the fifth schedule   
(w.e.f. 31 -10-2019).  
2. Now Uttar Pradesh.  
<|CHUNK|>
[MADRAS.—BOARD OF REVENUE..pdf - page 1]
MADRAS. —BOARD OF REVENUE.  
 
ACT NO. X OF 1849. 
                                                   [Passed on the 26th May,1849. ] 
Recites expediency of empowering G. to depute one Member of Board of  Revenue to perform duties 
of Board in any districts,&c.  
     1. Enacts, G. in C. of Fort St. G. may depute Member of Revenue Board to Perform in any district, 
duties of Board collectively.  
2, 3. Empowers Commissioner so deputed to exercise all powers mentioned in  Commission ,               
(3) Commission to be published in Gazette.     
4. Correspondence ,&c. under  Commission to be deposited with and deemed  Records of Board of 
Revenue.  
 An Act for appointing a Commissioner of Revenue  at  Madras  . 
Whereas it is expedient that the Governor of Fort St. Georg e in Cou ncil should be empowered to 
depute a Member of  the Board of Revenue, to perform in any of the Districts of that Presidency all or 
any of the duties which, by the General Regulations and Laws of the Presidency, belong to the Board 
of  Revenue collectively, It is enacted as follows:  
I. The Governor of Fort St. George in Council may, from time to time, whenever he shall see fit, 
depute a member of the Board  of Revenue t o perform alone, in any of the D istricts of that  Presidency, 
all or any of the duties which, by the General Regulations and Laws of the Presidency, belong to the 
Board of Revenue collectively.  
II. When a special Commission shall  be given to a Member of the Board of Revenue under this 
Act, the Member of the Board named therein shall, by vir tue thereof, be empowered to exercise, 
within the limits of his Commission, all the powers and duties which by Law are vested in the Board 
of Revenue collectively, without exception, or subject to any exceptions or restrictions, which shall be 
prescribed i n such Commission ; and all Regulations and Acts concerning the Board of Revenue shall 
be deemed to apply to the said Commissioner within the limits of his Commission, 
<|CHUNK|>
[MADRAS.—BOARD OF REVENUE..pdf - page 1]
 of Revenue shall 
be deemed to apply to the said Commissioner within the limits of his Commission, and with regard to 
all things concerning the Revenue of the Districts included in it, so far as is necessary to give full 
effect to his Commission and to this Act.  
III. Every such Commission shall  be published in the Fort St. Ge orge  Gazette, and the 
Commissioner shall enter on his Office from the date of such publication; and in like manner t he 
revocation or other determination of any such Commission shall be published in the Fort St. George 
Gazette.  
IV. The correspondence and other documents belonging to any such Commission shall be 
deposited on the determination there of, in the Office of th e Board of Revenue, and shall be deemed 
records of the said Board.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[STRAITS SETTLEMENTS.pdf - page 1]
STRAITS SETTLEMENTS.  
ACT No.XIV. OF 1852.  
                                                 [Passed on the 2 7th February,1852 .] 
     1.  Extending Acts 24,1841  and 17,1843  to Straits Settlements.  
2. Extending provisions of above Acts relating to Supreme Court to Court of Judicature of Straits 
Settlements .    
An Act for extending the provisions of Acts XXIV.of 1841. and XVII. of 1843, to the Straits 
Settlement.  
Whereas doubts have bee n entertained whether Acts XXIV. of 1841. and XVII . of 1843, are in 
force in the Settlement of Prince of Wales’ Islands, Singapore and Malacca; It is hereby enacted as 
follows:  
I. The Provisions of Acts XXIV . of 1841, and XVII. of 1843, shall be applicable and in force in the 
said Settlement.  
II. All provisions contained in Act XXIV. of 1841, and Act XVII. of 1843, relating to Her 
Majesty’s Supreme Courts shall be applicable to the Court of Judicature of the said Settlement, and 
shall b e respectively construed as, if , instead of the words Her Majes ty’s Supreme Courts, or Her 
Majesty’s Supreme Courts of the repective  presidencies, or the Supreme Court of each of the 
Presidencies, the words, “the Court of Judicature of prince of Wales’ Island, Singapore and Malacca,” 
had been therein mentioned.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE (GRADING AND MARKING) ACT, 1937.pdf - page 1]
1 THE AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE (GRADING AND MARKING) ACT, 1937  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and extent.  
2. Explanations.  
3. Prescription of grade designation s. 
3A. Powers of entry, inspection and search.  
3B. Powers of the authorised officer to seize agricultural produce.  
4. Penalty for unauthorised marking with grade designation mark.  
5. Penalty for counterfeiting grade designation mark.  
5A. Penalty for selling migra ded articles.  
5B. Power to prescribe com pulsory grade designations in respect of certain articles.  
5C. Adjudicati ng officer . 
5D. Appeal.  
5E. Recovery.  
6. Extension of application of Act.   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE (GRADING AND MARKING) ACT, 1937.pdf - page 2]
2 THE AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE (GRADING AND MARKING) ACT, 1937  
ACT NO. 1 OF 19371 
[24th February, 1937 .] 
An Act to  provide for the grading and marking of agricultural  2[and other] produce.  
WHEREAS  it is expedient to provide for the grading and marking of agricultural  2[and other] produce ; 
It is hereby enacted as follows:  
1. Short title and extent .—(1) This Act may be called the Agricultural Produce (Grading and 
Marking) Act, 1937.  
3[(2) It extends to the whole of India  4***.] 
2. Explanations .—In this Act, unless the contrary appears from the subject or context ,— 
(a) “agricultural produce ” includes all produce of agriculture or horticulture and all articles of 
food or drink wholly or partly manufactured from any such produce, and fleeces and the skins of 
animals;  
(b) “counterfeit ” has the meaning assigned to that word by section 28 of the Indian Penal             
Code  (45 of 1860) ; 
(c) “covering ” includes any vessel, box, crate, wrapper, tray or other container;  
(d) “grade designation ” means a designation prescribed as indicative of the quality of any 
scheduled article;  
(e) “grade designatio n mark ” means a mark prescribed as representing a particular grade 
designation;  
(f) “quality ”, in relation to any article , includes the state and condition of the article;  
(g) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(h) “scheduled artic le” means an article included in the Schedule;  5*** 
(i) an article is said to be marked with a grade designation mark, if the article itself is marked with 
a grade designation mark or any covering containing or label attached to such article is so marked;  
6[(j) an article is said to be migra ted if,— 
(i) the article is not of the quality prescribed for the grade designation with which it is 
marked;  
(ii) the composition of the article offered for grading is altered in any way after a sample has 
been drawn for  analysis and determination of the grade designation of the art
<|CHUNK|>
[THE AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE (GRADING AND MARKING) ACT, 1937.pdf - page 2]
y after a sample has 
been drawn for  analysis and determination of the grade designation of the article in accordance 
with the rules made under this Act;  
(iii) the article is tampered with in any manner; and  
                                                           
1. The Act has been extended in its application to Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and Sch. I (w.e.f. 1 -7-1965), to 
Pondicherry by Reg. 7 of 1963, s. 3 and Sch. I (w.e.f. 1 -10-1963) and to Goa, Daman and Diu by Notifn. No. G .S.R. 679, dated 
1-5-1965, Gazette of India, Pt. II, Sec. 3 (i), p. 742.  
2. Ins. by Act 13 of 1942, s.  2 (w.e.f. 24 -2-1937).  
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1948, for sub -section ( 2). 
4. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 25 of 1960, s. 2 (w.e.f. 27 -8-1960).  
5. The word “and” omitted by Act 76 of 1986, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15-4-1987).  
6. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -4-1987 ). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE (GRADING AND MARKING) ACT, 1937.pdf - page 3]
3 (iv) any false claim is made for the quality prescribed for its grade designation, u pon the label 
or through advertisement or in any other manner.]  
3. Prescription of grade designation s.—1[(1)] The Central Government may, after previous 
publication by notification in the Official Gazette,  2[make rules to carry  out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: —] 
(a)  fixing grade designations to indicate the quality of any scheduled article;  
(b) defining the quality indicated by every grade designation;  
(c)  specifying grade designation marks to represent particular grade designations;  
(d) authorising a person or a body of persons, subject to any prescribed conditions, to mark with a 
grade designation mark  any article in respect of which such mark has been prescribed or any covering 
containing or label attached to any such article;  
(e) specifying the conditions referred to in clause ( d)  including in respect of any article 
conditions as to the manner of mar king, the manner in which the article shall be packed, the type of 
covering to be used, and the quantity by weight, number or otherwise to be included in each covering;  
(f) providing for the payment of any expenses incurred in connection with the manufactu re or use 
of any implement necessary for the reproduction of a grade designation mark or with the manufacture 
or use of any covering or label marked with a grade designation mark  3[or with measures for the 
control of the quality of articles marked with gra de designation marks including testing of samples 
and inspection of such articles or with any publicity work carried out to promote the sale of any class 
of such articles;]  4*** 
(g) providing for the confiscation and disposal of produce marked otherwise than in accordance 
with the prescribed conditions with a grade designation mark;  
5[
<|CHUNK|>
[THE AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE (GRADING AND MARKING) ACT, 1937.pdf - page 3]
ked otherwise than in accordance 
with the prescribed conditions with a grade designation mark;  
5[(ga) holding inquiry and imposing penalty under sub-section ( 1) of section 5C;  
(gb) preferring appeal under sub-section ( 1) of section 5D; ] 
6[(h) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.]  
7[8[(3)] Every rule made by the Central  Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which ma y be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses ag ree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previ ously done 
under that rule.]  
                                                           
1. Section 3 re-numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 20 of 1983, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 15 -3-1984). 
2. Subs. by Act 76 of 1986, s. 3, for “make rules —” (w.e.f. 15 -4-1987).  
3. Ins. by Act 20 of 1943, s. 2 (w.e.f. 13 -8-1943).  
4. The word “and” omitted by Act 76 of 1986, s. 3 (w.e.f. 15 -4-1987).  
5. Ins. by Act 18 of 2023, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 31 -7-2024) . 
6. Ins. by Act 76 of 1986 , s. 3 (w.e.f. 15 -4-1987).  
7. Ins. by Act 20 of 1983, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 15 -3-1984). 
8. Sub -section ( 2) re-numbered as sub -section ( 3) thereof by Act 76 of 1986, s. 3 (w.e.f. 15 -4-1987).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE (GRADING AND MARKING) ACT, 1937.pdf - page 4]
4 1[3A. Powers of entry, inspection and search .—(1) Any officer of the Central Government or a 
State Government or any authority, being an officer of a gazette drank or of equivalent rank, authorised  
by the Central government may, if he has reason to believe that any provision of t his Act or the rules 
made there under has been, or is being, contravened, enter any premises at any reasonable time and make 
necessary inspection of, and search for, the agri cultural produce in relation to which such contravention 
has been, or is being, made.  
(2) Every authorisation made under sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to be a warrant referred to 
in section 93  of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) . 
 3B. Powers of the authorised officer to seize agricultural produce .—(1) An officer authorised 
under sub -section ( 1) of Section 3A may seize and detain any agricultural produce in relation to which an 
offence under this Act or the rules made thereunder is being, or appears to have been, committed, or 
which is intended or likely to be used in the commission of such offe nce: 
Provided that where any agricultural produce seized under this sub -section is subject to speedy or 
natural decay, the officer so authorised may dispose of such produce in such manner as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) The provisions of  section 102  of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974)  shall apply to 
every seizure made under this section. ] 
4. Penalty for unauthorised marking with grade designation mark .—Whoever marks                       
any scheduled article with a grade designation mark, not being authorised to do so by rule made under 
section 3, shall be  2[liable to penalty not exceeding five lakh rupees ]. 
5. Penalty for counterfeiting grade designation mark .—Whoever counterfeits any gr ade 
designation mark or has in his possession any die, plate or other instrument for the purpose of 
counterfeiting a grade designation mark shall be  3[liable to penalty
<|CHUNK|>
[THE AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE (GRADING AND MARKING) ACT, 1937.pdf - page 4]
instrument for the purpose of 
counterfeiting a grade designation mark shall be  3[liable to penalty not exceeding fifteen lakh rupees ]. 
4[5A. Penalty for selling migra ted articles .—Whoever sells any scheduled article which is migra ted 
shall be  5[liable to penalty not exceeding three lakh rupees ]. 
5B. Power to prescribe compulsory grade designations in respect of certain articles .—(1) Where 
the Central Government is of opinion that it  is necessary in the public interest or for the protection of 
consumers that any scheduled article or class of articles shall not be sold or distributed except after such 
article or class of articles is marked with the grade designation mark, it may, by no tification in the Official 
Gazette, make a declaration to that effect.  
(2) Any notification issued under sub -section ( 1) shall specify the area or areas in relation to which 
the notification shall have effect.  
(3) Where a notification under sub -section ( 1) is issued in respect of any area or areas, no person shall 
sell or offer to sell or distribute or offer to distribute any scheduled article or class thereof in the area or 
areas except in accordance with the provisions of t his Act or the rules made there under.  
(4) Whoever contravenes the provisions of this section shall be  6[liable to penalty not exceeding five 
lakh rupees ]. 
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 76 of 1986, s. 4 (w.e.f. 15 -4-1987 ). 
2. Subs.  by Act 18 of 2023, s. 2 and the Schedule for certain words (w.e.f. 31 -7-2024) . 
3. Subs . by s. 2 and the Schedule, ibid., for certain words (31 -7-2024).  
4. Ins. by  Act 76 of 1986 , s. 7 (w.e.f. 15 -4-1987).  
5. Subs. by Act 18 of 2023, s. 2 and the Schedule for certain words (31 -7-2024).  
6. Subs.  by s. 2 and the Schedule , ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 31 -7-2024) . 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE (GRADING AND MARKING) ACT, 1937.pdf - page 5]
5 1[5C. Adjudicating officer .—(1) The Central Government may, for the purposes of determining the 
penalties under sections 4, 5, 5A and 5B, appoint an officer not below the rank of Deputy Secretary to the 
Government of India or an officer not below the rank of Deputy Secretary to the State Government, to be 
adjudicating officer to hold an inquiry and impose penalty, in the manner as ma y be prescribed:  
Provided that the Central Government may appoint as many adjudicating officers as may be required.  
(2) The adjudicating officer may summon and enforce the attendance of any person acquainted with 
the facts and circumstances of the case to give evidence or to produce any document, which in the opinion 
of the adjudicating officer, may be useful for, or relevant to, the subject -matter of the inquiry and if, on 
such inquiry, he is satisfied that the person concerned has failed to comply with th e provisions of                       
sections 4, 5, 5A and 5B, he may impose penalty:  
Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed without giving the person concerned a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard in the matter . 
5D. Appeal .—(1) Whoever aggrieved by the order, passed by the adjudicating officer under Section 
5C may prefer an appeal to the Agricultural Marketing Adviser, Government of India within thirty days 
from the date of receipt of order in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) An app eal may be admitted after the expiry of the period of thirty days if the appellant satisfies the 
Agricultural Marketing Adviser that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within that 
period.  
(3) The Agricultural Marketing Adviser may, after  giving the parties to the appeal an opportunity of 
being heard, pass such order as he may think fit.  
(4) The Agricultural Marketing Adviser referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall dispose of the appeal 
within sixty days from the date of filing.  
5E. Recovery .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE (GRADING AND MARKING) ACT, 1937.pdf - page 5]
hin sixty days from the date of filing.  
5E. Recovery .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, if penalty imposed by the 
adjudicating officer under Section 5C or order of the Agricultural Marketing Adviser under Section 5D, 
as the case may be, is not deposited, the amount shall be recovered as an arr ear of land revenue. ] 
6. Extension of application of Act .—The Central Government, after such consultation as it thinks fit 
of the interests likely to be affected, may by notification in the Official Gazette declare that the provisions 
of this Act shall app ly to an article of agricultural produce not included in the Schedule  2[or to an article 
other than an article of agricultural produce] and on the publication of such notification such article shall 
be deemed to be included in the Schedule.   
                                                           
 1. Subs . by Act 18 of 2023, s. 2 and the Schedule  for section 5C  (w.e.f. 31 -7-2024).  
 2. Ins. by Act 13 of 1942, s. 3 (w.e.f. 24 -2-1937 ). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE (GRADING AND MARKING) ACT, 1937.pdf - page 6]
6 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 2)  
1. Fruit.  
2. Vegetables.  
3. Eggs.  
4. Dairy produce.  
5. Tobacco.  
6. Coffee.  
7. Hides and Skins.  
8. Fruit products.  
9. Atta.  
10. Oilseeds.  
11. Vegetable oils (including hydrogenated oils and vegetable fats).  
12. Cotton.  
13. Rice.  
14. Lac.  
15. Wheat  
16. Sann Hemp.  
17. Sugarcane gur (Jaggery).  
18. Myrobalans.  
19. Bura.  
20. Wool and Goat Hair.  
21. Bristles.  
22. Rosin and Turpentine.  
23. Arecanuts.  
24. Essential Oil.  
25. Cashew nut. 
26. Cardamom.  
27. Pepper.  
28. Ginger.  
29. Honey.  
30. Curry Powder.  
31. Kapok.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE (GRADING AND MARKING) ACT, 1937.pdf - page 7]
7 32. Raw Jute.  
33. Paddy.  
34. Millets.  
35. Mesta.  
36. Chilies.  
37. Turmeric.  
38. Tapioca Chips and Tapioca Flour  
39. Sisal and Aloe Fibres.  
40. Oil cakes.  
41. Condiments and Spices.  
(Other than pepper, ginger, cashewnut, cardamom, chillies  and turmeric, to which the provisions 
of the Act have already been applied.)  
42. Pulses.  
43. Walnut.  
44. Animal casings (cattle, buffaloes, sheep, goats and pigs).  
45. Guar Gum.  
46. Karaya Gum.  
47. Senna Leaves and Pods.  
48. Palmyra fibre.  
49. Catechu.  
50. Tendu Leaves.  
51. Water Chest -nut. 
52. Mushrooms.  
53. Poppy seed.  
54. Cashew -shell Oil (Liquid).  
55. Beeswax.  
56. Gram (Cicer arietinum).  
57. Jowar (Sorghum vulgare).  
58. Maize (Zea mays).  
59. Barley (Hordeum vulgare).  
60. Ragi (Eleusio coracana).  
61. Bajra (Pennisetum typhoides).  
62. Sheekakai powder.  
63. Compounded asafoetida.  
—————  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE AGRICULTURISTS' LOANS ACT, 1884.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE AGRICULTURISTS' LOANS ACT, 1884  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
PREAMBLE.  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title , Commencement.  
2. Local extent.  
3. Repeal of Act X of 1879, and section s 4 and 5 of Act XV of 1880.  
4. Power for State Government to make rules.  
5. Recovery  of loans.  
6. Liability of joint -borrowers as among themselves.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE AGRICULTURISTS' LOANS ACT, 1884.pdf - page 2]
2 
 THE AGRICULTURISTS' LOANS ACT, 1884  
ACT NO. 12 OF 18841 
[24th July, 1884.]  
An Act to amend and provide for the extension of the Northern India Takkavi Act, 1879.  
Preamble .—WHEREAS  it is expedient to amend the Northern India Takkavi Act, 1879 (10 of 1879), 
and provide for its extension to  2[certain other areas];  
It is hereby enacted as follow: — 
1. Short title. —(1) This Act may be called the Agriculturists' Loans Act, 1884; and Commencement.  
(2) It shall come into force on the first day of August, 1884.  
2. Local extent .—(1) This section  3[extends to the whole of India except  the territories which, 
immediately before the 1st November, 1956, were comprised in Part B States].  
4[(2) The rest of this Act extends in the first instance only to Uttar Pradesh, the Central Provinces, 
Assam and Delhi and the territories which, immediately before the 1st November, 1956, were comprised 
in the States of Bombay, Punjab and Ajmer.]  
(3) But any St ate Government may, from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette, extend 
the rest of this Act to the  whole or any part of  5[the territories to which this Act extends] under its 
administration.  
3. [Repeal of Act X of 1879, and sections 4 and 5 of Act XV of 1880.]  Rep. by Repealing Act, 1938                       
(1 of 1938), s. 2 and Schedule.  
4. Power for State Government to make rules .—(1) The State Government  6[or, in a State for which 
there is a Board of Revenue of Financial Commissioner,  such Board or Financial Commissioner, subject to 
the control of the State Government] may, from time to time, 7*** make rules as to loans to be made to 
owners and occupiers of arable land, for the relief of distress, the purchase of seed or cattle, or any  other 
purpose not specified in the Land Improvement Loans Act, 1883 (19 of 1883), but connected with 
agricultural objects.  
(2)  All such rules shall be published in the Official Gazette.  
                                              
<|CHUNK|>
[THE AGRICULTURISTS' LOANS ACT, 1884.pdf - page 2]
h rules shall be published in the Official Gazette.  
                                                           
1. It has been amended in — 
C.P. and Berar by C.P. & Berar Acts 34 of 1947 and 54 of 1949;  
Coorg by Coorg Act 3 of 1936;  
Madras by Madras Act 16 of 1935;  
Orissa by Orissa Act 6 of 1937; and  
U.P. by U.P. Acts 12 of 1922, 12 of 1934 and 12 of 1948.  
Bombay by Bombay Act 27 of 1958.  
Repealed in its application to Malabar District of Kerala by Kerala Act 27 of 1961.  
Extended to the whole of Madhya Pradesh by M.P. Act 27 of 1958 (when notified).  
Extended to the Hyderabad and Saurashtra area of the State of Bombay by Bombay Act 27 of 1958.  
Extended to Goa, Daman and Diu with modifications, by Reg. 12 of 1962, s. 3 and S chedule.  
This Act as at present in force in the State of Gujarat extended to the Union territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli by                     
G. S.  R. 1638, date 3 -12-1962.  
Extended to the Whole of the Union territory of Lakshadweep : vide Reg. 8 of 196 5, s.  
3 and Schedule. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1967).   
2. Subs. by the Adaption of Laws (No. 2) Order, 18956, for “ other Part A States or Part C States ”.  (w.e.f. 1 -11-1956).  
3. Subs., ibid., for “and section 3 extend to the whole of India except Part B States”. (w.e.f. 1 -11-1956)  
4. Subs. by the Adaption of laws (No. 2.) Order, 1956. For “the territories” (w.e.f. 1 -11-1956)  
5. Subs. by 2 A.L.O., 1956, for “the territories”.  
6. Ins. by Act  4 of 1914, Section 2 and Schedule, Part I.  
7. The words “subject to the cont rol of the G.G. in C.”  rep. by the Act 4 of 1914, Section 2.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE AGRICULTURISTS' LOANS ACT, 1884.pdf - page 3]
3 
 1[(3) Every rule made by the State Government or a Board of Revenue or a Financial Commissioner under 
this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before the State Legislature."].  
5. Recovery of loans .—Every loan made in accordance with such rules, all interest (if any) chargeable 
thereon, and costs (if any)  incurred in making or recovering the same, shall, when they become due, be 
recoverable from the person to whom the loan was made, or from any person who has become surety for 
the repayment thereof, as if they were arrears of land -revenue or costs incurred  in recovering the same due 
by the person to whom the loan was made or by his surety.  
6. Liability of joint  borrowers as among themselves. —When a loan is made under this Act to the 
members of a village community or to any other persons on such terms that a ll of them are jointly and 
severally bound to the Government for the payment of the whole amount payable in respect thereof, and a 
statement showing the portion of that amount which as among themselves each is bound to contribute is 
entered upon the order granting the loan and is signed, marked, or sealed by each of them or his agent duly 
authorized in this behalf and by the officer making the order, that statement shall be conclusive evidence 
of the portion of that amount which as among themselves each of those persons is bound to contribute.  
 
                                                           
 1. Ins. by Act 4 of 2005, s. 2 and Schedule. (w.e.f. 11 -1-2005)  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962.pdf - page 1]
1 THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions and interpretation . 
3. General powers of the Central Government . 
4. Notification of discovery of uranium or thorium . 
5. Control over mining or concentration of substances containing uranium . 
6. Disposal of uranium . 
7. Power s to obtain information regarding materials, plant or processes . 
8. Power s of entry and inspection . 
9. Power to do work for discovering minerals . 
10. Compulsory acquisition of rights to work minerals . 
11. Compulsory acquisition of prescribed substances, minerals and plants . 
11A. Removal of doubts . 
12. Compensation in case of compulsory acquisition of a mine . 
13. Novation of certain contracts . 
14. Control over production and use of atomic energy . 
15. Requisitioning of any substance for extracting uranium or plutonium . 
16. Control over radioactive substances . 
17. Special provisions as to safety . 
18. Restriction on disclosure of information . 
19. Prevention of entry into prohibited areas . 
20. Special Provisions as to inventions . 
21. Principles relating to payment of compensation . 
22. Special provisions as to electricity . 
23. Administration of Factories Act, 1948 . 
24. Offences and penalties . 
25. Offences by companies . 
26. Cognizance of offences . 
27. Delegation of powers . 
28. Effect of other laws  
29. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
30. Power to make rules . 
31. Act binding on Government . 
32. [Repealed .] 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962.pdf - page 2]
2 THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962  
ACT No. 33 OF 1962  
[15th September , 1962 .] 
An Act to provide for the development, control and use of atomic energy for the welfare of the 
people of India and for other peaceful purposes and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may b e called the Atomic Energy                   
Act, 1962 . 
(2) It extends  to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may , by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
 2. Definitions and interpretation .—(1) In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “atomic energy ” means energy released from atomic nuclei as a result of any process, 
including the fission and fusion processes;  
(b) “fissile material ” means uranium 233, uranium 235, plutonium or any material containing 
these substances or any other material that may be declared as such by notification by the Central 
Government;  
2[(bb) “Government company” means a company in which — 
(i) not less than fifty -one per cent. of the paid -up share capital is held by the Central 
Government; or  
(ii) the whole of the paid -up share capital is held by one or more of the companies specified 
in sub -clause ( i) and which, by its art icles of association, empowers the Central Government to 
constitute and reconstitute  its Board of Directors ;] 
(c) “minerals ” include all substances obtained or obtainable from the soil (including alluvium or 
rocks) by u nderground or surface working;  
(d) “notification ” means notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(e) “Plant” includes machinery, equ ipment or appliance, whether affixed to land or not;  
(f) “prescribed equipment ” means any property which the Central Government may, by 
notification, prescribe, being a property which in its opinion is specially designed or adapted or w
<|CHUNK|>
[THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962.pdf - page 2]
notification, prescribe, being a property which in its opinion is specially designed or adapted or which 
is used or intended to be used for the production or util isation of any prescribed substance, or for the 
production or utili sation o f atomic energy, radio active substances, or radiation, but does not include 
mining, milling, laboratory and other equipment not so specially designed or adapted and not 
incorporated in equipment used or intended to be used for any of the purposes aforesaid;  
(g) “prescribed substance ” means any substance including any mineral which the Central 
Government may, by notification, prescribe, being a substance which in its opinion is or may be used 
for the production or use of atomic energy or research in to matters  connected therewith and includes 
uranium, plutonium, thorium, beryllium, deuterium or any of their respective derivatives or 
compounds or any other materials containing any of the aforesaid substances;  
(h) “radiation ” means gamma rays, X -rays, a nd rays consisting of alpha particles, beta particles, 
neutrons, protons and other nuclear and sub -atomic particles; but not sound or radio waves,  or visible, 
infrared or ultraviolet  light;  
                                                           
1. 21st September, 1962, vide notification No. G.S.R. 1254, dated 18th September, 1962, see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3 ( i). 
2. Subs. by Act 5 of 2016, s. 2, for clause ( bb) (w.e.f. 15-05-2023 ). 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962.pdf - page 3]
3 (i) “radioactive substance ” or “radioactive material ” means any su bstance or material which 
spontaneously emits radiation in excess of the levels prescribed by notification by the Central 
Government.  
(2) Any reference in this Act to the working of minerals shall be construed as including a reference to 
the mining, gettin g, carrying away, transporting, sorting, extracting or otherwise treating of minerals.  
(3) Any  reference in this Act to the production or use of atomic energy shall be construed as including 
a reference to the carrying out of any process, preparatory or ancillary to such product ion or use.  
3. General powers of the Central Government .—Subject to the  provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government shall have pow er— 
(a) to produce, develop, use and dispose of atomic energy  1[either by itself or through any 
authority or corporation established by it or a Government company] and carry out research into any 
matters connected therewith;  
2[(b) to manufacture or otherwise produce any prescribed or radioactive substance and any 
articles which in its opinion are, or are likely to be, required for or in connection with, the production, 
development or use of ato mic energy or such research as aforesaid and to dispose of such prescribed 
or radioactive substance or any articles manufacture d or otherwise produced ; 
(bb) (i) to buy or otherwise acquire, store and transport any prescribed or radioactive 
substance and an y articles which in its opinion are, or are likely to be, required for, or in 
connection with, the production, development or use o f atomic energy; and  
(ii) to dispose of such prescribed or radioactive substance or any articles boug ht or otherwise 
acquired  by it,  
either by itself or through any authority or corporation established by it, or a Government company;]  
(c) to declare as “restricted information ” any information not so far published or oth erwise made 
public relating to — 
(i) the location, quality
<|CHUNK|>
[THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962.pdf - page 3]
information not so far published or oth erwise made 
public relating to — 
(i) the location, quality an d quantity of prescribed substances and transactions for their 
acquisition, whether by purchase or otherwise, or disposal, whether by sale or otherwise;  
(ii) the processing or prescribed substances and the extraction or production of fissile 
materials from  them;  
(iii) the theory, design, construction and operation of plants for the treatment and production 
of any of the pr escribed substances and for the separation or isotopes;  
(iv) the theory , design, construction and operation of nuclear reactors;  
(v) rese arch and technological work on materials and process es involved in or derived from 
items ( i) to ( iv); 
(d) to declare as “prohibited area ” any area or premises where work including research, design or 
development is carried on in respect of the production, treatment, use, application or disposal of 
atomic energy or of any prescribed substances;  
(e) to provide for control over radioactive substances or radiatio n generating plant in order to — 
(i) prevent radiation hazards;  
(ii) secure public safety and safety or persons hand ling radioactive substances or radiation 
generating plant; and  
(iii) ensure safe disposal of radioactive wastes;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 29 of 1987, s. 3 (w.e.f. 8 -9-1987).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 8 -9-1987).   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962.pdf - page 4]
4 (f) to provide for the production and supply of electricity from atomic energy and for taking 
measures conducive to such product ion and supply and for all matters incidental thereto  1[either by 
itself or through any authority or corporation established by it or a Government company] ; and 
(g) to do all such thing s (including the erection of buildings and execution of works and the 
working of minerals) as the Central Government considers necessary or expedient for the exercise of 
the foregoing powers.  
4. Notification of discovery of uranium or thorium .—(1) Every person who, whether before or 
after the commencement of this Act, has discovered or discovers that uranium or thorium occurs at any 
place in India shall, within three  months after the date of commencement of this Act or after the 
discovery , whichev er is later , report the discovery in writing to the Central Government or to any person 
or authority authorised by the Central Government in this behalf.  
(2) Every person who has reason to believe that uranium or thorium occurs at any place in India shall,  
without delay, send intimation of such belief and the reasons therefor to the Central Government or to any 
such person or authority as aforesaid.  
 5. Control over mining or concentration of substances containing uranium .—(1) If the Central 
Government is s atisfied that any person is mining or is about to mine any substance from which, in the 
opinion of the Central Government, uranium can be or may reasonably be expected to be, isolated or 
extracted, or is engaged or is about to be engaged in treating or con centrating by any physical, chemical 
or metallurgical process any substance from which, in the opinion of the Central Government, uranium 
can be or may reasonably be expected to be, isolated or extracted, the Central Government may b e notice 
in writi ng giv en to that person either — 
(a) require him in conducting the mining operations or in treating or concentrating the subs
<|CHUNK|>
[THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962.pdf - page 4]
ther — 
(a) require him in conducting the mining operations or in treating or concentrating the substance 
aforesaid to comply with such terms and conditions and adopt such processes as the Central 
Government may in the notice , or from time to time thereafter, think fit to specify, or  
(b) totally prohibit him from conducting the mining operations or treating or concentrating the 
substance aforesaid.  
(2) Where any terms and conditions are imposed on any person conducting any mini ng operations or 
treating or concentrating any substance under clause  (a) of sub -section ( 1), the Central Government may, 
having regard to the nature of the terms and conditions, decide as to whether or not to pay any 
compensation to that person and the de cision of the Ce ntral Government shall be final : 
Provided that where the Central Government decides not to pay any compensation, it shall record in 
writing a brief statement giving the reasons for such decision.  
(3) Where the Central Government decides to pay any compensation under sub -section ( 2), the 
amount thereof shall be determined in accordance with section 21 but in calculating the compensation 
payable, no account shall be taken of the value of any uranium contained in the substance referred to in 
sub-section ( 1). 
(4) Where any mining operation or any process o f treatment or concentration of any substance is 
prohibited under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1), the Central Government shall pay compensation to the 
person conducting the mining operations or u sing the process of treatment or concentration and the 
amount of such compensation shall be determined in accordance with section 21 but in calculating the 
compensation payable, no account shall be taken of the value of any uranium contained in the substan ce. 
6. Disposal of uranium .—(1) No minerals, concentrates and other materials which contain uranium 
in its natural state in excess of  such proportion as may be prescribed by notification by the C
<|CHUNK|>
[THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962.pdf - page 4]
um 
in its natural state in excess of  such proportion as may be prescribed by notification by the Central 
Government shall be disposed of except with the previous permission in writing of the Central 
Government and in accordance with such terms and conditions as it may impose.  
(2) The Central  Government may serve notice on any person who has produced any mineral, 
concentrate or other material referred to in sub -section ( 1) that the Central Government  1[proposes to 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 59 of 1986, s. 2, for certain words (w.e.f. 21 -9-1962),  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962.pdf - page 5]
5 compulsorily acquire it and upon the service of the notice], the mineral, concen trate or other material 
shall become the property o f the Central Government and shall be delivered to the Central  Government or 
as it may direct : 
1*   *   *   *   * 
2[(3) Compensation in respect of acquisition under sub -section ( 2) shall be paid in accordance with 
section 21 and in determining such compensation regard shall be had to the cost of production of such 
mineral, concentrate or other material and such other factors as may be relevant but no account shall be 
taken of the v alue of uranium in its natural state contained therein.]  
7. Power s to obtain information regarding materials, plant or processes .—The Central 
Government may, by notice in writing served on any person, require him to make such periodical and 
other returns, or statements at such times and containing such  particulars and accompanied by such plans, 
drawings, and other documents as may be speci fied in the notice relating to — 
(a) any prescribed substance, specified in the notice, in his possession or under his control or 
present in or on any land or mine owned or occupied by him which in the opinion of the Central 
Government is or can be a source of any of the prescribed substances, including returns in respect of 
any such land or mine;  
(b) any plant in his poss ession or under his control designed for mining or processing of minerals 
so specified, or adapted for the production or use of atomic energy or research into matters connected 
therewith;  
(c) any contract entered into by him or any licence granted by or to  him relating to prospecting or 
mining o f minerals so specified or the production or use o f atomic energy or research into matters 
connected therewith;  
(d) any other information in his possession relating to any work carried out by him or on his 
behalf or under his directions, in connection with prospecting or mining of materials so specified or 
the production or 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962.pdf - page 5]
irections, in connection with prospecting or mining of materials so specified or 
the production or use of atomic energy or research into matters connected therewith.  
8. Power of entry and inspection .—(1) Any person authorised  by the Central Government may, on 
producing, if so required, a duly authenticated document showing his authority, enter an y mine, premises 
or land— 
(a) where he has reason to believe that work is being carried out for the purpose of or in 
connection with production and processing of any prescribed substances or substances from which a 
prescribed substance can be obtained or production, development or use o f atomic energy or research 
into matters connected therewith, or  
(b) where any such plant as is mentio ned in clause ( b) of section 7 is situate,  
and may inspect the mine, premises or land and any articles contained therein.  
(2) The person carrying out the inspection may make copies of or extracts from any drawing, plan or 
other document found in the mine, premises or land and for the purpose of making such copies or 
extracts, may remove any such drawing, plan or other document after giving a duly signed receipt for the 
same and retain possession thereof for a period not exceeding seven days.  
 9. Power to do  work for discovering minerals .—(1) The Central Government may, subject to the 
provisions of this section, do on, over or below the surface of any land such work as it considers 
necessary for the purpose of discovering whether there is present in or on the land, either in a natural state 
or in a deposit o f waste m aterial obtained from any under ground or surface working, any substance f rom 
which in its opinion any of the prescribed substances can be obtained, and the extent to which such 
substance is so present.  
(2) Before any powers are exe rcised under sub -section ( 1) in relation to any land, the Central 
Government shall serve on every owner, lessee and occupier of the land a notice in writing speci
<|CHUNK|>
[THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962.pdf - page 5]
al 
Government shall serve on every owner, lessee and occupier of the land a notice in writing specifying the 
                                                           
1. The p roviso omitted by Act 59 of 1986, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21 -9-1962).  
2. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 21 -9-1962).   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962.pdf - page 6]
6 nature of the work proposed to be done and the extent of the land affected, and the time, not being less 
than twenty -eight days, within which and the manner in which objections can be made thereto, and no 
such powers shall be exercised otherwise than in pursuance of the notice or before the expiration of the 
time specified therein for mak ing objections.  
(3) The Central Government may, after giving the person making the objection an opportunity of 
appearing before and being heard by a person appointed by the Central Government for the purpose, and 
after considering any such objection and th e report of the person so appointed, make such orders as it may 
deem proper but not so as to increase the extent of the land affected.  
(4) Compensation shall be determined and paid in accordance with section 21 in respect of any 
diminution in the value of any land or property situate thereon resulting from the exercise of powers 
under this section.  
10. Compulsory acquisition of rights to work minerals .—(1) Where it appears to the Central 
Government that any minerals from which in its opinion any of the pres cribed substances can be obtained 
are present in or on any land, either in a natural state or in  a deposit of waste material obtained from any 
underground or surface working, it may by order provide for compulsorily vesting in the Central 
Government the ex clusive right, so long as the order remains in force to work those minerals and any 
other minerals which it appears to the Central Government to be necessary to work with those minerals, 
and may also provide, by that order or a subsequent order, for compul sorily vesting in the Central 
Government any other ancillary rights which appear to the Central Government to be necessary for the 
purpose of working the minerals aforesaid including (without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
provisions)  — 
(a) rights to withdraw support;  
(b) rights necessary for the purpose of access to or conveya
<|CHUNK|>
[THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962.pdf - page 6]
)  — 
(a) rights to withdraw support;  
(b) rights necessary for the purpose of access to or conveyance of the minerals aforesaid or the 
ventilation or drainage of the working;  
(c) rights to use and occupy the surface of any land for the purpose of  erecting any necessary 
building s and installing any necessary plant in connection with the working of the minerals aforesaid;  
(d) rights to use and occupy for the purpose of working the minerals aforesaid any land forming 
part of or used in connection wit h an existing mine or quarry, and to use or acquire any plant used in 
connection with any such mine or quarry; and  
(e) rights to obtain a supply or water for any of the purposes connected with the working of the 
minerals aforesaid, or to dispose of water o r other liquid matter obtained in consequence of working 
such minerals.  
(2) Notice of any order proposed to be made under this section shall be se rved by the Central 
Government — 
(a) on all persons who, but for the order, would be entitled to work the miner als affected; and  
(b) on every owner, lessee and occupier (except tenants for a month or for less than a month) of 
any land in respect of which rights are proposed to be acquired under the order.  
(3) Compensation in respect of any right acquired under this  section shall be paid in accordance with 
section 21, but in calculating the compensation payable, no account shall be taken of the value of any 
minerals present in or on land affected by the order, being minerals specified in the order as those from 
which  in the opinion of the Central Government uranium or any concentrate or derivative of uranium can 
be obtained.  
11. Compulsory acquisition of prescribed substances, minerals and plants .—(1) Save as 
otherwise provided in any other provision of this Act, the Central Government may compulsorily acquire 
in accordance with the provisions of this section — 
(a) any prescribed substance;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962.pdf - page 6]
 of this section — 
(a) any prescribed substance;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962.pdf - page 7]
7 (b) any minerals from which in the opinion of the Central Government any o f the prescribed 
substances can be obtained;  
(c) any prescribed equipment;  
(d) any plant which is designed or adapted for the mining or processing of any minerals referred 
to in clause ( b) or substances obtained therefrom or for the production or use of any prescribed 
substance or a radioactive substanc e or for the production, use or disposal of such articles as are or 
are likely to be required for or in connection with the production, use or disposal o f atomic energy or 
for research into matters connected therewith.  
(2) Where the Central Government acqu ires any plant referred to in clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1), it 
shall also have the right to acquire any buildings, railway sidings, tramway lines, or aerial ropeways 
serving such plant.  
(3) Where the Central Government proposes to acquire any property under sub -section ( 1), it shall 
serve upon the person appearing to be the owner thereof, a notice in writing specifying the property to be 
acquired and requiring that person to make to the Central Government within the time specified  in the 
notice a writte n declaration containing such particulars as may be so specified  regarding the ownership of 
such property and any agreement or charge by virtue of which any other person has an interest in such 
property.  
(4) Upon the service of a notice under sub -section ( 3), no property to which the notice relates shall be 
disposed of without the previous permission in writing of the Central Government.  
(5) If it appears to the Central Government in consequence of any written declaration made to                  
it in pursu ance of sub -section ( 3) that any person other than the person on whom the notice under                   
sub-section ( 3) was served is the owner of, or has any interest in, the property to which the notice relates, 
the Central Government shall serve a copy  of the notice on that other person.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962.pdf - page 7]
he notice relates, 
the Central Government shall serve a copy  of the notice on that other person.  
(6) A notice served under sub -section ( 3) shall contain a statement to the effect that an objection may 
be made thereto within such time and in such manner as may be specified , and if any such objection is 
duly made and  not withdrawn, the Central Government shall afford an opportunity to the person making 
the objection of appearing before and being heard by a person appointed by the Central Government for 
the purpose.  
(7) After considering any such objection, and the rep ort of the person appointed by it under                    
sub-section ( 6), the Central Government may serve on the person s upon whom the notice under            
sub-section ( 3) or a copy thereof was served a further notice in writing either withdrawing th e notice of 
acquisition or confirming the said notice as respects the property to which it relates or such part of the 
property as may be specified.  
(8) Any property with respect to which a notice of acquisition is s erved under this section shall — 
(a) if no objection is duly made to the notice, vest in the Central Government at the expiration of 
the time for making such objection;  
(b) if such an objection is duly made and the notice is confirmed as respect the whole or any part 
of that property by a notice  served under sub -section ( 7), vest accordingly in the Central Government 
on the servic e of the last mentioned notice;  
and shall in either case vest free from all encumbrances.  
(9) Compensation in respect of acquisition under this section shall be paid in accordance with            
section 21.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962.pdf - page 8]
8 1[11A. Removal of doubts .— For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the compulsory 
acquisition of any mineral, concentrate or other material under sub -section ( 2) of section 6, or of any 
substance, minerals, equipment or plant under sub -section ( 1) of section 11, shall not be deemed to be a 
sale for any purpose whatsoever.]  
12. Compensation in case of compulsory acquisition of a mine .—Where the Central Government 
acquires, in accordance with any law,  any mine or part of a mine from which in the opinion of the Central 
Government any of the prescribed substances can be obtained, compensation in respect of such 
acquisition shall be pai d in accordance with section 21 : 
Provided that in determining the amou nt of such compensation, no account shall be taken of the value 
of uranium which may be obtained from such mine or part of a mine.  
13. Novation of certain contracts .—(1) The Central Government may serve on the parties to a 
contract relating to prospecting or mining of any substance from which any of the prescribed substances 
can be obtained or to production or use of atomic energy or to research into matters connected therewith, 
not being a contract for the rendering of personal services, a notice in writin g stating that on such date as 
may be specified in the notice the rights and liabilities of any of the parties to the contract specified in the 
notice (hereinafter referred to as the specified party) will be transferred to the Central Government, and 
there upon subject to any withdrawal of the notice under the following provisions of this section, the 
contract shall , as regards any rights exercisable, or liabilities incurred, on or a fter the said date, have 
effect s as if the Central Government were a party to the contract instead of the specified party and as if 
for any reference in the contract to the specified party there were substituted a reference to the Central 
Government.  
(2) A notice served under sub -secti
<|CHUNK|>
[THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962.pdf - page 8]
here were substituted a reference to the Central 
Government.  
(2) A notice served under sub -section ( 1) shall contain a statement to the effect that an objection may 
be made thereto within such time and in such manner as may be specified, and if any such objection is 
duly made and not  withdrawn, the Central Government shall afford an opportunity to the person making 
the objection of appeari ng before and being heard by person appointed by the Central Government for the 
purpose.  
(3) After considering any such objection and the report of the person appointed by it under                     
sub-section ( 2), the Central Government may make such o rder as it may deem proper.  
(4) Where the rights and liabilities of a party to a contract are transferred to the Central Government 
under this section, there shall be paid to that party such compensation in respect of any loss suffered by 
that party as may  be agreed between him and the Central Government, and in default of such agreement, 
as may be determined by arbitration.  
14. Control over production and use of atomic energy .—(1) The Central Government may, subject 
to such rules as may be made in this behalf, by order prohibit except  under a licence granted by it — 
(i) the working of any mine or minerals specified in the order, being a mine or minerals from 
which in the opinion of the Central Government any of the prescr ibed substances can be obtained;  
(ii) the acquisition, production, possession, u se, disposal, export or import — 
(a) of any of the prescribed substances; or  
(b) of any minerals or other substances specified in the rules, from which in the opinion of the 
Central Government any of the prescri bed substances can be obtained ; or 
(c) of any plant designed or ad opted or manufactured for the production, development and 
use of atomic energy or for research into matters connected therewith; or  
(d) of any prescribed equipment.  
2[(1A) No licence  under sub -clause ( c) of clause 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962.pdf - page 8]
rewith; or  
(d) of any prescribed equipment.  
2[(1A) No licence  under sub -clause ( c) of clause ( ii) of sub -section ( 1) shall be granted to a person 
other than a Department of the Central Government or any authority or an institution or a corporation 
established by the Central Government, or a Government company.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 59 of 1986, s. 3 (w.e.f. 21 -9-1962).  
2. Ins. by Act 5 of  2016, s. 3 ( w.e.f. 15 -05-2023 ). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962.pdf - page 9]
9 (1B) Any licence granted to a Government company under sub -section ( 1) shall stand cancelled in 
case the licensee ceases to be a Government company and, notwithstanding anything contained in any 
other law for the time being in f orce, all assets thereof shall v est in the Central Government free from any 
liability and the Central Government shall take such measures for safe operation of the plant and disposal 
of nuclear material so vested in it, as may be necessary in accordance with the provisions of section 3. ] 
(2) Nothing in this section shall affect the authority of the Central Government to refuse a licence for 
the purpose of this section or to include in a licence such conditions as the Central Government thinks fit 
or to revoke a licence and the Central Gove rnment may take any action as aforesaid.  
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the rules referred to in this section  
may provide for — 
(a) the extent to which information in the possession  of, or which has been made available to, the 
person granted a licence for purposes of this section, should be regarded as restricted information;  
(b) the extent to which the area or premises under the control of the person to whom a licence has 
been grant ed for purposes of this section, should be regarded as a prohibited area;  
(c) the conditions and criteria for location of any installation or operation of any plant in respect 
of which a licence has been granted or is intended to be granted for the purpose s of this section 
including those necessary for protection against radiation and safe disposal of harmful by -product s or 
wastes;  
(d) the extent of the licensee ’s liability in respect of any hurt to any person or any damage to 
property caused by ionising ra diations or any radioactive contamination either at the plant under 
licence or in the surrounding area;  
(e) provision by licensee either by insurance or by such other means as the Central Government
<|CHUNK|>
[THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962.pdf - page 9]
ea;  
(e) provision by licensee either by insurance or by such other means as the Central Government 
may approve, of sufficient funds to be available at all t imes to ensure settlement of any claims in 
connection with the use of the site or the plant under licence which have been or may be duly 
established against the licensee in respect of any hurt to any person or any damage to any property 
caused by ionising radiations emitted at the plant under licence or radioactive contamination either at 
the plant under licence or in surrounding areas;  
(f) obligatory qualifications, security clearances, hours of employment, minimum leave and 
periodical medical examination of the persons employed and any other requirement or restriction or 
prohibition on the employer, employed persons and other persons; and  
(g) such other incidental and supplementary provisions including provisions for inspection and 
also for the sealing or premises and seizure, retention and disposal of any article in respect of which 
there are reasonable grounds for suspecting that a contravention of the rules has been committed, as 
the Central Government considers necessary.  
(4) The Central Government may also prescribe the fees payable for issue of licences under                     
sub-section ( 1). 
15. Requisitioning of any substance for extracting uranium or plutonium .—(1) The Central 
Government shall have the right to require that any substance which, in  the opinion of the Central 
Government, contains uranium, plutonium or any of their isotopes, shall be delivered to it and the Central 
Government may extract from that substance the uranium, plutonium or any of their isotopes contained 
therein and return t he substance to the person concerned on payment of compensation which shall be 
determined in accordance with section 21 : 
Provided that such compensation shall not, in any case, exceed the cost incurred by the person in the 
production , mining or irradiation  of the substanc
<|CHUNK|>
[THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962.pdf - page 9]
, exceed the cost incurred by the person in the 
production , mining or irradiation  of the substance and in determining the same no account shall be taken 
on the value of the uranium, plutonium or any of their isotopes extracted from the substance.  
(2) Nothing in this section shall prevent the Central Government from permitting, subject to such 
conditions as it may deem fit to impose, the use of small quantities of natural uranium for the purpose of 
examination, test or analysis.  
16. Control over radioactive substances .—The Central Government may prohibit the manufacture, 
possession, use,  transfer by sale or otherwise, export and import and in any emergency, transport and 
disposal, of any radioactive substances without its written consent.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962.pdf - page 10]
10 17. Special provisions as to safety .—(1) The Central Government may, as regards any class or 
descript ion of premises or places, being premises, or places, in which radioactive substances ar e 
manufactured, produced, mined, treated, stored or used or any radiation generating plant, equipment or 
appliance is used, make such provision by rules as appear to th e Central Government to be necessary — 
(a) to prevent injury being caused to the health of persons employed at such premises or places or 
other persons either by radiations, or by the ingestion of any radioactive substance;  
(b) to secure that any radioactive waste products resulting from such manufacture, production, 
mining, treatment, storage, or use as aforesaid are disposed of safely;  
(c) to prescribe qualifications of the persons for employment at such premises or places and the 
regulation of t heir hours of employment , minimum leave and  periodical medical examination;  
and the rules may, in particular and  without prejudice to the generality of this sub -section, provide for 
imposing requirements as to the erection or structural alterations of buildings or the carrying out of works.  
(2) The Central Government may, as respects the transport of any radioactive  substance or any 
prescribed substance specified by an order issued under this Act as being dangerous to health, make such 
rules as appear to be necessary to prevent injury being caused by such transport to the health of persons 
engaged therein and other p ersons.  
(3) Rules made under this section may provide for imposing requirements, prohibitions and 
restrictions on employers, employed persons and other persons.  
(4) Any person authorised by the Central Government under this section, may, on producing, if s o 
required, a duly authenticated document showing his authority, enter at all reasonable hours any premises, 
or any vehicle, vessel or aircraft for the purpose of ascertaining whether there has been committed, or is 
be
<|CHUNK|>
[THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962.pdf - page 10]
icle, vessel or aircraft for the purpose of ascertaining whether there has been committed, or is 
being committed, in or in connection wit h the premises, vehicle, vessel or aircraft, any contravention of 
the rules made under this section.  
(5) In the event of any contravention of the rules made under this section, the Central Government 
shall have the right to take such measures as it may dee m necessary to prevent further injury to persons or 
damage to property arising from radiation or contamin ation by radioactive substances  including, without 
prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, and to the right to take further action for  the 
enforcement of penalties under section 24, the sealing or premises, vehicle, vessel, or aircraft, and the 
seizure of radioactive substances and contaminated equipment.  
18. Restriction on disclosure of information .—(1) The Central Government may by order restrict 
the disclosure of information, whether contained in a document, drawing , photograph, plan, model, or in 
any other form whatsoever, which relates to, represents or illustrat es— 
(a) an existing or proposed plant used or proposed to be used for  the purpose of producing, 
developing or using atomic energy, or  
(b) the purpose or method of operation of any such existing or proposed plant, or  
(c) any process operated or proposed to be operated in any such existing or proposed plant.  
(2) No person sha ll— 
(a) disclose, or obtain or attempt to obtain any information restricted under sub -section ( 1), or 
(b) disclose, without the authority of the Central Government, any information obtained in the 
discharge of any functions under this Act or in the perform ance of his official duties.  
(3) Nothi ng in this section shall apply — 
(i) to the disclosure of information with respect to any plant of a type in use for purposes other 
than the production, development or use of atomic energy, unless the information disclo se that plant 
of that type is
<|CHUNK|>
[THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962.pdf - page 10]
n, development or use of atomic energy, unless the information disclo se that plant 
of that type is used or proposed to be used for the production, development or use of atomic energy or 
research into any matters connected therewith; or  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962.pdf - page 11]
11 (ii) where any information has been made available to the general public otherwise than i n 
contravention of this section, to any subsequent disclosure of that information.  
19. Prevention of entry into prohibited areas .—The Central Go vernment may by order prohibit — 
(a) entry of any person, without obtaining permission, into a prohibited area, and 
(b) taking by any persons, without permission, of any photograph, sketch, pictures, drawing, map 
or other document from a prohibited area and any permission, if given to do these things, may be 
subject to stipulations which the Central Government may c onsider necessary.  
20. Special Provisions as to inventions .—(1) As from the commencement of this Act, no patents 
shall be granted for inventions which in the opinion of the Central Government are useful for or relate to 
the production, control, use or disposal of atomic energy or the prospecting, mining, extraction, 
production, physical and chemical treatment, fabrication, enrichment, canning or use of any prescribed 
substance or radioactive substance or the ensuring of safety in atomic energy operation s. 
(2) The prohibition under sub -section ( 1) shall also apply to any invention of the nature specified in 
that sub -section in respect of which an application for the grant of a patent has been made to the 
Controller of Patents and Designs appointed under the Indian Patents and Designs Act, 1911  (2 of 1911) , 
before the commencement of this Act and is pending with him at such commencement.  
(3) The Central Government shall have the power to inspect at any time any pending patent 
application and specification before its acceptance and if it considers that the invention relates to atomic 
energy , to issue directions to the Controller of Patents and Designs to refuse the application on that 
ground.  
(4) Any person, who has made an invention which he has reason to b elieve relates to atomic energy, 
shall communicate to the Central Government the na
<|CHUNK|>
[THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962.pdf - page 11]
has reason to b elieve relates to atomic energy, 
shall communicate to the Central Government the nature and description of the invention.  
(5) Any person desiring to apply for a patent abroad for an invention relating to or which he has 
reason to believe relates to atomic energy shall obtain prior permission from the Central Government 
before making the application abroad or communicating the invention to any person abroad, unless three 
months have elapsed since his request for permission was made to the Central Government and no reply 
was received by him.  
(6) The Controller of Patents and Designs shall have the power to refer any application to the Central 
Government for direction as to whether the invention is one relating to atomic energy and the direction 
given by the Ce ntral Government shall be final.  
(7) Any invention in the field of atomic energy conceived whether in establishments controlled by the 
Central Government or under any contract, sub -contract, arrangement or other relationship with the 
Central Government sha ll be deemed to have been made or conceived by the Central Government, 
irrespective of whether such contract, sub -contract, arrangement or other relationship involves financial 
participation of or assistance from the Central Government.  
(8) Notwithstanding  anything contained in the Indian Patents and Designs Act, 1911  (2 of 1911) , the 
decision of the Central Government on points connected with or arising out of this section shall be final.  
21. Principles relating to payment of compensation .—(1) Save as othe rwise provided in this Act, 
where by reason of exercise of any powers under this Act, any compensation is payable, the amount of 
such compensation shall be determined in the manner and in accordance with the principles hereinafter 
set out, that is to say — 
(a) where the amount of compensation is fixed by agreement, it shall be paid in accordance with 
such agreement;  
(b) where no such agreement is reached, t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962.pdf - page 11]
nt, it shall be paid in accordance with 
such agreement;  
(b) where no such agreement is reached, the Central Government shall appoint as arbitrator a 
person having expert knowledge as to the nature of the right affected who shall determine the amount 
of compensation payable.  
(2) In making his award, the arbitrator appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall have regard — 
(a) in the case of any compen sation payable under section 9 — 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962.pdf - page 12]
12 (i) to the nature of the work  done;  
(ii) the manner, extent and duration of the exercise of any powers under that section;  
(iii) the diminution in the rent of the land and of the property situated thereon, which might 
reasonably be expected over any period or diminution in the market value of the land and 
property on the date when the exercise of powers comes to an end; and  
(iv) the provisions of sub -section  (1) of section  23 of the Land Acquisition                                    
Act, 1894  (1 of 1894) , in so far as such provisions can be made applicable to the exercise of 
powers under section 9; and  
(b) in the case of any compensation payable under section 11 or under section 12, to the price 
which the owner might reasonably have been expected to obtain on a sale of the property effected by 
him immediately before the date of the acquisition.  
(3) An appeal shall lie to the High Court against an award of the arbitrator except in cases where the 
amount claimed thereof does not exceed an amount prescribed in this behalf by the Central  Government.  
(4) The Central Government may make rules prescribing the procedure to be followed in arbitrations 
under this Act and the principles to be followed in the apportionment of the cost of proceedings before the 
arbitrator and on appeal.  
(5) Save a s provided in this Act, nothing in any law for the time being in force relating to arbitration 
shall apply to arbitrations under this Act.  
 22. Special provision  as to electricity .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Electricity 
(Supply) Act, 1948  (54 of 1948) , the Central G overnment shall have authority — 
(a) to develop a sound and adequate national policy in regard to atomic power, to co -ordinate 
such policy with the Central Electricity Authority and the State Electricity Boards constituted un der 
sections 3 and 5 respectively of that Act and other similar statutory corporations concerned with the 
control and utilisation of ot
<|CHUNK|>
[THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962.pdf - page 12]
 that Act and other similar statutory corporations concerned with the 
control and utilisation of other power resources, to implement schemes for the generation of 
electricity in pursuance of such policy and to operate  1[,either by itself or through any authority or 
corporation established by it or a Government company ,] atomic power stations in the manner 
determined by it in consultation with the Boards or Corporations concerned, with whom it shall enter 
into agreement re garding the su pply or electricity so produced;  
(b) to fix rates for and regulate the supply of electricity from atomic power stations  2[either by 
itself or through any authority or corporation established by it or a Government company, in 
consultation with] of the Central Electricity Authority;  
(c) to enter into arrangements with the Electricity Board of the State in which an at omic power 
station is situated 1[either by itself or through any authority or corporation established by it or 
a Government com pany] for the transmission of electricity to any other State:  
Provided that in case there is difference of opinion between the Central Government 1[or such 
authority or corporation or Government company, as the case may be,] and any State Electricity Board  in 
regard to the construction of necessary transmission lines, the matter shall be referred to the Central 
Electricity Authority whose decision shall be binding on the parties concerned.  
(2) No provision of the Indian Electricity Act, 1910  (9 of 1910) , or any rule made thereunder or of 
any instrument having effect by virtue of such law or rule shall have any effect so far as it is inconsistent 
with any of the provisions of this Act.  
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of this Act sha ll be in addition to, and                    
not in derogation of, the Indian Electricity Act, 1910  (9 of 1910) , and the Electricity (Supply)                         
Act, 1948  (54 of 1948) . 
23. Administrati
<|CHUNK|>
[THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962.pdf - page 12]
 , and the Electricity (Supply)                         
Act, 1948  (54 of 1948) . 
23. Administration of Factories Act, 1948 .—Notwithstanding anything  contained in the Factories 
Act, 1948  (63 of 1948) , the authority to administer the said Act and to do all things for the enforcement of 
its provisions, including the appointment of inspecting staff and the making of rules thereunder, shall vest 
                                                           
1.  Ins. by Act 29 of 1987, s. 4 (w.e.f. 8 -9-1987).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “with the concurrence of”  (w.e.f. 8 -9-1987).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962.pdf - page 13]
13 in the Cen tral Government in relation to any factory owned by the Central Government 1[or any authority 
or corporation established by it or a Government company ] and engaged in carrying out the purposes of 
this Act.  
24. Offences and penalties .—(1) Whoever — 
(a) contravenes any order made under section 14 or any condition subject to which a licence is 
granted under that section; or  
(b) contravenes any rule made under section 17 or any requirement, prohibition or restriction 
imposed under any such rule; or  
(c) obstructs any person authorised by the Central Government under sub -section ( 4) of                
section 17 in the exercise of powers under that sub -section; or  
(d) contravenes sub -section ( 2) of section 18;  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with 
both.  
(2) Whoever — 
(a) fails to comply with any notice served on him under Section 5 or with any terms and 
conditions that may be imposed on him under that section; or  
(b) fails to comply with any notice served on him under Section 7 or knowingly makes any untrue 
statement in any return or statement made in pursuance of any such notice; or  
(c) obstructs any person or authority in the exercise of powers under Section 8 or 9; or  
(d) contravenes any ot her provision of this Act or any order made there under;  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with 
both . 
25. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of , and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that  nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if h
<|CHUNK|>
[THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962.pdf - page 13]
 nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithsta nding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of , any dir ector, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary, or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm and other association of 
individuals; and  
(b) “director ” in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
26. Cognizance of offences .—(1) All offences under this Act shall be cognizable under the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898) , but no action shall be taken in respect of any person for any 
offence under this Act except on the bas is of a written complaint made — 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 29 of 1987 , s. 5. (w.e.f. 8 -9-1987).   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962.pdf - page 14]
14 (a) in respect of contravention of section 8, 14 or 17 or any rule or order made thereunder, by the 
person authorised to exercise powers of entry and inspection ; 
(b) in respect of any other contravention, by a person duly authorised to make such complaints b y 
the Central Government.  
(2) Proceedings in respect of contravention of section 18 shall not be instituted except w ith the 
consent of the Attorney General of India.  
27. Delegation of powers .—The Central Government may, by order, direct that any power conf erred 
or any duty imposed on it by this Act shall, in such circumstances and subject to such conditions as may 
be specified in the direction, be e xercised or discharged also by — 
(a) such officer or authority subordinate to the Central Government, or  
(b) such State Government or such officer or authority subordinate to a State Government as may 
be specified in the direction.  
28. Effect of other laws .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding any thing 
inconsistent therewith contained in any enactment other than this Act or any other instrument having 
effect by virtue of any enactment other than this Act.  
29. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Government or any person or authority in respect of anything done by it or him in good 
faith in pursuance of this A ct or of any rule of order made  thereunder.  
30. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification , make rules  for 
carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) declaring any information not so far published or otherwise made public as restricted 
information and prescribing the measures to be taken to guard against unauthorised dissemination or 
use thereof;  
(b) declaring any area or premises as prohibited area a nd prescribing the measures to b
<|CHUNK|>
[THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962.pdf - page 14]
 thereof;  
(b) declaring any area or premises as prohibited area a nd prescribing the measures to be taken to 
provide against unauthorised entry into or departure from such prohibited area;  
(c) reporting of information relating to the discovery of uranium, thorium and other prescribed 
substances and for payment of rewards  for such discoveries;  
(d) control over mining or concentration of substances containing uranium;  
(e) regulating by licensing and encouraging by award of concessions including rewards, floor 
prices and guarantees, mining of and prospecting for other prescr ibed substances;  
(f) compulsory acquisition of prescribed substances, minerals and plants;  
(g) regulating the production, import, export, transfer, refining, possession , ownership, sale, use 
or disposal of the prescribed substances and any other articles t hat in the opinion of the Central 
Government may be used for, or may result as a consequence of, the production, use or application of 
atomic energy;  
(h) regulating the use of prescribed equipment;  
(i) regulating the manufacture, custody, transport, transf er, sale, export, import, use or disposal of 
any radioactive substance;  
(j) regulating the transport of such prescribed substances as are declared dangerous to health 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 17;  
(k) developing, controlling, supervising and licensi ng the production, application and use of 
atomic energy;  
(l) fees for issue of licences under this Act;  
(m) the manner of serving notices under this Act;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE ATOMIC ENERGY ACT, 1962.pdf - page 15]
15 (n) generally promoting co -operation among person, institutions and countries in the production, 
use, application of atomi c energy and in research and in vestigation s in that field.  
(3) Rules made under this Act may provide that a contravention of the rules shall, save as otherwise 
expressly provided in this Act, be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.  
(4) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two or more succe ssive sessions , and if  1[before the expiry of the session immediately following the 
session] or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shal l thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
31. Act binding on Govern ment .—The provisions of this Act shall be binding on Government.  
32. [Repeal of Act  29 of 1948]. —Rep. by Repealing and Amending Act , 1974 (56 of 1974) , s. 2 and 
the First Schedule  (w.e.f. 20-12-1974).  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule, for “before the expiry of the session in which it is so  laid”                               
(w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BANKERS’ BOOKS EVIDENCE ACT, 1891.pdf - page 1]
1 THE BANKERS ’ BOOK S EVIDENCE ACT, 1891  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Title and extent.  
2. Definitions.  
2A. Conditions in the printout . 
3. Power to extend provisions of Act.  
4. Mode of proof of entries in bankers’ books.  
5. Case in which officer of bank not compellable to produce books.  
6. Inspection  of books by order of Court or Judge.  
7. Costs.  
8. Order of court to be construed to be order made by specified officer.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BANKERS’ BOOKS EVIDENCE ACT, 1891.pdf - page 2]
2 THE BANKERS ’ BOOK S EVIDENCE ACT, 1891  
ACT NO. 18 OF 1891  
[1st October , 1890 .] 
An Act to amend the Law of Evidence with respect to Bankers ’ Books.  
WHEREAS  it is expedient to amend the Law of Evidence with respect to Bankers ’ books; It is hereby 
enacted as follows: — 
1. Title and extent .—(1) This Act may be called the Bankers ’ Books Evidence Act, 1891.  
(2) It 1extends to the whole of  India 2[except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ]; 3*** 
4*   *   *   *   * 
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless there is something repug nant in the subject or context, — 
5[(1) “company ” means any company as defined in section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956                
(1 of 1956), and includes a foreign company within the meaning of section 591 of that Act;  
(1A) “corporation” means any body corporate established by an y law for the time being in for ce 
in India and includes the Reserve Bank of India, the State Bank of India and any subsidiary bank as 
defined in the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act , 1959 (3 8 of 1959); ] 
(2) “bank ” and “banker ” mean — 
6[(a) any company or corporation carrying on the business of banking ;] 
(b) any partnership or individual to whose books the provisions of this Act shall have been 
extended as hereinafter provided;  
7[(c) any  post office savings bank or money order office ;] 
8[(3) "bankers' books" include ledgers, day -books, cash -books, account  books  and all other records 
used in the ordinary business of the bank, whether  these records are kept in written form or stored in a 
micro film, magnetic tape or  in any other form of mechanical or electronic data retrieval mechanism, 
either  onsite or at any offsite location including a back -up or disaster recovery site of both;] 
9[(4) “legal proceeding ” means, — 
(i) any proceeding or inquiry in which evidence is or may be given ; 
(ii) an arbitration ; and 
(iii) any investigation or inquiry under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), or 
und
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BANKERS’ BOOKS EVIDENCE ACT, 1891.pdf - page 2]
 
(iii) any investigation or inquiry under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), or 
under any other law for the time being in force for the collection of evidence, conducted by a 
police officer or by any other person (not being a magistrate) authori sed in this behalf by a 
magistrate or by any law for the time being in force; ] 
                                                           
1. The Act has been e xtended in its application to the whole of the Union territory of Lakshadweep (with effect from 1 -10-1967) 
vide Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 and the Schedule and to the Union territory of Pondicherry by Act 26 of 1968, s. 3 and the Schedule. 
This Act shall apply i n relation to the Development Banks as if that were a bank as defined in section 2 of this Act, vide Act 18 
of 1964, s. 33.  
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule, for “except Part B State”.  
3. The word “and” rep . by Act 10 of 1914 , s. 3 and the Second Schedule . 
4. Sub -section ( 3) rep. by s. 3 and the Second Schedule , ibid. 
5. Subs. by Act 56 of 1962, s. 4, for clause ( 1). 
6. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for sub -clause ( a) 
7. Added by Act 1 of 1893, s. 2.  
8. Subs. by Act 55 of 20 02, s.  11, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 6 -2-2003). 
9. Subs. by Act 1 of 1984, s. 2, for clause ( 4) (w.e.f. 15 -2-1984).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BANKERS’ BOOKS EVIDENCE ACT, 1891.pdf - page 3]
3 (5) “the Court ” means the person or persons before whom a legal proceeding is held  or taken ; 
(6) “Judge ” means a Judge of  a High Court Division ; 
(7) “trial” means any hearing before the Court at which evidence is taken ; and 
1[(8) “certified copy" means when the books of a bank, — 
(a) are maintained in written form, a c opy of any entry in such books together with a 
certificate written at the foot of such copy that it is a true copy of such entry, that such entry 
is contained in one of the ordinary books of the bank and was made in the usual and ordinary 
course of busines s and that such books is still in the custody of the bank, and where the copy 
was obtained by mechanical or other process which in itself ensured the accuracy of the copy, 
a further certificate to that effect, but where the book from which such copy was pr epared has 
been destroyed in the usual course of the bank's business after the date on which the copy has 
been so prepared, a further certificate to that effect, each such certificate being dated and 
subscribed by the principal accountant or manager of the  bank with his name and official 
title; and  
(b) consists of printouts of data stored in a floppy, disc, tape or any other                         
electro -magnetic data storage device, a printout of such entry or a copy of such printout 
together with such statements certified in a ccordance with the provisions of section 2A. ] 
2[(c) a printout of any entry in the books of a bank stored in a micro film, magnetic tape 
or in any other form of mechanical or electronic data retrieval mechanism obtained by a 
mechanical or other process which  in itself ensures the accuracy of such printout as a copy of 
such entry and such printout contains the certificate in accordance with the provisions of 
section 2 A.] 
3[2-A. Conditions in the printout .—A printout of entry or a copy of printout referred to i n                    
sub-section ( 8) of section 2 shall be accompanied by
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BANKERS’ BOOKS EVIDENCE ACT, 1891.pdf - page 3]
f printout referred to i n                    
sub-section ( 8) of section 2 shall be accompanied by the following, namely:  — 
(a) a certificate to the effect that it is a printout of such entry or a copy of such printout by the 
principal accountant or branch manager ; and  
(b) a certificate by a person in -charge of computer system containing a brief descriptions of the 
computer system and the particulars of — 
(A) the safeguards adopted by the system to ensure that data is entered or any other operation 
performed only by autho rised persons;  
(B) the safeguards adopted to prevent and detec t unauthorised change of data;  
(C) the safeguards available to retrieve data that is lost due to systemic failure or any other 
reasons;  
(D) the manner in which data is transferred from the system to removable media like floppies, 
discs, tapes or other electro -magnetic data storage devices;  
(E) the mode of verification in order to ensure that data has been accurately transferred to 
such rem ovable media;  
(F) the mode of identification of such data storage devices;  
(G) the arrangements for the storage and custody of such storage devices;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 200 0, s. 93 and the third Schedule, fo r sub -section (8) (w.e.f. 17 -10-2000 ). 
2. Ins. by Act 55 of 2002, s. 11 (w.e.f. 6 -2-2003).  
3. Ins. by Act 21 of 2000 , s. 93 and the third Sch edule (w.e.f. 17 -10-2000 ). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BANKERS’ BOOKS EVIDENCE ACT, 1891.pdf - page 4]
4 (H) the safeguards to prevent and detect any tampering with the system; and any other factor 
which will vou ch for the integrity and accuracy of the system.  
(c) a further certificate from the person in -charge of the computer system to the effect that to the 
best of his knowledge and behalf, such computer system operated properly at the material time, he 
was prov ided with all the relevant data and the printout in question represents correctly, or is 
appropriately derived from, the relevant data.]  
3. Power to extend provisions of Act. —The State Government may, from time to time, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, extend the provisions of this Act to the books of any partnership or  
individual carrying on the business of bankers within the territories under its administration, and keeping 
a set of not less tha n three ordinary account -books, namely, a cashbook, a day -book or journal, and a 
ledger, and may in like manner rescind any su ch notification.  
4. Mode  of proof of entries in bankers’  books .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, a certified 
copy of any entry in a banker ’s book shall in all legal proceedings be received as prima facie evidence of 
the existence of such entry, and shall be admitted as evidence of the matters, transactions and accounts 
therein recorded in every case where, and to the same extent as, the original entry itself is now by law 
admissible, but not further or otherwise.  
5. Case in which officer of bank not compellable to produce books .—No officer of a bank shall in 
any legal proceeding to which the bank is not a party be compellable to produce any banker ’s book the 
contents of which can be proved under this Act, or to appear as a witness to prove the matters , 
transactions and accounts therein recorded, unless by order of the Court or a Judge made for special 
cause.  
6. Inspection  of books by order of Court or Judge .—(1) On the application of any party to a legal 
proceeding the Court or a Judg
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BANKERS’ BOOKS EVIDENCE ACT, 1891.pdf - page 4]
r of Court or Judge .—(1) On the application of any party to a legal 
proceeding the Court or a Judge may order that s uch party be at liberty to inspect and take copies of any 
entries in a banker ’s book for any of the purposes of such proceeding, or may order the bank to prepare 
and produce, within a time to be specified in the order, certified copies of all such entries,  accompanied 
by a further certificate that no other entries are to be found in the books of the bank relevant to the matters 
in issue in such proceeding, and such further certificate shall be dated and subscribed in manner 
hereinbefore directed in referenc e to certified copies.  
(2) An order under this or the preceding section may be made either with or without summoning the 
bank, and shall be served on the bank three clear days (exclusive of bank holidays) before the same is to 
be obeyed, unless the Court o r Judge shall otherwise direct.  
(3) The bank may at any time before the time limited for obedience to any such order as aforesaid 
either offer to produce their books at the trial or give notice of their intention to show cause against such 
order, and thereupon the same not be enforced without further order.  
7. Costs .—(1) The costs of any application to the Court or a Judge under or for the purposes of this 
Act and the costs of anything done or to be done under an order of the Court or a Judge made unde r or for 
the purposes of this Act shall be in the discretion of the Court or Judge, who may further order such costs 
or any part thereof to be paid to any party by the bank if they have been incurred in consequence of any 
fault or improper delay on the par t of the bank.  
(2) Any order made under this section for the payment of costs to or by a bank may be enforced as if 
the bank were a party to the proceeding.  
(3) Any order under this section awarding costs may, on application to any Court of Civil Judicatur e 
designated in the order, be executed by such Court as if th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BANKERS’ BOOKS EVIDENCE ACT, 1891.pdf - page 4]
ation to any Court of Civil Judicatur e 
designated in the order, be executed by such Court as if the order were a decree for money passed by 
itself:  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BANKERS’ BOOKS EVIDENCE ACT, 1891.pdf - page 5]
5 Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall be construed to derogate from any power which the 
Court or Judge making the order may possess for  the enforcement of its or his directions with respect to 
the payment of costs.  
1[8. Order of court to be construed to be order made by specified officer. —In the application of 
sections 5, 6 and 7 to any investigation or inquiry referred to in sub -clause ( iii) of clause ( 4) of section 2, 
the order of al Court or a Judge referred to in the said sections shall be construed as referring to an order 
made by an officer of a rank not lower than the rank of a Superintendent of Police as may be specified in 
this be half by the appropriate Government.  
Explanation .—In the this section, “appropriate Government” means the Government by which the 
police officer or any other person conducting the investigation or inquiry is employed.]  
 
___________  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 1984, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15 -2-1984).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BEEDI AND CIGAR WORKERS (CONDITIONS OF.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE BEEDI AND CIGAR WORKERS (CONDITIONS OF  
EMPLOYMENT) ACT, 1966                                                                                                                              
_______ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                      
________ 
SECTIONS 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
3. Industrial premises to be licensed. 
4. Licences. 
5. Appeals. 
6. Inspectors. 
7. Powers of Inspectors. 
7A. Inspector not to disclose the source of any com plaint, etc. 
8. Cleanliness. 
9. Ventilation. 
10. Overcrowding. 
11. Drinking water. 
12. Latrines and urinals. 
13. Washing facilities. 
14. Creches. 
15. First aid. 
16. Canteens. 
17. Working hours. 
18. Wages for overtime work. 
19. Interval for rest. 
20. Spread over. 
21. Weekly holidays. 
22. Notice of periods of work. 
23. Hours of work to correspond with notice under s ection 22. 
24. Prohibition of employment of children. 
25. Prohibition of employment of women or young per sons during certain hours. 
26. Annual leave with wages. 
27. Wages during leave period. 
28. Application of the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 t o industrial premises. 
29. Special provisions. 
30. Onus as to age. 
31. Notice of dismissal. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BEEDI AND CIGAR WORKERS (CONDITIONS OF.pdf - page 2]
2 
 SECTIONS 
32. Penalty for obstructing Inspector. 
33. General penalty for offence. 
34. Offences by companies. 
35. Indemnity. 
36. Cognizance of offences. 
37. Application of the Industrial Employment (Stand ing Orders) Act, 1946 and the Maternity Benefit 
Act, 1961. 
38. Certain provisions not to apply to industrial p remises. 
39. Application of the Industrial Disputes Act, 194 7. 
40. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with  this Act. 
41. Power to exempt. 
42. Powers of Central Government to give directions . 
43. Act not to apply to self-employed persons in pr ivate dwelling houses. 
44. Power to make rules. 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BEEDI AND CIGAR WORKERS (CONDITIONS OF.pdf - page 3]
3 
 THE BEEDI AND CIGAR WORKERS (CONDITIONS OF  
EMPLOYMENT) ACT, 1966 
ACT NO. 32 OF  1966 
[30 th November, 1966.] 
An Act to provide for the welfare of the workers in  beedi and cigar establishments and to 
regulate the conditions of their work and for matte rs connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventeenth Year of  the Republic of India as follows:— 
1. Short title, extent and commencement.— (1) This Act may be called the Beedi and Cigar 
Workers (Conditions of Employment) Act, 1966. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State  of Jammu and Kashmir*. 
(3) It shall come into force in a State on such date 1 as the State Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates m ay be appointed by the State Government for differe nt 
areas and for different provisions of this Act. 
2. Definitions.— In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “adult” means a person who has completed eighteen  years of age; 
(b) “child” means a person who has not completed four teen years of age; 
(c) “competent authority” means any authority authori sed by the State Government by 
notification in the Official Gazette to perform all  or any of the functions of the competent authority  
under this Act and for such areas as may be specifi ed therein; 
(d) “contractor” means a person who, in relation to a  manufacturing process, undertakes to 
produce a given result by executing the work throug h contract labour or who engages labour for any 
manufacturing process in a private dwelling house a nd includes a sub-contractor, agent, munshi, 
thekedar ; 
(e) “contract labour” means any person engaged or emp loyed in any premises by or through 
contractor, with or without the knowledge of the em ployer, in any manufacturing process; 
(f) “employee” means a person employed directly or th rough any agency, whether for wages or 
not, in any establishment 2[or godown] to do any works skilled, unskilled, man ual or cleri
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BEEDI AND CIGAR WORKERS (CONDITIONS OF.pdf - page 3]
ages or 
not, in any establishment 2[or godown] to do any works skilled, unskilled, man ual or clerical, and 
includes— 
(i) anylabour who is given raw materials by an employ er or a contractor for being made into 
beedi or cigar or both at home (hereinafter referre d to in this Act as “home worker”), and 
(ii ) any person not employed by an employer or a contr actor but working with the permission 
of, or under agreement with, the employer or contra ctor 2[or both]; 
(g) “employer” means,— 
(a) in relation to contract labour, the principal emp loyer; and 
(b) in relation to other labour, the person who has t he ultimate control over the affairs of any 
establishment or who has, by reason of his advancin g money, supplying goods or otherwise, a 
substantial interest in the control of the affairs of any establishment, and includes any other 
person to whom the affairs of the establishment are  entrusted, whether such other person is called 
the managing agent, manager, superintendent or by a ny other name; 
                                                           
1. 10thFebruary, 1970, vide  notification No.IIE/2-1/70, dated the 9th February , 1970, in respect of section 3, in the State of 
Orissa. 
2. Ins. by Act 41 of 1993, s. 2 (w.e.f. 22-5-1993).  
*.  Vide  Notification No. S.O. 3912 (E), dated 30th October , 2019, this Act is made applicable to the Union te rritory of Jammu 
and Kashmir and the Union territory of Ladakh.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BEEDI AND CIGAR WORKERS (CONDITIONS OF.pdf - page 4]
4 
 (h) “establishment” means any place or premises inclu ding the precincts thereof in which or in 
any part of which any manufacturing process connect ed with the making of beedi or cigar or both is 
being, or is ordinarily, carried on and includes an  industrial premises; 
1[( hh ) “godown” means any warehouse or other place, by w hatever name called, used for the 
storage of— 
(i) any article or substance required for any manufac turing process; or 
(ii ) beedi or cigar or both;] 
(i) “industrial premises” means any place or premises  (not being a private dwelling house), 
including the precincts thereof, in which or in any  part of which any industry or manufacturing 
process connected with the making of beedi or cigar  or both is being, or is ordinarily, carried on wit h 
or without the aid of power, 2[and includes a godown attached thereto]; 
(j) “Inspector” means an Inspector appointed under su b-section( 1) of section 6; 
(k) “manufacturing process” means any process for, or  incidental to, making, finishing or packing 
or otherwise treating any article or substance with  a view to its use, sale, transport, delivery or 
disposal as beedi or cigar or both; 
(l) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by th e State Government under this Act; 
(m) “principal employer” means a person for whom or o n whose behalf any contract labour is 
engaged or employed in an establishment; 
(n) “private dwelling house” means a house in which p ersons engaged in the manufacture of 
beedi or cigar or both reside; 
(o) “State Government”, in relation to a Union territ ory, means the Administrator thereof; 
(p) “week” means a period of seven days, beginning at  midnight on Saturday; 
(q) “young person” means a person who has completed f ourteen years of age but has not 
completed eighteen years of age. 
3. Industrial premises to be licensed.— Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no employer  shall 
use or allow to be used any place or premises as an  industrial premises u
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BEEDI AND CIGAR WORKERS (CONDITIONS OF.pdf - page 4]
 Act, no employer  shall 
use or allow to be used any place or premises as an  industrial premises unless he holds a valid licenc e 
issued under this Act and no such premises shall be  used except in accordance with the terms and 
conditions of such licenced. 
4. Licences.— (1) Any person who intends to use or allows to be use d any place or premises as 
industrial premises shall make an application in wr iting to the competent authority, in such form on 
payment of such fees as may be prescribed, for a li cence to use, or allow to be used, such premises as  an 
industrial premises. 
(2) The application shall specify the maximum number of employees proposed to be employed at any 
time of the day in the place or premises and shall be accompanied by a plan of the place or premises 
prepared in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(3) The competent authority shall, in deciding whethe r to grant or refuse a licence, have regard to the 
following matters:— 
(a) the suitability of the place or premises which is  proposed to be used for the manufacture of 
beedi or cigar or both; 
(b) the previous experience of the applicant;  
(c) the financial resources of the applicant includin g his financial capacity to meet the demands 
arising out of the provisions of the laws for the t ime being in force relating to welfare of labour; 
(d) whether the application is made bonafide  on behalf of the applicant himself or in benami of  
any other person; 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 41 of 1993, s. 2 (w.e.f. 22-5-1993).  
2. Added by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 22-5-1993).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BEEDI AND CIGAR WORKERS (CONDITIONS OF.pdf - page 5]
5 
 (e) welfare of the labour in the locality, the intere st of the public generally and such other matters 
as may be prescribed. 
(4) ( a) A licence granted under this section shall not be  valid beyond the financial year in which it is 
granted but may be renewed from financial year to f inancial year. 
(b) An application for the renewal of a licence grant ed under this Act shall be made at least thirty 
days before the expiry of the period thereof, on pa yment of such fees as may be prescribed, and where 
such an application has been made, the licence shal l be deemed to continue, notwithstanding the expiry  of 
the period thereof, until the renewal of the licenc e, or, as the case may be, the rejection of the app lication 
for the renewal thereof. 
(c) The competent authority shall, in deciding whethe r to renew a licence or to refuse a renewal 
thereof, have regard to the matters specified in su b-section ( 3). 
(5) The competent authority shall not grant a renew a  licence unless it is satisfied that the provisions  
of this Act and the rules made thereunder have been  substantially complied with. 
(6) The competent authority may, after giving the hol der of a licence an opportunity of being heard, 
cancel or suspend any licence granted or renewed un der this Act if it appears to it that such licence has 
been obtained by misrepresentation or fraud or that  the licensee has contravened or failed to comply w ith 
any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made  thereunder or any of the terms or conditions of th e 
licence. 
(7) The State Government may issue in writing to a co mpetent authority such directions of a general 
character as that Government may consider necessary  in respect of any matter relating to the grant or 
renewal of licences under this section. 
(8) Subject to the foregoing provisions of this secti on, the competent authority may grant or renew 
licences under this Act on such terms and condition s as it may determine and where the com
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BEEDI AND CIGAR WORKERS (CONDITIONS OF.pdf - page 5]
r renew 
licences under this Act on such terms and condition s as it may determine and where the competent 
authority refuses to grant or renew any licence, it  shall do so by an order communicated to the applic ant, 
giving the reasons in writing for such refusal. 
5. Appeals.— Any person aggrieved by the decision of the compete nt authority refusing to grant or 
renew a licence or cancelling or suspending a licen ce may, within such time and on payment of such fee s, 
not exceeding twenty rupees, as may be prescribed, appeal to such authority as the State Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, speci fy in this behalf, and such authority may by order 
confirm, modify or reverse any order refusing to gr ant or renew a licence or cancelling or suspending a 
licence. 
6. Inspectors.— (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint such 
of its officers or such officers of any local autho rity as it thinks fit to be Inspectors for the purp oses of this 
Act and may assign to them such local limits as it may think fit. 
(2) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint any person to be a 
Chief Inspector who shall exercise the powers of an  Inspector throughout the State. 
(3) Every Chief Inspector and Inspector shall be deem ed to be a public servant within the meaning of 
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code 1860 (45 of 186 0). 
7. Powers of Inspectors.— (1) Subject to any rules made by the State Government  in this behalf, an 
Inspector may, within the local limits for which he  is appointed,— 
(a) make such examination and hold such inquiry as ma y be necessary for ascertaining whether 
the provisions of this Act have been or are being c omplied within any place or premises: 
Provided that no person shall be compelled under th is section to answer any question or to give 
any evidence which may tend to incriminate himself;  
(b) require the production of any prescribed register  and any ot
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BEEDI AND CIGAR WORKERS (CONDITIONS OF.pdf - page 5]
may tend to incriminate himself;  
(b) require the production of any prescribed register  and any other document relating to the 
manufacture of beedi or cigar or both; 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BEEDI AND CIGAR WORKERS (CONDITIONS OF.pdf - page 6]
6 
 (c) enter, with such assistants as he thinks fit, at all times any place or premises including the 
residences of employees if he has reasonable ground s for suspecting that any manufacturing process 
is being carried on or is ordinarily carried on in any such place or premises; 
(d) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed. 
(2) If an Inspector has reasonable grounds for suspec ting that any manufacturing process is being 
carried on in any establishment in contravention of  the provisions of this Act, he may, after giving d ue 
notice to the employer or, in the absence of the em ployer, to the occupier, enter such establishment w ith 
such assistants, if any, as he may think fit. 
(3) Every employer or occupier shall accord to the Ch ief Inspector or the Inspector, as the case may 
be, all reasonable facilities in the discharge of h is duties under this Act. 
1[7A. Inspector not to disclose the source of any com plaint, etc. —(1) No Inspector shall disclose 
the source of any complaint made to him regarding t he contravention of any of the provisions of this A ct.  
(2) No Inspector shall, while making an inspection under this Act in pursuance of a complaint 
received by him, disclose to the employer or contra ctor concerned or any of his representatives that t he 
inspection is being made in pursuance of a complain t: Provided that nothing in this section shall appl y to 
any case in which the person who has made the compl aint has consented to disclose his name.]  
8. Cleanliness.— Every industrial premises shall be kept clean and f ree from effluvia arising from any 
drain, privy or other nuisance and shall also maint ain such standard of cleanliness including white 
washing, colour washing, varnishing or painting, as  may be prescribed. 
9. Ventilation.— (1) For the purpose of preventing injury to the healt h of the persons working therein, 
every industrial premises shall maintain such stand ards of lighting, ventilation and temperature, as m ay be
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BEEDI AND CIGAR WORKERS (CONDITIONS OF.pdf - page 6]
ustrial premises shall maintain such stand ards of lighting, ventilation and temperature, as m ay be 
prescribed. 
(2) Wherever dust or fume or other impurity of such a  nature and to such an extent as is likely to be 
injurious or offensive to the persons employed in a ny industrial premises is given off by reason of th e 
manufacturing process carried on in such premises, the competent authority may require the employer to  
take such effective measures as may prevent the inh alation of such dust, fume or other impurity and 
accumulation thereof in any work room. 
10. Overcrowding.— (1) No room in any industrial premises shall be overc rowded to an extent 
injurious to the health of the persons employed the rein. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-sectio n ( 1), there shall be in any work room of such 
premises at least four and a quarter cubic metres o f space for every person employed therein, and for the 
purposes of this sub-section, no account shall be t aken of any space which is more than three metres 
above the level of the floor of the work room. 
11. Drinking water.— (1) The employer shall make in every industrial premi ses effective 
arrangements to provide and maintain at suitable po ints conveniently situated for all persons employed  
therein, a sufficient supply of wholesome drinking water. 
(2) All such points shall be legibly marked “drinking  water” in a language understood by the majority 
of the persons employed in the industrial premises and no such point shall be situated within six metr es of 
any washing place, urinal or latrine except with th e prior approval in writing of the competent author ity. 
12. Latrines and urinals.— (1) In every industrial premises, sufficient latrine and urinal 
accommodation of such types as may be prescribed sh all be provided and shall be so conveniently 
situated as may be accessible to the employees at a ll times while they are in the industrial premises:  
Provided that it shall not be necessa
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BEEDI AND CIGAR WORKERS (CONDITIONS OF.pdf - page 6]
ees at a ll times while they are in the industrial premises:  
Provided that it shall not be necessary to provide separate urinals in industrial premises where less 
than fifty persons are employed or where the latrin es are connected to a water-borne sewage system. 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 41 of 1993, s. 3 (w.e.f. 22-5-1993).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BEEDI AND CIGAR WORKERS (CONDITIONS OF.pdf - page 7]
7 
 (2) The State Government may specify the number of la trines and urinals which shall be provided in 
any industrial premises in proportion to any number  of male and female employees ordinarily employed 
therein, and may provide for such further matters i n respect of sanitation in the industrial premises 
including obligation of the employees in this regar d as it may consider necessary in the interest of t he 
health of the persons employed therein. 
13. Washing facilities.— In every industrial premises, where blending or sie ving or both of tobacco 
or warming of beedi in hot ovens is carried on, the  employer shall provide such washing facilities for  the 
use of the employees, as may be prescribed. 
14. Creches.— (1)In every industrial premises wherein more than 1[thirty]  female employees are 
ordinarily employed, there shall be provided and ma intained a suitable room or rooms for the use of 
children under the age of six years of such female employees. 
(2) Such rooms shall — 
(a) provide adequate accommodation; 
(b) be adequately lighted and ventilated; 
(c) be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition; 
(d) be under the charge of women trained in the care of children and infants. 
(3) The State Government may make rules, — 
(a) prescribing the location and the standards in res pect of construction, accommodation, 
furniture and other equipment of rooms to be provid ed under this section; 
(b) requiring the provision in any industrial premise s to which this section applies, of additional 
facilities for the care of children belonging to fe male employees, including suitable provision of 
facilities for washing and changing their clothing;  
(c) requiring the provision in any industrial premise s of free milk or refreshment or both for such 
children; 
(d) requiring that facilities shall be given in any i ndustrial premises for the mothers of such 
children to feed them at necessary intervals. 
15. First aid.— Every industrial premises shall provide 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BEEDI AND CIGAR WORKERS (CONDITIONS OF.pdf - page 7]
ldren to feed them at necessary intervals. 
15. First aid.— Every industrial premises shall provide such first aid facilities as may be prescribed. 
16. Canteens.— The State Government may, by rules, require the emp loyer to provide and maintain in 
every industrial premises wherein not less than two  hundred and fifty employees are ordinarily employe d, 
a canteen for the use of the employees. 
17. Working hours.— No employee shall be required or allowed to work in  any industrial premises 
for more than nine hours in any day or for more tha n forty-eight hours in any week: 
Provided that any adult employee may be allowed to work in such industrial premises for any period 
in excess of the limit fixed under this section sub ject to the payment of overtime wages if the period  of 
work, including overtime work, does not exceed ten hours in any day and in the aggregate fifty-four ho urs 
in any week. 
18. Wages for overtime work.— (1) Where any employee employed in any industrial pre mises is 
required to work overtime, he shall be entitled in respect of such overtime work, to wages at the rate  of 
twice his ordinary rate of wages. 
(2) Where the employees in an industrial premises are  paid on a piece-rate basis, the overtime rate 
shall be calculated, for the purposes of this secti on, at the time rates which shall be as nearly as p ossible 
equivalent to the daily average of their full time earnings for the days on which they had actually wo rked 
during the week immediately preceding the week in w hich the overtime work has been done. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 41 of 1993, s. 4, for “fifty” (w.e. f. 22-5-1993). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BEEDI AND CIGAR WORKERS (CONDITIONS OF.pdf - page 8]
8 
 1[Explanation .—Where an employee had not worked on any day of th e week immediately preceding 
the week in which the overtime work has been done, any week preceding such week in which he had 
actually worked shall be taken into account in calc ulating the overtime rate for the purposes of this sub-
section.] 
(3) For the purposes of this section, “ordinary rates  of wages” means the basic wages plus such 
allowance, including the cash equivalent of the adv antage accruing through the concessional sale to th e 
employees of food grains and other articles as the employee is for the time being entitled to but does  not 
include bonus. 
(4) The cash equivalent of the advantage accruing thr ough the concessional sale to an employee of 
food grains and other articles shall be computed as  often as may be prescribed on the basis of the 
maximum quantity of food grains and other articles admissible to a standard family. 
ExplanationI .—“Standard family” means a family consisting of the employee, his or her spouse and 
two children requiring in all three adult consumpti on units. 
ExplanationII .—“Adult consumption units” means the consumption uni t of a male above the age of 
fourteen years; and the consumption unit of a femal e above the age of fourteen years and that of a chi ld 
shall be calculated at the rate of eight-tenths and  six-tenths, respectively, of one adult consumption  unit. 
19. Interval for rest.— The periods of work for employees in an industrial premises each day shall be 
so fixed that no period shall exceed five hours and  that no employee shall work for more than five hou rs 
before he has had an interval for rest of at least half an hour. 
20. Spread over.— The periods of work of an employee in an industrial  premises shall be so arranged 
that inclusive of his intervals for rest under sect ion 19, they shall not spread over more than ten an d a half 
hours in any day: 
Provided that the Chief Inspector may, for reasons to be specified in writin
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BEEDI AND CIGAR WORKERS (CONDITIONS OF.pdf - page 8]
alf 
hours in any day: 
Provided that the Chief Inspector may, for reasons to be specified in writing, increase the spread ove r 
to twelve hours. 
21. Weekly holidays.— (1) Every industrial premises shall remain entirely c losed, except for wetting 
of beedi or tobacco leaves, on one day in the week which day shall be specified by the employer in a 
notice exhibited in a conspicuous place in the indu strial premises and the day so specified shall not be 
altered by the employer more often than once in thr ee months and except with the previous written 
permission of the Chief Inspector. 
2[Provided that a copy of every such notice shall be  sent to the Inspector having jurisdiction over the  
industrial premises within two weeks from the date on which such notice is exhibited in the industrial  
premises.] 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section  ( 1), an employee employed in the said 
premises for wetting of beedi or tobacco leaves on the day on which it remains closed in pursuance of 
sub-section ( 1), shall be allowed a substituted holiday on one of  the three days immediately before or after 
the said day. 
(3) For a holiday under this section, an employee sha ll be paid, notwithstanding any contract to the 
contrary, at the rate equal to the daily average of  his total full time earnings for the days on which  he had 
worked during the week immediately preceding the ho liday exclusive of any overtime earnings and bonus 
but inclusive of dearness and other allowances. 
Explanation. —The expression “total full time earnings” shall hav e the meaning assigned to it in 
section 27. 
22. Notice of periods of work.— (1) There shall be displayed and correctly maintained  in every 
industrial premises a notice of periods of work in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed, 
showing clearly for every day the periods during wh ich the employees may be required to work. 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 41 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BEEDI AND CIGAR WORKERS (CONDITIONS OF.pdf - page 8]
be required to work. 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 41 of 1993, s. 5 (w.e.f. 22-5-1993).  
2. The proviso added by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 22-5-19 93).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BEEDI AND CIGAR WORKERS (CONDITIONS OF.pdf - page 9]
9 
 (2) ( a) A copy of the notice referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be sent in triplicate to the Inspector 
having jurisdiction over the industrial premises wi thin two weeks from the date of the grant of a lice nce 
for the first time under this Act, in the case of a ny industrial premises carrying on work at the 
commencement of this Act, and in the case of any in dustrial premises beginning work after such 
commencement, before the day on which the work is b egun in the industrial premises. 
(b) Any proposed change in the system of work which w ill necessitate a change in the notice referred 
to in sub-section ( 1) shall be notified to the Inspector in triplicate before the change is made and except 
with the previous sanction of the Inspector, no suc h change shall be made until one week has elapsed 
since the last change. 
23. Hours of work to correspond with notice under s ection 22.— No employee shall be employed 
in any industrial premises otherwise than in accord ance with the notice of work displayed in the premi ses 
under section 22. 
24. Prohibition of employment of children.— No child shall be required or allowed to work in an y 
industrial premises. 
25. Prohibition of employment of women or young per sons during certain hours.— No woman or 
young person shall be required or allowed to work i n any industrial premises except between 6 a.m. and  7 
p.m. 
26. Annual leave with wages.— (1) Every employee in an establishment shall be allow ed in a 
calendar year leave with wages — 
(i) in the case of an adult, at the rate of one day f or every twenty days of work performed by him 
during the previous calendar year; 
(ii ) in the case of a young person at the rate of one day for every fifteen days of work performed 
by him during the previous calendar year. 
Explanation. —The leave admissible under this sub-section shall b e exclusive of all holidays whether 
occurring during, or at the beginning or at the end  of, the period of leave. 
(2) If an emplo
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BEEDI AND CIGAR WORKERS (CONDITIONS OF.pdf - page 9]
ther 
occurring during, or at the beginning or at the end  of, the period of leave. 
(2) If an employee is discharged or dismissed from se rvice or quits employment during the course of 
the year, he shall be entitled to leave with wages at the rate laid down in sub-section ( 1). 
(3) In calculating leave under this section, any frac tion of leave of half a day or more shall be treate d 
as one full day’s leave and any fraction of less th an half a day shall be omitted. 
(4) If any employee does not, in any calendar year ta ke the whole of the leave allowed to him under 
sub-section ( 1), the leave not taken by him shall be added to the  leave to be allowed to him in the 
succeeding calendar year: 
Provided that the total number of days of leave tha t may be carried forward to a succeeding year shall  
not exceed thirty in the case of an adult or forty in the case of a young person. 
(5) An application of an employee for the whole or an y portion of the leave allowed under sub-section 
(1) shall be in writing and ordinarily shall have to be made sufficiently in advance of the day on which  he 
wishes the leave to begin. 
(6) If the employment of an employee who is entitled to leave under sub-section ( 1) is terminated by 
the employer before he has taken the entire leave t o which he is entitled, or if having applied for le ave, he 
has not been granted such leave, or if the employee  quits his employment before he has taken the leave , 
the employer shall pay him the amount payable under  section 27 in respect of leave not taken and such 
payment shall be made, where the employment of the employee is terminated by the employer, before the 
expiry of the second working day after such termina tion and where the employee quits his employment, 
on or before the next pay day. 
(7) The leave not availed of by an employee shall not  be taken into consideration in computing the 
period of any notice required to be given before di scharge or dismissal. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BEEDI AND CIGAR WORKERS (CONDITIONS OF.pdf - page 9]
the 
period of any notice required to be given before di scharge or dismissal. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BEEDI AND CIGAR WORKERS (CONDITIONS OF.pdf - page 10]
10 
 27. Wages during leave period.— (1) For the leave allowed to him under section 26, an  employee 
shall be paid at the rate equal to the daily averag e of his total full time earnings for the days on w hich he 
had worked during the month immediately preceding h is leave exclusive of any overtime earnings and 
bonus but inclusive of dearness and other allowance s. 
Explanation I. —In this sub-section, the expression “total full tim e earnings” includes the cash 
equivalent of the advantage accruing through the co ncessional sale to employees of foodgrains and othe r 
articles, as the employee is for the time being ent itled to, but does not include bonus. 
ExplanationII .—For the purposes of determining the wages payable t o a home worker during leave 
period or for the purpose of payment of maternity b enefit to a woman home worker, “day” shall mean any  
period during which such home worker was employed, during a period of twenty-four hours commencing 
at midnight, for making beedi or cigar or both. 
(2) An employee who has been allowed leave for not le ss than four days in the case of an adult and 
five days in the case of a young person, shall, bef ore his leave begins, be paid wages due for the per iod of 
the leave allowed. 
28. Application of the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 t o industrial premises.— (1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Payment of Wages Act, 193 6 (4 of 1936) (hereinafter referred to in this sect ion 
as the said Act), the State Government may, by noti fication in the Official Gazette, direct that all o r any of 
the provisions of the said Act or the rules made th ereunder shall apply to all or any class of employe es in 
establishment or class of establishments to which t his Act applies and on such application of the 
provisions of the said Act, an Inspector appointed under this Act shall be deemed to be the Inspector for 
the purposes of the enforcement of such provisions of the said Act within the local limits of his 
jurisdic
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BEEDI AND CIGAR WORKERS (CONDITIONS OF.pdf - page 10]
poses of the enforcement of such provisions of the said Act within the local limits of his 
jurisdiction. 
(2) The State Government may, by a like notification,  cancel or vary any notification issued under 
sub-section ( 1). 
29. Special provisions.— (1) The State Government may permit the wetting or cu tting of beedi or 
tobacco leaves by employees outside the industrial permises on an application made to it by the employ er 
on behalf of such employees. 
(2) The employer shall maintain in the prescribed for m a record of the work permitted under sub-
section ( 1) to be carried on outside the industrial premises.  
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this section, no em ployer shall require or allow any manufacturing 
process connected with the making of beedi or cigar  or both to be carried on outside the industrial 
premises: 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall app ly to any labour who is given raw material by an 
employer or a contractor for being made into beedi or cigar or both at home. 
30. Onus as to age.— (1) When any act or omission would, if a person were under a certain age, be 
an offence punishable under this Act and such perso n is, in the opinion of the court, prima facie  under 
such age, the burden shall be on the accused to pro ve that such person is not under such age. 
(2) A declaration in writing by a medical officer not  below the rank of a Civil Assistant Surgeon 
relating to an employee that he has personally exam ined him and believes him to be under the age state d 
in such declaration, shall, for the purposes of thi s Act and the rules made thereunder, be admissible as 
evidence of the age of that employee. 
31. Notice of dismissal.— (1) No employer shall dispense with the services of a n employee who has 
been employed for a period of six months or more, e xcept for a reasonable cause, and without giving su ch 
employee at least one month’s notice or wages in li eu of such notice: 
Provided that such notice shall not be neces
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BEEDI AND CIGAR WORKERS (CONDITIONS OF.pdf - page 10]
t one month’s notice or wages in li eu of such notice: 
Provided that such notice shall not be necessary if  the services of such employee are dispensed with 
on a charge of misconduct supported by satisfactory  evidence recorded at an inquiry held by the employ er 
for the purpose. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BEEDI AND CIGAR WORKERS (CONDITIONS OF.pdf - page 11]
11 
 (2) ( a) The employee discharged, dismissed or retrenched may appeal to such authority and within 
such time as may be prescribed either on the ground  that there was no reasonable cause for dispensing 
with his services or on the ground that he had not been guilty of misconduct as held by the employer o r on 
the ground that such punishment of discharge or dis missal was severe. 
(b) The appellate authority may, after giving notice in the prescribed manner to the employer and the 
employee, dismiss the appeal or direct the reinstat ement of the employee with or without wages for the  
period during which he was kept out of employment o r direct payment of compensation without 
reinstatement or grant such other relief as it deem s fit in the circumstances of the case. 
1[(2A) The appellate authority shall have the same p owers as are vested in a civil court under the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), when try ing a suit, in respect of the following matters, 
namely:— (a) enforcing the attendance of any person  and examining him on oath; and (b) compelling the 
production of documents and material objects.] (3) The decision of the appellate authority shall be fi nal 
and binding on both the parties and be given effect  to within such time as may be specified in the ord er of 
the appellate authority. 
(3) The decision of the appellate authority shall be final and binding on both the parties and be given 
effect to within such time as may be specified in t he order of the appellate authority. 
32. Penalty for obstructing Inspector.— Whoever obstructs the Chief Inspector or an Inspect or in 
the exercise of any powers conferred on him by or u nder this Act, or fails to produce on demand by the  
Chief Inspector or an Inspector any register or oth er document kept in his custody in pursuance of thi s Act 
or of any rules made thereunder, or conceals or pre vents any employee in an industrial premises from 
appearing before or being examined by the Chief I
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BEEDI AND CIGAR WORKERS (CONDITIONS OF.pdf - page 11]
vents any employee in an industrial premises from 
appearing before or being examined by the Chief Ins pector or an Inspector, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to 2[six months], which may extend to 3[five thousand 
rupees], or with both. 
33. General penalty for offence .—(1)Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, any person 
who contravenes any of the provisions of this Act o r of any rule made thereunder, or fails to wages or  
compensation in accordance with any order of the ap pellate authority passed under clause ( b) of sub-
section ( 2) of section 31, shall, be punishable, for the firs t offence, with fine which may extend to two 
hundred and fifty rupees and for a second or any su bsequent offence with imprisonment for a term which  
shall not be less than one month or more than six m onths or with fine which shall not be less than one  
hundred rupees or more than five hundred rupees or with both. 
(2) ( a) Any employer who fails to reinstate any employee in accordance with the order of the 
appellate authority passed under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 2) of section 31, shall be punishable with fine 
which may extend to two hundred and fifty rupees. 
(b) Any employer, who, after having been convicted un der clause ( a), continues, after the date of such 
conviction, to fail to reinstate an employee in acc ordance with the order mentioned in that clause, sh all be 
punishable, for each day of such default, with fine  which may extend to twenty rupees. 
(c) Any Court trying an offence punishable under this  sub-section may direct that the whole or any 
part of the fine, if realised, shall be paid, by wa y of compensation, to the person, who, in its opini on, has 
been injured by such failure. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Payment  of Wages Act, 1936 (4 of 1936), with regard 
to the definition of wages, any compensation requir ed to be paid by an employer under clause ( b) of sub-
section ( 2) of sec
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BEEDI AND CIGAR WORKERS (CONDITIONS OF.pdf - page 11]
, any compensation requir ed to be paid by an employer under clause ( b) of sub-
section ( 2) of section 31 but not paid by him shall be recove rable as delayed wages under the provisions 
of that Act. 
(4) It shall be no defence in a prosecution of any pe rson for the contravention of the provisions of 
section 3 that any manufacturing process connected with the making of beedi or cigar or both was carri ed 
on by such person himself of by any member of his f amily or by any other person living with or 
dependent on such person. 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 41 of 1993, s. 7 (w.e.f. 22-5-1993) 
2 . Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for “three months” (w.e.f . 22-5-1993) 
3 . Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for “five hundred rupees”  (w.e.f. 22-5-1993).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BEEDI AND CIGAR WORKERS (CONDITIONS OF.pdf - page 12]
12 
 34. Offences by companies.— (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committe d by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was incharge of, and was responsible  
to, the company for conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to  
be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section  shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act if he proves that t he offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section  ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the of fence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect o n the part of any director, manager, secretary or o ther 
officer of the company, such director, manager, sec retary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded  against and punished accordingly. 
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section — 
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a  firm, and other association of 
individuals; and 
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partne r in the firm. 
35. Indemnity.— (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings s hall lie against any person for 
anything which is in good faith done or intended to  be done under this Act or any rule or order made 
thereunder. 
(2) No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie agai nst the Government for any damage caused or 
likely to be caused by anything which is in good fa ith done or intended to be done in pursuance of thi s 
Act or any rule or order made thereunder. 
36. Cognizance of offences.— (1) No Court shall take cognizance of any offence pun ishable under 
this Act except up
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BEEDI AND CIGAR WORKERS (CONDITIONS OF.pdf - page 12]
f offences.— (1) No Court shall take cognizance of any offence pun ishable under 
this Act except upon a complaint made by, or with t he previous sanction in writing of the Chief Inspec tor 
or an Inspector within three months of the date on which the alleged commission of the offence came to  
the knowledge of the Inspector: 
Provided that where the offence consists of disobey ing a written order made by the competent 
authority, the Chief Inspector or an Inspector, com plaint thereof may be made within six months of the  
date on which the offence is alleged to have been c ommitted. 
(2) No Court inferior to that of a presidency magistr ate or a magistrate of the first class shall try an y 
offence punishable under this Act. 
37. Application of the Industrial Employment (Stand ing Orders) Act, 1946 and the Maternity 
Benefit Act, 1961.— (1) The provisions of the Industrial Employment (Stan ding Orders) Act, 1946 (20 of 
1946) shall apply to every industrial premises wher ein fifty or more persons are employed or were 
employed on any one day of the preceding twelve mon ths as if such industrial premises were an industri al 
establishment to which that Act has been applied by  a notification under sub-section ( 3) of section 1 
thereof, and as if the employee in the said premise s were a workman within the meaning of that Act. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section  ( 1), the State Government may, after giving 
not less than two months’ notice of its intention s o to do, by notification in the Official Gazette, a pply all 
or any of the provisions of the Industrial Employme nt (Standing Orders), Act, 1946 (20 of 1946), to an y 
industrial premises wherein less than fifty employe es are employed or were employed on any one day of 
the preceding twelve months as if such industrial p remises were an industrial establishment to which A ct 
has been applied by a notification under sub-sectio n ( 3) of section 1 thereof, and as if the employee in t he 
sa
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BEEDI AND CIGAR WORKERS (CONDITIONS OF.pdf - page 12]
d by a notification under sub-sectio n ( 3) of section 1 thereof, and as if the employee in t he 
said premises were a workman within the meaning of that Act. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Materni ty Benefit Act, 1961 (53 of 1961), the 
provisions of that Act shall apply to every establi shment as if such establishment were an establishme nt to 
which that Act has been applied by a notification u nder sub-section ( 1) of section 2 thereof: 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BEEDI AND CIGAR WORKERS (CONDITIONS OF.pdf - page 13]
13 
 Provided that the said Act shall, in its applicatio n to a home worker, apply subject to the following 
modifications, namely: — 
(a) in section 5, in the Explanation  to sub-section ( 1), the words “or one rupee a day, whichever is 
higher” shall be omitted; and 
(b) sections 8 and 10 shall be omitted. 
38. Certain provisions not to apply to industrial p remises.— (1) Chapter IV and section 85 of the 
Factories Act, 1948 (62 of 1948) shall apply to an industrial premises and the rest of the provisions in that 
Act shall not apply to any industrial premises. 
(2) Nothing contained in any law relating to the regu lation of the conditions of work of workers in 
shops or commercial establishments shall apply to a ny establishment to which this Act applies. 
39. Application of the Industrial Disputes Act, 194 7.—(1) The provisions of the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), shall apply to matters aris ing in respect of every industrial premises. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section  ( 1), a dispute between an employer and 
employee relating to — 
(a) the issue by the employer of raw materials to the  employees, 
(b) the rejection by the employer of beedi or cigar o r both made by an employee, 
(c) the payment of wages for the beedi or cigar or bo th rejected by the employer, 
1[shall be referred for settlement within such time and by such authority as the State Government 
may, by rules, specify in this behalf and such rule s may also provide for the summary manner in which 
such dispute shall be settled].  
(3) Any person aggrieved by a settlement made by the authority specified under sub-section ( 2) may 
prefer an appeal to such authority and within such time as the State Government may, by notification i n 
the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf. 
(4) The decision of the authority specified under sub -section ( 3) shall be final. 
40. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with  this Act.— (1) The provisions of this Act shall
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BEEDI AND CIGAR WORKERS (CONDITIONS OF.pdf - page 13]
40. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with  this Act.— (1) The provisions of this Act shall 
have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent t herewith contained in any other law for the time be ing 
in force or in the terms of any award, agreement, o r contract of service whether made before or after the 
commencement of this Act: 
Provided that where under any such award, agreement , contract of service or otherwise an employee 
is entitled to benefits in respect of any matters w hich are more favourable to him than those to which  he 
will be entitled to under this Act, the employee sh all continue to be entitled to the more favourable 
benefits in respect of that matter notwithstanding that he receives benefits in respect of other matte rs 
under this Act. 
(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed as precluding any employee from entering into an 
agreement with an employer for granting him rights or privileges in respect of any matter which are mo re 
favourable to him than those to which he would be e ntitled under this Act. 
41. Power to exempt.— The State Government may, by notification in the Of ficial Gazette, exempt, 
subject to such conditions and restrictions as it m ay impose, any class of industrial premises or clas s of 
employers or employees from all or any of the provi sions of this Act or of any rules made thereunder: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall be cons tructed as empowering the State Government to 
grant any exemption in respect of any woman employe e from any of the provisions of this Act or any 
rules made thereunder relating to annual leave with  wages, maternity benefits, creches, wages, rejecti on 
of beedi or cigar and night work. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 41 of 1993, s. 9, for certain words  (w.e.f. 22-5-1993). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BEEDI AND CIGAR WORKERS (CONDITIONS OF.pdf - page 14]
14 
 42. Powers of Central Government to give directions .—The Central Government may give 
directions to a State Government as to the carrying  into execution of the provisions of this Act. 
43. Act not to apply to self-employed persons in pr ivate dwelling houses.— Nothing contained in 
this Act shall apply to the owner or occupier of a private dwelling house who carries on any 
manufacturing process in such private dwelling hous e with the assistance of the members of his family 
living with him in such dwelling house and dependen t on him: 
Provided that the owner or occupier thereof is not an employee of an employer to whom this Act 
applies. 
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, “family” means th e spouse and children of the owner 
or occupier. 
44. Power to make rules.— (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Ac t. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the gener ality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, na mely: — 
(a) the terms and conditions subject to which a licen ce may be granted or renewed under this Act 
and the fees to be paid in respect of such licence;  
(b) the form of application for a licence under this Act and the documents and plans to be 
submitted together with such application; 
(c) other matters which are to be taken into consider ation by the competent authority for granting 
or refusing a licence; 
(d) the time within which, the fees on payment of whi ch and the authority to which, appeals may 
be preferred against any order granting or refusing  to grant a licence; 
(e) the submission of a monthly return by an employer  to the competent authority specifying the 
quantity of tobacco released by the Central Excise Department and the number of beedi or cigar or 
both manufactured by him; 
(f) the powers which may be conferred on the Inspecto rs under this Act; 
(g) the standards of cleanlin
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BEEDI AND CIGAR WORKERS (CONDITIONS OF.pdf - page 14]
 the powers which may be conferred on the Inspecto rs under this Act; 
(g) the standards of cleanliness required to be maint ained under this Act; 
(h) the standards of lighting, ventilation and temper ature required to be maintained under this 
Act; 
(i) the types of urinals and latrines required to be provided under this Act; 
(j) the washing facilities which are to be provided u nder this Act; 
(k) canteens; 
(1) the form and manner of notice regarding the perio ds of work; 
(m) the form in which records of work done outside an  establishment shall be maintained; 
(n) the authority to which and the time within which an appeal may be filed by a dismissed, 
discharged or retrenched employee; 
(o) the manner in which the cash equivalent of the ad vantage accruing through the concessional 
sale to an employee of foodgrainsand other articles  shall be computed; 
(p) the records and registers that shall be maintaine d in an establishment for the purpose of 
securing compliance with the provisions of this Act  and the rules made thereunder; 
(q) the maintenance of first aid boxes or cupboards a nd the contents thereof and the persons in 
whose charge such boxes shall be placed; 
(r) the manner in which sorting or rejection of beedi  or cigar or both and disposal of rejected 
beedi or cigar or both shall be carried out; 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BEEDI AND CIGAR WORKERS (CONDITIONS OF.pdf - page 15]
15 
 (s) the fixation of maximum limit of the percentage o f rejection of beedi or cigar or both 
manufactured by an employee; 
(t) specifying the place at which wages shall be paid  to persons who receive directly or through 
an agent raw materials for the manufacture of beedi  or cigar or both at home; 
(u) supervision by the Inspectors over distribution o f raw materials including beedi and tobacco 
leaves to the employees; 
(v) precautions to be taken against fire for the safe ty of workers; 
(w) 1[the time within which a dispute specified section- section (2) of section 39 shall be referred 
for settlement, the authority by which and the summ ary manner in which such dispute shall be settled]  
and the authority to which an appeal shall lie from  the settlement made by the first-mentioned 
authority; 
(x) any matter which is required to be, or may be, pr escribed. 
(3) All rules made under this Act shall be published in the Official Gazette and shall be subject to the  
condition of previous publication; and the dates to  be specified under clause ( 3) of section23 of the 
General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), shall not b e less than three months from the date on which dra ft 
of the proposed rules was published. 
(4) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of the State Legislature, where it consists o f two Houses, or where such Legislature consists of  one 
House, before that House, while it is in session fo r a total period of thirty days which may be compri sed 
in one session or in two successive sessions, and i f, before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid 
or the session immediately following the Legislatur es agree in making any modification in the rule or the 
Legislatures agree that the rule should not be made , the rule shall thereafter have effect only in suc h 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may b e; so however, that any such modification or 
annulment, sh
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BEEDI AND CIGAR WORKERS (CONDITIONS OF.pdf - page 15]
rm or be of no effect, as the case may b e; so however, that any such modification or 
annulment, shall be without prejudice to the validi ty of anything previously done under that rule. 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 41 of 1993, s. 10, for certain word s (w.e.f. 22-5-1993). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL BONDED WAREHOUSE ASSOCIATION ACT, 1854.pdf - page 1]
1 
    THE BENGAL BONDED WAREHOUSE ASSOCIATION  ACT , 185 4 
ACT NO. V OF1854 
[Passed on the  10th February ,1854.] 
1. Repeal ss. 12, 14, 32, and 37, of Act 5 of 1838 . 
2. Business to be managed by six Directors, three to be quorum.  
3. Directors to go out of office before annual meeting of May in new election to be made then, and old 
Directors to be re -eligible.  
4. Qualification of Director, 5 shares in his own right . 
5. Ordinary General Meeting to be held twice a year, and when : and ma y declare divide nd, but not 
out of capital . 
6. Empowers Association to make By -laws.  
7. Corporation may be dissolved after  5 years from date of order to that effect, but no such order to 
be made till after  14th March , 1860.  
An Act to amend Act No. V. of 1838, relating to the Bengal Bonded Warehouse Association.  
Whereas the Bengal Bonded Warehouse Association are desirous that the provision of Act No. V. of 
1838 should be amended, and it appears reasonable that such amendment should be made; It is enacted as 
follows:  
I. Section XII. XIV ., XXXII. And XXXVII. Of the said Act are hereby repealed.  
II.The business of the said Association shall be managed by six Directors, three of whom shall from a 
quorum.  
III. The two Directors who are to go out of office by rotation in every year shall go out of office in 
the month of May, before the holding of the ordinary General Meeting of proprietors directed to be 
holden in that month, and at such ordinary General Meeting two Directors shall be chosen, and the 
Directors so going out of office  or either of them shall be capable of being re -elected in the same year at 
such General M eeting.  
IV. No person shall be capable of being a Director of the said Association who shall not be a 
proprietor in his own right of Five shares of the Capital Stock of the said Association.  
V. Ordinary General Meetings of the said proprietors shall be held at least twice in every year, that is 
to say, on the second Wednesda
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL BONDED WAREHOUSE ASSOCIATION ACT, 1854.pdf - page 1]
said proprietors shall be held at least twice in every year, that is 
to say, on the second Wednesday in the month of May, and the second Wednesday in the month of 
November, and at every such ordinary Meeting the Directors of the said Association shall present a 
Report in writing of the state of the affairs of the said Association and a balance sheet; and such General 
Meeting may declare a dividend out of the profits of the said Association, provided that no dividend shall 
be made which shall diminish the capital of the said Association.  
VI. It shall be lawful for the said Association to make Bye -laws for the Regulation of its own 
proceedings, which Bye -laws shall be binding only on its own Members and Officers, provided tha t no 
such Bye -law shall be valid till its shall have been approved of by one extraordinary General Meeting of 
proprietors specially convened for that purpose, provided also that no such Bye -law shall be valid till it 
shall have been confirmed by the Govern or of the Presidency of Fort William in Bengal.  
VII. At any time after the 14th day of march 1860, it shall be lawful for the Governor 
General of India in Council by an  order in council to direct that the said Association shall be   
dissolved at the expira tion of five years from the date of such order, and such order shall of itself 
have the effect of dissolving the said corporation at the expiration of the said space of five years, 
except for the purposes mentioned in Section XXXIX., Act No. V. of 1838.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL BONDED WAREHOUSE ASSOCIATION ACT.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE BENGAL BONDED WAREHOUSE ASSOCIATION ACT  
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS . 
1. Incorporation . 
2. Power to sue and be sued, and to acquire, hold and transfer property . 
3. Capital Stock and shares . 
4. Registering of names of proprietors . Register to be open to inspection.  
5. Share -certificates . 
6. Transfer of shares . 
7. Proprietors of shares to be members of Association . 
8. First Directors of Association . 
9. Removal and election of Directors . 
10. Directors to go out by rotation . 
11. Election of successor, when Director ceases  to be so otherwise than by rotation . 
12. [Repeal ed]. 
13. Directors to be residents of Bengal Presidency . 
14. [Repealed] . 
15. Adjournment of ordinary meetings . 
16. Extraordinary general meeting s. 
17. Voting at general meetings  Qualification for voting . 
18. Number of votes to which proprietors  entitled . 
19. Votes of joint proprietors shares . 
20. Voting by proxy . 
21. Authority of Directors . 
22. Calls for share money . 
23. Interest to run on each call . Application of dividend in satisfaction of unpaid calls.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL BONDED WAREHOUSE ASSOCIATION ACT.pdf - page 2]
2 
 24. Power t o refuse to register transfer by defaulting proprietor . Power to sell shares to satisfy 
calls, and issue fresh certificates.  
25. Extension of Act 25 of 1836 to warehouses of Asso ciation . 
26. Power to give general security for payment of import and export duties . 
27. Rates for w arehousing . 
28. Certificates of deposit, transferable by endorsement . 
29. Suits against Association . 
30. Joint Stock of Association . 
31. Individual members not to be liable . 
32. [Repealed ]. 
33. Increase of Capital Stock . 
34. Option to original proprietors to subscribe in first instance . 
35. Provisions of Act to apply to additional Stock . 
36. East India Company to have right of pre -emption . 
37. Dissolution of Association by order of the Governor General in Council . 
38. Dissolution of Association by resolution of proprietors . 
39. Division of property on dissolution . 
SHEDU LE NO . I 
SHEDULE NO. II 
 
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL BONDED WAREHOUSE ASSOCIATION ACT.pdf - page 3]
3 
 THE BENGAL BONDED WAREHOUSE ASSOCIATION ACT, 1838  
ACT NO. 5 OF 1838 
[14th March, 1838.]  
1. Incorporation .—It is hereby enacted, that the persons whose names appear in the Schedule 
No. 1, hereunto annexed, shall, from the 14th day of March, 1838, form a corporate body for the 
Warehousing of Goods, either in bond or otherwise, by the name of the Bengal Bonded Warehouse 
Association.  
2. Power to sue and be sued, and to acquire, hold and transfer property .—1 * * * The said 
Association shall sue and be sued by its corporate name, and shall  use such common seal as the 
Directors of the said Association shall from time to time appoint, and may acquire, may hold 
absolutely, may hold by way of pledge, and may transfer, any description of property whatever.  
3. Capital Stock and shares .—1* * * The sum of Rs. 10,00,000 subscribed for the purpose of the 
said Association by the persons hereby incorporated, shall be the Capital Stock of the said 
Association, and shall be divid ed into 2,000 shares of 500 Rupees each, and  2* * * every one of the 
persons hereby incorporated shall have one share of such Capital Stock for every 500 Rupees which 
such person shall have subscribed.  
4. Registering of names of proprietors .—1 * * * The Directors of the said Association shall 
cause the names, additions, and places of residence of the proprietors of shares in the said Capital 
Stock, and the number of shares held by each proprietor, to be registered in a book, and the said 
shares shall in such book be numbered, beginning from No. 1, and such book shall be kept at the 
office of the said Association,  
Register to be open to inspection .—and shall there be open to the insp ection of all persons 
during the usual hours of business.  
5. Share -certificates .—1 * * * A certificate signed by three Directors of the said Association shall 
be delivered to every proprietor of the said Capital Stock, and  2* * * it shall  be at the option of every 
proprietor of several
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL BONDED WAREHOUSE ASSOCIATION ACT.pdf - page 3]
or of the said Capital Stock, and  2* * * it shall  be at the option of every 
proprietor of several shares to receive one certificate for all the shares of such proprietor, or one 
certificate for each of those shares or several certificates, each of which may be for any number of 
those shares.  
6. Transfer of shares .—3 * * * Any share or shares of the said Capital Stock may be transferred 
by indorsement made on the certificate for such share or shares by the proprietor of such share  or 
shares, or by the Attorney of such proprietor duly authorized thereunto; provided always, that such 
indorsement shall specify the name of the party to whom the transfer is made; and provided also that 
no such indorsement shall be effectual to transfer any such share or shares until such indorsement 
shall have been registered in a Register to be kept for that purpose at the office of the said 
Association, and until a note of such registration, and of the date thereof, shall have been made on the 
back of the indorsed certificate under the hand of an officer appointed for that purpose by the 
Directors of the said Association.  
                                                           
1. The words “And it is hereby enacted, that” omitted by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and Sch. I.  
2. The word “that” omitted by s. 2 and Sch. I ibid. 
3. The words “And it is hereby enacted, that” omitted by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and Sch. I.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL BONDED WAREHOUSE ASSOCIATION ACT.pdf - page 4]
4 
 7. Proprietors of shares to be members of Association .—1 * * * Every proprietor of a share of 
the said Capital Stock, who shall cease to be a proprietor of such Stock, shall cease to be a member of 
the corporation created by this Act; and  2* * * every person who shall become a proprietor of the said 
Capital Sto ck, shall become a member of the corporation created by this Act; and shall, in respect of 
his share or shares of the said Capital Stock, be under the same liabilities under which an original 
proprietor of the said Capital Stock would be.  
8. First Directors of Association .—1* * * The business of the said Association shall be managed 
by six Directors, and  2* * * Francis Macnaghten, Joseph Walker, Jasper Ouseley, Richard Howe 
Cockerell, Alexander Colvin, Joseph Willis, and James Church, Esquires, shall be the first Directors 
of the said Association.  
9. Removal and election of Directors .—1* * * Every Di rector of the said Association may be 
removed by a general meeting of the proprietors, and  2* * * every future Director of the said 
Association shall be elected by such a general meeting.  
10. Directors to go out by rotation .—1* * * A rotation among the Directors of the said 
Association shall be settled by lot, so that two of the sai d Directors may go out of office on the 
Monday following the 15th day of May, in every year, and  2* * * on the Monday following the       
15th day of May, in  every year, a general meeting of proprietors shall be held, at which two Directors 
shall be chosen, and that no Director going out by such rotation shall be capable of being re -elected, 
till the Monday after the 15th of May in the year next following.  
11. Election of successor, when Director ceases  to be so, otherwise than by rotation .—1* * * 
If any Director of the said Association shall cease to be a Director, otherwise than by the operation of 
the rule of rotation aforesaid, the Directors of the said Association shall, with all convenien
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL BONDED WAREHOUSE ASSOCIATION ACT.pdf - page 4]
 of 
the rule of rotation aforesaid, the Directors of the said Association shall, with all convenient speed 
after such public notice as is herei nafter directed, call an extraordinary general meeting of the 
proprietors for the purpose of choosing a successor and such successor shall come into the same place 
in the rotation aforesaid in which the Director whom he has succeeded was.  
12. [Qualifications of Directors .]—[Repealed by Act 5 of 1854, Section 1 .] 
13. Directors to be residents of Bengal Presidency .—1* * * No person shall be capable of being 
a Director of the said Association, unless he be resident within the Territories subject to the 
Presi dency of Fort William in Bengal.  
14. [Ordinary  meetings .]—[Repealed by Act 5 of 1854, Section 1 .] 
15. Adjournment of ordinary meetings .—1* * * Any ordinary general meeting of the said 
Association may adjourn itself to a future day, and may, on the day to w hich it shall have so 
adjourned itself, resume its proceedings, and transact any business which it would have been 
competent to transact on the day when it originally assembled.  
16. Extraordinary general meetings .—1* * * Extraordinary general meetings of the said 
Association shall be held according to such rules as may be made for t hat purpose, in the Bye -laws of 
the said Association; provided always, that no such extraordinary general meeting shall be held 
without a previous notice of not less than fourteen days, which notice shall be published in not less 
than two newspapers printe d at Calcutta.  
17. Voting at general meeting s.—1* * * At General Meetings of the Proprietors, every election 
and question shall be decided by a majority of votes; and  Qualificati ons for voting .—2* * * no 
                                                           
1. The words “And it is hereby enacted, that” omitted by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and Sch. I.  
2. The word “that” omitted by s. 2 and Sch. I, ibid. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL BONDED WAREHOUSE ASSOCIATION ACT.pdf - page 4]
 The word “that” omitted by s. 2 and Sch. I, ibid. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL BONDED WAREHOUSE ASSOCIATION ACT.pdf - page 5]
5 
 proprietor shall be allowed to vote unless he be possessed of two or more shares of the Capital Stock 
of the said Association, which shares shall have been registered in his name not less than three 
calendar months before.  
18. Number of votes to which proprietors  are entitled .—1* * * At such general meet ings, no 
proprietor shall have more than eight votes, and  2* * * the proprietors shall vote according to the 
following scale: — 
2 Shares  shall  entitle  to 1 vote.  
4 ” ” ” ” 2 votes.  
6 ” ” ” ” 3 ” 
10 ” ” ” ” 4 ” 
20 ” ” ” ” 6 ” 
35 ” ” ” ” 7 ” 
50 ” ” ” ” 8 ” 
 
19. Votes of joint proprietors shares .—1* * * If more persons than one, being partners in trade, 
shall be joint proprietors of two or more shares of the said Capital Stock,  and shall agree to give a 
joint vote or joint votes, such joint vote or joint votes, shall be received in all respects as the vote or 
votes of a single proprietor would be received.  
20. Voting by proxy .—1* * * Every proprietor entitled to vote at any general meeting may give a 
proxy in writing, general or special, limited or unlimited, and signed by himself or  by his attorney 
duly authorized thereunto, to any other proprietor; and  2* * * the proprietor to whom the proxy is 
given, may vote on behalf of the propriet or who had given the proxy, according to the terms of such 
proxy.  
21. Authority of Directors .—1* * * The Directors of the said Association shall have authority to 
expend the mone y of the said Association for the purpose of purchasing and erecting warehouses, and 
of warehousing and bonding goods therein, and to make and fulfil contracts for the said purpose, and 
to appoint and remove such servants as may be necessary for the said p urpose and generally to 
manage all the concerns of the said Association, subject to such rules as may be laid down in the  
Bye-laws of the said Association, and to keep the seal of the said Association, and to use the said seal 
in the affairs of the said A ss
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL BONDED WAREHOUSE ASSOCIATION ACT.pdf - page 5]
 to keep the seal of the said Association, and to use the said seal 
in the affairs of the said A ssociation, provided always, that the said seal shall never be affixed to any 
instrument except in the presence and by the consent of three Directors, who shall sign their names on 
every such instrument in token of their presence and consent.  
22. Calls for share money .—1* * * The Directors of the said Association shall have authorit y to 
call on the proprietors to pay such instalment or instalments as shall, together with the instalments 
already                                                                  
                                                           
1. The words “And it is hereby enacted, that” omitted by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and Sch. I.  
2. The word “that” omitted by s. 2 and Sch. I, ibid. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL BONDED WAREHOUSE ASSOCIATION ACT.pdf - page 6]
6 
  
paid, amount to a sum not exceeding 50 per cent. on each share; and  1* * * no further call shall be 
made, except in consequence of a vote of a general meeting of the proprietors, authorising such 
further call; provided always that no proprietor shall be called upon to pay more in proportion to his 
share in the Capital Stock  than any other proprietor.  
23. Interest to run on each call .—2* * * If any proprietor shall not pay any instalment which he 
is lawfully called upon to pay, in the manner describ ed in the last section, on the day appointed for 
such payment, the said Association shall have a claim against such proprietor for interest on the 
deficient sum, after the rate of 10 per cent. per annum; and  
Application of dividend in satisfaction of unpai d calls .—1* * * it shall be lawful for the 
Directors of the said Association to apply, in satisfaction of such instalment and of such interest, any 
dividend due to such proprietor, placing every dividend so applied to the credit of such proprietor with 
the said Association.  
24. Power to refuse to register transfer by defaulting proprietor .—2* * * It shall be lawful for 
the Directors of the said Association to refuse to register th e transfer of any share belonging to any 
proprietor who shall not have paid such instalment and interest as aforesaid; and  1* * * in case such 
instalment and interest shall not be paid within two months after notice to pay the same has been 
given by the sa id Directors to such proprietor, or to his attorney or attorneys duly authorised, it shall 
be lawful for the said Directors to sell by public sale the share or shares of such proprietor, to such an 
extent as may be sufficient to satisfy such instalment and  interest, and to grant, upon such sale,  
Power to sell shares to satisfy calls, and issue fresh certificates .—a new certificate or new 
certificates to the purchaser of such share or shares whereupon the former certificate or certificates for 
such share
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL BONDED WAREHOUSE ASSOCIATION ACT.pdf - page 6]
e purchaser of such share or shares whereupon the former certificate or certificates for 
such share or shares shall become void, and if there be any surplus after such instalment and interest 
have been satisfied, such surplus shall be paid on demand to the proprietor of such share or shares, 
and shall, till demand, be credited in the books of the said Assoc iation to such proprietor, but no 
interest shall run thereon.  
25. Extension of Act 25 of 1836 to warehouses of Association .—2* * * All the provisions 
of 3Act 25 of 1836, of the G overnor General of India in council, relating to private licensed 
Warehouses, shall be applicable to all Warehouses wherein the said Association shall receive bonded 
Goods.  
26. Power to give general security for payment of import and export duties .—2* * * It shall 
be lawful for the said Association to give general security, by bond, under the seal of the said 
Association, for payment of the full duties of importation on Goods, lo dged in any Warehouse of the 
said Association, or for the due exportation of such Goods; and if the said Association shall give such 
bond, no security shall be required from any other party to the same effect.  
27. Rates for warehousing .—2* * * The Directors of the said Association shall, from time to 
time, fix the rates at which the said Association will Warehouse Goods and receive Goods at its 
Wharfs, and  1* * * a table of such r ates shall be placed at every Warehouse and Wharf of the said 
Association.  
28. Certificates of deposit, transferable by endorsement .—2* * * As often as any Goods are 
lodged in an y Warehouse of the said Association, the Secretary of the said Association shall deliver a 
                                                           
1. The word “that” omitted by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and Sch. I. 
2. The words “And it is hereby enacted, that” omitted by s. 2 and Sch. I, ibid. 
3. Rep. by the Repealing Act, 1873 (12 of 1873).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL BONDED WAREHOUSE ASSOCIATION ACT.pdf - page 6]
. I, ibid. 
3. Rep. by the Repealing Act, 1873 (12 of 1873).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL BONDED WAREHOUSE ASSOCIATION ACT.pdf - page 7]
7 
 warrant signed by him as such Secretary, to the person lodging such Goods, which warrant shall be, as 
nearly as possible, in the form set forth in Schedule II annexe d to this Act, and such warrant shall be 
transferable by indorsement, and shall entitle any person to whom it may have been so transferred by 
endorsement, to receive the Goods specified in such warrant on the same terms on which the person 
who originally l odged those Goods would have been entitled to receive the same.  
29. Suits against Association .—1* * * All suits brought against the said Association shall be 
brought in the Supreme Court of Judicature at Fort William in Bengal and not elsewhere.  
30. Joint Stock of Association .—1 * * * All the Joint Stock of the said Association of what kind 
or descr iption soever, and all the Land, Warehouses, Messuages, Tenements, Hereditaments, Premises 
and Property acquired therewith, of which the said Association shall become in any manner 
possessed, entitled to, or interested in, shall be held and enjoyed by the Proprietors thereof, and their 
successors respectively, as Personal Estate, or as in the nature of Chattel Interests, and not as, or in the 
nature of, Real Estate.  
31. Individual  members not to be liable .—1* * * In order to define the liability of Proprietors or 
shares, and to save harmless themselves and their respective Heirs, Executors, Administrators, 
Representatives and Assigns, no Proprietor, his Heirs, Executors, Administra tors, Representatives or 
Assigns, shall be personally liable to any person or persons whatsoever by reason of being a 
Proprietor in any event, or for or on account of any acts, deeds, contracts or liabilities of the said 
Association, or of the Directors or  Secretary thereof respectively, or under or by virtue of any 
judgment or decree in any action or suit, but  2* * * the party or parties having any legal or equitable 
demand or claim for or on the account last aforesaid, or having obtained such j
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL BONDED WAREHOUSE ASSOCIATION ACT.pdf - page 7]
 legal or equitable 
demand or claim for or on the account last aforesaid, or having obtained such judgment or decree as 
last aforesaid, shall and may only recover the amount of such demand, claim, judgment or decree 
from and out of or to the whole extent of the paid up Capital, accumulated Funds, Lands, Messuages, 
Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises whatsoever a nd wheresoever, which may at the time belong 
to the said Association, or to which they may at the time be entitled.  
32. [Bye-laws.]—[Repealed by Act 5 of 1854, Section 1 .] 
33. Increase of Capital Stock .—1* * * It shall be lawful for the said Association to increase its 
Capital Stock; provided always that no such increase shall take place unless it be  authorized by a vote 
of two extraordinary general meetings of Proprietors specially convened for that purpose, of which 
meetings the second shall be held not less than three calendar months after the first.  
34. Option to original proprietors to subscribe in first instance .—1* * * In the event of such 
increase, the Proprietors of the original Stock shall not be bound to subscribe, but shall in the first 
instance have the option of  subscribing for the increased Capital Stock in proportion to the share 
which each has of the original Capital Stock; and so much of the additional Capital Stock as shall not 
be subscribed for by the said Proprietors of the original stock, within one year after the passing of the 
final resolution for the increase, shall be open to the public, and be sold, for the benefit of the said 
Association, by public sale.  
35. Provisions of A ct to apply to additional Stock .—1* * * All the rules laid down in this Act 
respecting the original Capital Stock of the said Association, shall be applicable to any additional 
Stock which may be subscribed in the manner hereinbefore described.  
36. East India Company to have right of pre -emption .— 1* * * If the said Association shall be 
desirous to dispose of any premises pur
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL BONDED WAREHOUSE ASSOCIATION ACT.pdf - page 7]
 of pre -emption .— 1* * * If the said Association shall be 
desirous to dispose of any premises purchased by the said Association from the East India Compa ny, 
                                                           
1. The words “And it is hereby enacted, that” omitted by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and Sch. I.  
2. The words “that” omitted by Act  12 of 1891, s. 2 and Sch. I.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL BONDED WAREHOUSE ASSOCIATION ACT.pdf - page 8]
8 
 the said East India Company shall the right of pre -emption, and the price shall be fixed by two 
appraisers, the one named on the part of the said East India Company, and the other by the Directors 
of the said Association; and if the said appraisers sha ll not agree on a price, the price shall be fixed by 
an umpire named by the said appraisers.  
37. [Dissolution of Association by order of the Governor General in Council .]—[Repealed by Act 
5 of 1854, Section 1 .] 
38. Dissolution of Association by resolution of proprietors .—1* * * The said Association may 
at any time be dissolved by a resolution to th at effect of two -thirds in number and value of the 
proprietors qualified to vote at two successive extraordinary meetings specially called for the purpose 
of taking into consideration the expediency of such dissolution; provided that not less than three 
months shall have elapsed between the first and second of such two extraordinary meetings.  
39. Division of property on dissolution .—1* * * Whenever the dissolution of the said 
Asso ciation shall be ordered either by the  2[Central Government], or by a vote of the said Association, 
the Directors of the said Association shall cause all the property of the said Association to be 
converted into money, and shall divide whatever surplus may  remain after satisfying the debts of the 
said Association among the proprietors in proportion to the shares which the proprietors have in the 
Capital Stock of the said Association; and after such distribution the said Association shall forthwith 
be dissol ved. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1. The words “And it is hereby enacted, that” omitted by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and Sch. I.  
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “Governor General of India in Council”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL BONDED WAREHOUSE ASSOCIATION ACT.pdf - page 9]
9 
 SCHEDULE NO. I  
 
LIST OF PROPRIETORS OF SHARES  
R. H. Cockerell.  W. Barrington, Captain  W. Freeth, Captain.  
W. Speir.  T. C. Robertson  James Colquhoun.  
W. Martin  Ramdas Dey.  James Church.  
R. Speir.  Bonomalee Mullick.  Edward Harding.  
T. Spier.  A. Muller.  Henry Moore.  
J. S. Brownrigg.  Charles Trebeck.  R. Watson.  
J. Cockerell.  T. Bowring.  Mrs. B. Betty.  
G.G.de H. Larpent.  J. W. Alexander.  Henry Mackenzie.  
J. St. Pourcain.  T.B. Swinhoe.  Adam Scott and Co.  
J. M. Dove.  Robert Swinhoe.  Holodhur Chowdry.  
Gungapersaud Gossain.  A. Dobbs.  Charles S. Gover.  
Ramchunder Seal.  John Watson.  K.B. Mackenzie.  
J. Willis.  Taraneechurn  S.R. Crawford.  
W. Earle.  Chatterjee.  T.A. Shaw.  
D. Willis.  G. Herklots, Junior.  W.A. Shaw.  
T. Willis.  F. O. Wells.  H. Walters.  
J. Master.  C. Lancaster.  J. Innes.  
G. C. S. Master, Lieut.  C. Lancaster, Trustee  W. Adam.  
Trustees of Mrs.  for Mrs. Cornish's  Joseph Worthington.  
Limond's Marriage  Marriage Settlement.  James Cullen.  
Settlement.  George Dougal.  J.C. Palmer.  
J. W. J. Ouseley,  John Richards.  A. Colvin.  
Captain.  Bruce, Shand & Co.  W. Ainslie.  
G.A. Prinsep.  G.W. A. Lloyd, Lt. -Col. H. Cowie.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL BONDED WAREHOUSE ASSOCIATION ACT.pdf - page 10]
10 
 T. S. Anquetil, Lt. -Col. J. Ranken, M.D.  Charles C. Bruce.  
W.H. Martin.  Brijobullub Doss &  Debnarain Day.  
A. Irvine, Major.  Gocul Doss.  William Bruce, 
Trustee  
W. A. Peacock.  A. S. Stopford.  for Mrs. Col. Lloyd.  
J. A. Moore, Major.  A. Beattie.  W. Ryland.  
T.W. Burt.  Wilson Frith & Co.  M. Hughes, Captain.  
William Braddon.  G.C. Arbuthnot.  Annundchunder 
Mitter.  
Francis Macnaghten.  A. Jackson.  J.A. Walker.  
Carr, Tagore and Co.  A. S. Gladsone.  T. Hyde Gardiner.  
W. Carr, Trustee for Mrs. Dick's                 
Marriage  Settlement.  J. Craigie, Lieut. -Col. 
J. Williams.  
J.B. Higginson.  J.C. Owen.  
Doorgachurn Bose.  
Rajkissore Lahory.  
Robert Lyall.  Megnarain Roy.  Gourmohun Coondoo.  
Moheshchunder Mitter.  Ramnarain Mookerjee.  S. Hornby.  
Prawnkisto Doss.  Doorgachurn Mookerjee.  Hurrischunder Bose.  
Conai Lal and Mukun Lal.  Gowrichurn Mookerjee.  Ramsoonder Mullick.  
 
I.B. Biss.  Rajchunder Ghose.  
J. Rostan, Junior.  J.S. Biss.  Radanauth Dutt.  
J. H. Rostan.  Rogoonath Coonlo.  H. Barrow.  
Madobchunder Sandell.  W. F. Gibbon.  Godadhur Mitter.  
Dyalchaund Bysack.  J. Cock.  E. D'Cruz.  
Gopeekissen Paul.  H.F. King.  Goluckchunder Dur.  
Ditto for Mrs. A.G. Glass.  James Hill.  Luckinarain Day.  
 
W. Rushton.  T. Blechynden.  
Ditto for E.B. Squire, Junior.  A. J. Sturmer.  W. Stacy.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL BONDED WAREHOUSE ASSOCIATION ACT.pdf - page 11]
11 
  
Boloram Day.  J. George.  
Charles Lyall.  Obhoychurn Mookerjee.  Mrs. C. Shelverton.  
John Lyall.  Bolychaund Bysack.  C. Shelverton.  
David Lyall.  Mrs. Sarah Moss.  Cassinauth Banorjee.  
W.T. Dawes.  W. Barrett.  P.S. D'Rozario.  
Colville, Gilmore & Co.  Hurrimohun Mookerjee.  J.D.' M. Sinaes, in 
Trust  
Alexander Rogers.  Mohunchunder Ghose.  for Miss J.F. Speed.  
J.H. Crawford.  Horrimohun Banorjee.  Gorachaund Bose.  
A. Porteous.  Kistnomohun Seal.  J.E. Dunn.  
J. Mackey & Co.  Hurrochunder Bose.  D. W. H. Speed.  
James Mackenzie.  J.P. Marcus.  Rajkissen Dey.  
P. J. Sarkies.  Mrs. Bruce.  Jomejoy Bhose.  
G. Collier.  Miss L.W. Bruce.   
R. Bird.  Joseph Bruce.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL BONDED WAREHOUSE ASSOCIATION ACT.pdf - page 12]
12 
 SCHEDULE NO. II  
CALCUTTA  BENGAL  BONDED  WAREHOUSE  ASSOCIATION  
I do hereby certify that………………………… have deposited in the Warehouse of the 
Association the undermentioned Goods…………………………. which Goods, the Association 
engage on demand, after payment of rent and incidental charges and Government dues or customs 
chargeable thereon, to deliver to the said……………………….. or their Assigns, or to the holder of 
this warrant to whom it may be transferred by i ndorsement.  
Secretary . 
———  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL EMBANKMENT ACT, 1855.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE BENGA L EMBANKMENT  ACT , 185 5 
ACT NO. XXXII OF 1855 
[Passed on the  30th November, 1855.] 
1. Repeal Bengal R. 6, 1806 and B.R. 11, 1829 . 
2. Defines what embankments are within the Act.  
3. 4. Embankments to be under superintendent of embankments; to whom powers are given to take 
charge, &c. change, &c. and enlarge &c. the embankments.  
5. Superintendent to give notice to Collector before he removes, changes or enlarges and embankment; 
who (cl. 2,) shall make proclamation; (cl.3,) hear objections, and pass orders if Collector and 
Superintendent agree: and (cl.4,) orders appealable: (cl.5) subject to appeal, ord ers to be final.  
6. Proprietors bound to maintain embankments, to pay for their mainten ance, when . 
7. Entitles persons sustaining damage from alterations, to compensation from Collector, and by civil 
action, and amount in admitted claims to be settled by arbitration; and (cl. 2,) provides for appointment of 
arbitrators: (cl. 3)  when there are several claimants : and (cl. 4,) for umpire, and (cl. 5,) for case of refusal 
of arbitrator to act, &c.; and (cl. 6,) empowers Collector to enforce attendance of arbitrators; and (cl. 7,) 
on default of arbitration may appoint new arbitrators ; and (cl. 8,) to conduct the arbitration; (cl. 9.) and 
award, and proceedings to be deposited in his office; and (cl. 10 ,)  may defer payment in certain cases; and 
(cl. 11,) award to be set aside only on grounds of corruption, &c. and (cl. 12,) gives costs to Government; 
and (cl. 13,) fixes a measure of compensation; but (cl. 14,) excepts from these provisions certain cases of  
compensation.  
8. Provides for making sluices for landholders in embankments; (cl. 2,) officer to report on the proposed 
work; but (cl. 3,) applicant to pay the expense.  
9. Sluices to be opened only by public officer, &c.  
10. Authorizes the making of tempo rary water -courses, &c. through embankment.  
11. Provides for specif ications, &c. of works expense of which belo
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL EMBANKMENT ACT, 1855.pdf - page 1]
rses, &c. through embankment.  
11. Provides for specif ications, &c. of works expense of which belongs to Zemindars, &c. and (cl. 2,) 
provides for accounts being kept.  
12. Authorize Sup. to report to Collector houses, &c.  the removal of which he deems necessary; and 
(cl. 2,) Collector to give notice to interested parties; and (cl. 3, 4 and 5,) jury to ascertain the value and 
make award.  
13, 14. After award Collector to give notice to parties concerned :  and (14) in their default houses, &c. 
May be removed by Collector.  
15, 16 ,17. Establishes penalty for obstructing the removal of houses, &c. and (16) for cutting, &c. 
ambankments; and (17) for damaging embankments by other means.  
18. Gives jurisdiction under the Act to Deputy and Assistant Magistates .  
19. Empowers Darogahs to inquire.  
20. Orders of Magistrate, &c. appealable.  
21. Interpretation clause.  
 
An Act relating to Embankments . 
Preamble.  - Whereas the Regulations now in force for the maintenance embankments in the Territories 
under the Government of the Lieutenant -Governor of Bengal , have been found ineffectual for the intended 
purposes thereof , and whereas it is desirable that provision should be made for the better supervision and 
protection of the same it is enacted as follows:  
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL EMBANKMENT ACT, 1855.pdf - page 2]
2 
 I.  Regulations Repealed. —Regulation VI. of 1806 and Regulation XI. of 1829, so far as they relate 
to the said Territories, are hereby repealed, except so far as they repeal the whole or part of any other 
Regulation, and except as to acts done, offences committed, and liabilities incurred before the passing of 
this Act.  
II. What is a public embankment within this Act. —The word “embankment ” in this Act means an 
embankment for the purpose of excluding or retaining water; and every embankment which is now kept up, 
or may hereafter be kept up, by the officers of the Government, at the expense either of Government or of 
any private person, is a public embankment within the meaning hereof.  
III. Who to have superintendence of p ublic embankments. —The Superintendence of the public 
embankments shall be entrusted, subject to the general orders  Government, to an Officer who shall be 
called the Superintendent of Embankme nts. 
IV. Clause 1 .—Superintendent may take c harge of  any embankment which connecting public 
embankments, &c. — The Superintendent of Embankments may cause any Embankment which connects 
public embankments, or forms by junction with them part of a line of embankments, or is necessary for the 
protection of the neighbouring country, to be taken charge of and kept up by the officers of the Crown.  
Clause 2.— And r emov e private embankment endangering  a public  embankment .— He may also 
cause any private embankment, which endangers the stability of a public embankment, or obstructs the 
beneficial drainage of the country, to be removed.  
Clause 3.— And Chang e line of  any public embankment or mak e a new embankment .— He may 
also, when necessary, cha nge the line of any public embankment, or make a new embankment.  
Clause 4.—And e nlarging embankment, etc .—  He may also enlarge any public embankment, and do 
all acts necessary and proper for the maintenance thereof.  
VI. Clause 1 .— Before taking charge of private embankments, &c
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL EMBANKMENT ACT, 1855.pdf - page 2]
roper for the maintenance thereof.  
VI. Clause 1 .— Before taking charge of private embankments, &c. Superintendent to give notice to 
Collector, who shall issue a proclamation .—  Before the Superintendent shall cause any of the works 
mentioned in the first three clauses of the next preceding Section to be executed, he shall give notice in 
writing to the Collector of the district of his intention so to do. Upon the receipt of such notice , the Collector 
shall cause a proclamation to be issued, incorporating the substance of the notice, and calling upon all 
persons interested, who may be desirous of showing cause against the execution of such works, to appear 
before him on a certain day to be named therein.  
Clause 2 .— Publication of proclamation .— The proclamation shall be published by affixing the same 
in the Cutcherry of the Collector, the  Mal Cutcherry  (if any) of the estate on which the works are intended 
to be executed, and on some conspicuous spot in the neighbourhood thereof.  The proclamation shall be 
published not less than fifteen days before the day appointed for hearing the parties interested.  
Clause 3.— Procedure on appearance of parties .— The Collector shall hear the objections of any 
parties who may appear, and, after recording any evidence which they may adduce, shall communicate the 
objections that may be made, together with his opinion thereon, to the Superintendent  of Embankments.  If 
the Superintendent agrees in opinion with the Collector, he shall pass an order accordingly.  If he differ from 
the Collector, the case shall be referred to the Commissioner of Revenue, who shall pass such orders thereon 
as he may deem fit.  
Clause 4. — Appeal from orders of Superintendent and Commissioner  of Revenue. — Every such 
order passed by the Superintendent shall be appealable to the Commissioner of Revenue, and every order 
of the Commissioner shall be appealable to the Board of Revenue ; but no appeal shall lie against any order 

<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL EMBANKMENT ACT, 1855.pdf - page 2]
mmissioner shall be appealable to the Board of Revenue ; but no appeal shall lie against any order 
passed under this section, unless  the same be presented within one month form the date of the order.  
Clause 5. — Order not open to revision by Civil Court.—Subject to the right of appeal above -
mentioned and to the orders and control of Government, every order passed under this Section shall be final 
and shall not be open to revision by any Civil Court, and shall be conclusive as to the necessity of any 
works ordered to be executed.  
VI. Maintenance of private embankments taken charge of  by the  Officers of Government . —              
(1) Whenever the Superintendent of Embankments shall hereafter cause an embankment , which any person 
is bound to keep up , to be taken charge of by the officers of Government, the expense of keeping up such 
embankment shall be charge to such person, Provided th at the amount so charged shall not exceed the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL EMBANKMENT ACT, 1855.pdf - page 3]
3 
 reasonable expenses of keeping up an embankment in the size and description,  which such person was 
bound to keep up,  notwithstanding the embankment shall have been enlarged or improved by the officers 
of Govern ment . 
VII. Clause 1. — Compensation for damages  sustained under this Act .— When the Superintendent 
of  Embankments shall enlarge or change the line of any embankment, or make a new embankment, or 
cause an embankment to be removed, any person sustaining damages thereby, who, but for the passing of 
this Act, would be entitled to c ompensation, may prefer his claim for such compensation to the Collector 
of the District, at any time within twelve months after the execution of the work by which he is endamaged, 
and the Collector thereupon shall report the case for the orders of the superior Revenue authorities.  If the 
claim be rejected, the claimant shall not be deprived, by reason of this Act, of any right which he might 
otherwise have had , to recover such compensation by a civil action; but such action shall not lie , unless the 
claimant shall have first preferred his claim to the Collector within the period above  mentioned, nor unless 
the suit be brought within a period of one year after notice to the claimant of its rejection.  If the claim for 
compensation be admitted by the Revenu e authorities, and the amount of compensation cannot be agreed 
upon, the same shall be settled by arbitration, in the manner hereinafter provided, and in no other manner, 
unless by the consent of the claimant and of the superior Revenue authorities.  
Clause  2.—Appointment of arbitrator. —Unless the Collector and the claimant concur in the 
appointment of a single arbitrator, the Collector on the part of Government, and the claimant , shall each 
appoint an arbitrator.  The appointment shall be in writing, and neither of the said parties shall have power 
to revoke the same without the consent of the other.  
Clause 3. —  Arbitrator how to be chosen when
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL EMBANKMENT ACT, 1855.pdf - page 3]
to revoke the same without the consent of the other.  
Clause 3. —  Arbitrator how to be chosen when there are several claimants for compensation.  —If 
there be several claimants for compensation in respect to the same injury, and they cannot agree in the 
appointment of an arbitrator on their behalf, in that case each of them may nominate one person ;  and the 
Collector shall choose by lot out of the person so nominated by the parties , or any of them a person to act 
as arbitrator on behalf of the claimants.  If only one person shall be so nominated, he shall be the arbitrator 
on behalf of the claimants.  
Clause 4. —  Appointment of third arbitrator.  — When more than a single arbitrator shall be appointed , 
the arbitrators shall, before they enter upon the matters referred to them, nominate and appoint by writing 
a third person to act with them as arbitrator; and in case the arbitrators shall neglect to appoint such third 
arbitrator for a period of seven day s after having been required so to do, the Collector may appoint such 
third arbitrator.  If the arbitrators differ in opinion, or if one of them, having received due notice of a meeting 
of arbitrators, neglect to attend, any two arbitrators may make an awar d. 
Clause 5. —  Arbitrator refusing or becoming incapable to act, &c.  —  If any person , on being 
appointed an arbitrator , shall refuse to act, or after accepting the appointment , shall die or become incapable 
of acting, another person shall be appointed in his stead, in the same manner in which the first person was 
appointed.  
Clause 6. —  Collector empowered to enforce attendance of arbitrators. — After the arbitrators have 
accepted the appointment, the Collector shall be competent to exercise towards them such powers and 
authority, for securing their attendance and the due completion of their award, as the said Collector may 
legally exercise towar ds witness summoned before him , when acting judicially for the purposes of 
compelling
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL EMBANKMENT ACT, 1855.pdf - page 3]
ercise towar ds witness summoned before him , when acting judicially for the purposes of 
compelling them to attend and give evidence.  
Clause 7. —  In default of award within a specified period, fresh arbitrators may be chosen. — If no 
award to made within a period to be fixed for that purpose by the Collector, he may order that the matter 
shall be referred to another arbitrator or other arbitrators, to be chosen in the same manner and subject to 
the same rules as the first.  
Clause 8. —  Collector to furnish information to  the arbitrators, and to enforce the attendance and 
examination of witnesses, &c.— The Collector shall furnish to the arbitrators, or, so far as may be in his 
power, procure for them, any information which his records or those of any public department may afford 
connected with the subject of enquiry.  He shall, on the application of the arbitrators, summon any witnesses 
whom the arbitrators may call for, and whom the parties may not be able to produce before them without 
such process, and require the persons  so summoned to bring and produce before them all such books, papers, 
deeds, writings, maps and plans as they shall require.  He shall also cause the proper affirmation to be made 
and signed by any witness whom the arbitrators may desire to examine upon aff irmation, or he may 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL EMBANKMENT ACT, 1855.pdf - page 4]
4 
 empower the arbitrators to cause such affirmation to be made and signed before them.  Any witness who 
shall refuse or omit to appear when duly summoned by the Collector, or who shall appear but shall refuse 
to make such affirmation, or who shall refuse to give evidence, shall be liable to the same punishment which 
would be incurred under the law by a witness refusing to appear o r give evidence before the Collector when 
acting judicially.  Any person giving intentionally and deliberately a  false deposition under an affirmation, 
in any case referred to arbitration as above, shall be held to be guilty of perjury, and shall be liable to the 
penalties prescribed for that offence by law.  
Clause 9. —  Award of arbitrators .— On the close of the inquiry the arbitrators shall deliver a full and 
complete award, which shall specify the amount of compensation and the party or parties entitled thereto.  
The proceedings of the arbitration shall be deposited in the Collector's office;  and every party interested 
therein shall be entitled to a copy of the award on plain paper under the seal and signature of the Collector, 
which copy shall be  prima facie  evidence thereof.  
Clause 10. — Payment of compensation may  in certain cases be  deferred .— If the right to the 
compensation awarded shall in any case be doubtful, or if there exists any ground which, in the judgement 
of the arbitrators or of the Collector, render it improper to make immediate payment thereof to any of the 
claimants, the amount shall be invested in Government securities, and held in deposit until one of the 
claimants shall obtain an order of Court for the payment thereof.  
Clause 11. —  Reversal or alteration of award .— No award passed under this Section shall be liable  
to be reversed or altered, except by the decision of a Civil Court on the ground of corruption or misconduct 
of the arbitrators and no suit to set aside such an award shall be entertained, unless it be instituted withi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL EMBANKMENT ACT, 1855.pdf - page 4]
bitrators and no suit to set aside such an award shall be entertained, unless it be instituted within 
three months from the date of the a ward.  In case the award shall be reversed, the matter shall be referred to 
another arbitrator or other arbitrators, to be appointed in the same manner as the first.  
Clause 12. —  Suits and proceedings against Government, except  suits for reversal of awards, to be 
dismissed with cost .— All suits and proceedings instituted against Government in any case in which 
compensation has been awarded, except suits instituted for the reversal of awards as aforesaid, shall be 
dismissed with costs.  Proviso .- But nothing herein contained shall affect the right of any party to recover 
the amount awarded from any person who may have received the same without any just title thereto.  
Clause 13.—Estimated value of benefit to be set off against compensation to be awarded .— In fixing 
the amount of compensation to which any person may be entitled by reason of any of the acts mentioned in 
Clause 1 of this Section, the Court or arbitrators, as the case  may be, shall take into consideration whether 
any party to the suit or arbitration has derived or will derive , benefit from the act in respect of which the 
compensation is claimed, and shall set off the estimated value of such benefit, if any, against the  
compensation which would otherwise be decreed or awarded to that party.  
Clause 14.—The provisions of this Section not to apply to cases of compensation in respect to huts, 
trees, or crops.  —  The provisions of this Section shall not be held applicable to cases in which the 
compensation to be made has reference only to huts, trees , or crops , which it may be necessary to remove 
or destroy in enlarging or changing the line of a public embankment.  In all such cases the officer in charge 
of the public embankmen ts of the district shall report to the Collector, and the Collector shall thereupon 
proceed to value and make compens
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL EMBANKMENT ACT, 1855.pdf - page 4]
 shall report to the Collector, and the Collector shall thereupon 
proceed to value and make compensation for such huts, trees and crops, in the manner prescribed in              
Section XII. of this Act.  
VIII . Clause 1. —Application by land -holder to have a sluice made in a public embankment .—If any 
land-holder, farmer , or cultivator be desirous of having a sluice made in any public embankment for the 
purpose of drainage or irrigation, he shall make an application in writi ng to the Collector of the district in 
which such embankment is situate.  The application shall contain such particulars of the land to be drained 
or irrigated as may enable the officers of the Crown to judge of the advantage which may be derived from 
the w ork, and shall declare as regards an embankment maintained at the expense of the State, whether the 
applicant is willing to bear such part, not exceeding half of the cost thereof, as may be determined by the 
Provincial Government; and, as regards any other  public embankment whether the applicant is willing to 
defray the whole or such part of the cost incidental to and attendant on, the proposed work, as may be 
determined as aforesaid.  
Clause 2. — Officer in immediate charge  of embankments  to report on  the proposed work .— The 
Collector shall transmit such application to the Officer in charge of the embankments of the district, who 
shall report his opinion thereon to the Superintendent of Embankments, and, if he be of opinion that 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL EMBANKMENT ACT, 1855.pdf - page 5]
5 
 compliance with the application is unobjectionable shall annex to his report a plan of the proposed work 
and an estimate of the expense of its construction.  The Superintendent of Embankments shall pass such 
order thereon as he shall think fit, which order shall be final.  
Clau se 3.—Upon  the applicant engaging to  the defray  the cost, Collector may issue certificate .— If 
the construction of the proposed sluice receive the approval of the Superintendent of Embankments, the 
Collector shall require the applicant to enter into a writ ten agreement to defray the whole or half of the 
expense or such portion thereof as may be determined under the provisions of Clause 1 of this section, as 
the case may be, and, upon such agreement being executed, shall issue a certificate to the officer in  charge 
of the public embankments of the district to construct the sluice.  
IX. Opening of sluices.  — Sluices constructed in any public embankment shall be opened only by, or 
with the permission of the officer of the immediate charge of the embankment, under such orders, either 
general or special, as he may receive from the officer in charge of public embankments of the district or 
from the Superintendent of Embankments.  
X. Officer in immediate charge of embankments may authori ze temporary water -course, &c. to 
be made.  — Whenever any person is desirous that a temporary watercourse should be made through, or 
that a temporary roadway should be made over any public embankment, or that a temporary dam should be 
constructed in any embanked river, he shall appl y to the nearest officer of the Embankment Department, 
who shall communicate the application to the officer in charge of the public embankments of the district, 
and that officer shall pass such orders thereon as he shall think fit, subject to the control o f the 
Superintendent of Embankments.  If the proposed work is to be executed by an officer of the Crown the 
applicant, before the commencement of the w
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL EMBANKMENT ACT, 1855.pdf - page 5]
d work is to be executed by an officer of the Crown the 
applicant, before the commencement of the work, shall enter into a written agreement to defray the expenses 
of, and incidental to, making such roadway, or of making and closing or removing such watercourse or 
dam.  In any case of emergency the officer in immediate charge of an embankment, subject to such general 
instructions as he may receive from the officer in charge of the embankments of the di strict, or from the 
Superintendent of Embankments, may cause a temporary watercourse to be made through such 
embankment.  
XI. Clause 1 . Specifications and estimates for maintaining or improving embankments kept up at 
the expense of zamindars  to be prepared annually, &c . — Specifications of the work and estimates of the 
expense which may be required for the maintenance or improvement of embankments kept up at the expense 
of zamindars  or others shall be prepared as soon after the rains in each year as may be practicable.  Copies 
of the specifications and estimates shall be transmitted to the office of the Collector, and may be examined 
by any person interested in the embankments.  Notice of the receipt of the specifications and estimates shall 
be posted up in th e Collector's office ; and, should any objection be preferred by any such person within a 
period of one month from the date of such notice, the Collector shall communicate the objection, with his 
own opinion thereupon, to the Superintendent of Embankments,  who shall pass such orders as may appear 
to him reasonable and proper :  Provided, however, that if the objection referred to the construction of sluices 
or other new works, any person dissatisfied with the order of the Superintendent may appeal to the 
Com missioner, who, subject to the orders of the Board of Revenue and of the Provincial Government may 
disallow the construction of the work.  
Clause 2. — Accounts to be forwarded to Collector, who may recover the amount as arrears of 
G
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL EMBANKMENT ACT, 1855.pdf - page 5]
rk.  
Clause 2. — Accounts to be forwarded to Collector, who may recover the amount as arrears of 
Government revenue .— The accounts of the actual expense incurred in maintaining or improving 
embankments kept up at the expense of  zamindars  or others and in constructing and repairing sluices and 
making temporary watercourses or roadways through or over any public embankment, or executing any 
other work the expense of which may be chargeable to individuals, shall be prepared as soon as possible 
after the completion of such works, and shall, as soon as such accounts shall have received the sanction of 
the Superintendent of Embankme nts, be forwarded to the office of the Collector, and may be there examined 
by any person interested.  Notice of the receipt of the accounts shall be posted up in the Collector's office; 
and if, within one month from the date of such notice, any interested person shall object to the accounts, on 
the ground either that the work charged for has not been performed, or that the whole sum charged has not 
been expanded, or that the rates of charge are higher than the estimate, the Collector shall inquire into such  
objection, and if the objection appears to be well founded, shall communicate the same with his opinion 
thereon, to the Superintendent of Embankments.  If the Superintendent concurs with the Collector, he shall 
pass order accordingly; if he differs, the ca se shall be reported to the Commissioner whose decision shall 
be final.  When the objection shall have been finally disposed of, or, if no objection be preferred when a full 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL EMBANKMENT ACT, 1855.pdf - page 6]
6 
 month shall have elapsed from the date of notice, the Collector shall proceed to le vy the amount from the 
parties liable to pay the same by the process which is or may be in force for the recovery of arrears of 
Government revenue.  
XII. Clause 1. — Superintendent to report to Collector as to removal of buildings, etc . —  Whenever 
the Superintendent of Embankments shall be of opinion that the removal of any houses, huts or other 
buildings, situated between a public embankment and the river, is necessary, he shall make a report to that 
effect, accompanied by a detailed stat ement of the houses, huts or other buildings to be removed, to the 
Collector of the district in whose jurisdiction the land on which such houses, huts or other buildings stand, 
is situated.  
Clause 2. — Collector to give notice to claimants . —  When such report is received the Collector shall 
cause a notice, containing a general description of the houses, huts or other buildings proposed to be 
removed, to be affixed in some conspicuous place upon the land, and to be published by proclamation in 
the nearest bazar, calling on all persons claiming a right in such houses, huts or other buildings to appear 
in person or by authori zed agent at a place to be specified in the notice, on or before a given date, not being 
less than fifteen days from the date of such proclamation, in order to make known the amount and particulars 
of their claim to compensation to a jury to be appointed in the following manner.  
Clause 3. —  Selection of jury . —The Collector shall direct a Deputy Collector or a Principal Officer 
of his establishment to proceed to the spot, and thereto select three respectable inhabitants of the 
neighbourhood, to form with himself, a jury for determine the value of the houses, hut s or buildings, and, 
if any dispute should arise, the rights of the claimants.  
Clause 4. — Proceedings of jury . —The jury shall assess the value of each house, hut or building 
separately
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL EMBANKMENT ACT, 1855.pdf - page 6]
 — Proceedings of jury . —The jury shall assess the value of each house, hut or building 
separately.  If in any case they differ, the value shall be assessed according to the opinion of the majority ; 
and, if they be equally divided, the Deputy Collector or other officer as aforesaid shall have a casting vote.  
Clause 5. — Award of jury  . —Having completed their proceedings, the jury shall make their award, 
which shall contain a schedule of the houses, huts and buildings, the amount of value assessed on each and 
the name of the person or persons entitled to receive the same.  The award shall be final and conc lusive and 
not open to question in the Civil Court :  Provided always that any person who was not present at the inquiry, 
or whose claim may have been set aside by the jury, may institute a suit for the value of the property claimed 
by him against the perso n to whom payment may have been made under the award.  
XIII . After award, Collector to give notice of payment, and to remove buildings, &c. in 30 days.— 
The Collector, on receiving the award, shall cause a notice to be affixed in some conspicuous place upon 
the land, with a citation calling on the parties to appear before him or the Deputy Collector or other officer 
aforesaid, in person or by authorised a gent, at a certain time and place, and receive the amount so awarded, 
and warning them to remove their houses, huts or other buildings within thirty days from the date of such 
notice.  
XIV.  Collector may remove buildings, &c., at the cost of the owners , in case they neglect to do so 
themselves.  —If, on the expiration of the above stated period, the houses, huts , or other buildings shall 
have not been previously removed, the Collector shall cause the same to be removed or levelled ; and if any 
expense be incu rred in removing or levelling the same, the Collector may sell the materials at public auction 
in order to defray the charge, delivering any surplus that may remain to the owner
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL EMBANKMENT ACT, 1855.pdf - page 6]
t public auction 
in order to defray the charge, delivering any surplus that may remain to the owner.  
XV. Penalty for obstructing officer or person in  discharge of duty . — Whoever wilfully obstructs 
any duly authorised person in removing or levelling any embankment, house, hut or other building shall be 
liable to be imprisoned for any time not exceeding six months, with or without labour, at the discretion of 
the Magistrate,  or to fine not exceeding two hundred rupees, commutable, if not paid, to a period of 
imprisonment not exceeding six months, or to both.  
XVI. Penalty for wilful damage to embankment by cutting, etc . — Whoever wilfully, and without 
due authority cut s through, or attempts to cut through, any embankment, whether public or private, or 
destroys , or attempts to destroy , any such embankment, or open any sluice or water -course in any such 
embankment, shall be liable, on conviction before a Magistrate, to be imprisoned for a term not exceeding 
one year, with or without labour, or to a fine not exceeding two hundred rupees, commutable, if not paid, 
to a period of imprisonment not exceeding one year, or to both ; or, if the Magistrate be of opinion that such 
punishment is insufficient for the offence, he may commit the offender to the Sessions Court, in which case 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL EMBANKMENT ACT, 1855.pdf - page 7]
7 
 he shall be liable, on conviction, to imprisonment for a period not exceeding seven years, with or without 
labour, or to fine, or to both.  
XVII . Penalt y for other wilful damage . —Whoever damages any public embankment by making any 
dam or other obstruction for the purpose of diverting or opposing the current of an embanked river without 
the permission of the officer in immediate charge of the embankment, or by refusing or neglecting  to remove 
any such dam or obstruction at the proper season, or by cutting or otherwise altering the banks of any 
embanked river, or by removing the earth from such embankment, or by grazing or tethering any cattle or 
animals on any such embankment, or by driving stakes into or cutting or rooting out grass growing on, such 
embankment, or by any other wilful act destroys or diminishes the efficiency of such embankment shall be 
liable, on conviction before a Magistrate, to simple imprisonment for a term not e xceeding six months, or 
to a fine not exceeding two hundred rupees, or to both.  
XVIII . Jurisdiction of Deputy or Assistant Magistrate  under this Act . —Any Deputy or Assistant 
Magistrate may take cognizance of offences under this Act, and may punish offende rs to the extent of the 
power conferred upon him by the Regulations of the Bengal Code, and by the Acts of the Governor General 
of India in Council with respect to the punishment of misdemeanors.  
XIX. Provision of Section XIII. Regulation XX. 1817 extended  to this Act . —The p rovision of 
Section XIII. Regulation XX. Of 1817 shall extend to any charge or information of the offences specified 
in Section XVI. of this Act ; and Darogahs and other Police Officers shall enquire into such offences in the 
mode and s ubject to the provisions therein prescribed.  
XX. Right of appeal . —All sentences and orders passed by a Magistrate, Deputy Magistrate or 
Assistant Magistrate under this Act shall be appealable, subject to the general provisions which regulate 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL EMBANKMENT ACT, 1855.pdf - page 7]
ant Magistrate under this Act shall be appealable, subject to the general provisions which regulate 
appeals.  
21. Interpretation . —In the construction of this Act, words importing the singular number only shall 
include the plural, and words importing the plural number only shall include the singular: words importing 
the masculine gender only shall include females; the word “Collector” shall mean any Collector, Deputy 
Collector or other Revenue Officer in independent charge of any district or portion of a district.  
________  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL GHATWALI LAND ACT, 1859.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE BENGAL GHATWALI LAND ACT, 18 59 
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Ghatwals of Beerbhoom to have the same right of granting leases as is allowed to other 
proprietors of lands.  
2. Court of Wards and Revenue authorities to have the like power  in certain causes.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL GHATWALI LAND ACT, 1859.pdf - page 2]
2 
 THE BENGAL GHATWALI LANDS  ACT, 18 59 
ACT NO. V OF 1859 
 
Passed by the Legislative Council of India  
(Received the assent of the Governor General on the  4th March , 1859.) 
An Act to empower the holder of Ghatwalee lands in the District of Beerbhoom  to grant leases 
extending beyond the period of their own possession . 
Preamble .—WHEREAS  it has been held that the Ghatwals of the District of Beerbhoom who  pay the 
revenue of their lands directly to Government  under the provisions of Regulation XXIX. 1814 of the 
Bengal Code have not the power of alienating their lands; and whereas, for the development of the 
mineral resources of the country in which the said Ghatwalee lands are situate, and for the improvement 
of the said lands, it is expedient that the power of granting leases for periods not limited by the term of 
their own possession, should in certain cases be extended to the possessors of such lands; It is enacted as 
follows : — 
I. Ghatwals of Beerbhoom to h ave the same right of granting leases as is allowed to other  
proprietors of lands .—Ghatwals holding lands in the District of Beerbhoom under the provisions of the 
aforesaid Regulation, shall have the same power of granting leases for any period which they may deem 
most conducive to the improvement of their tenures,  as is allowed by law to the proprietors of other lands.  
Proviso. Provided that no lease of Ghatwalee lands for any  period extending beyond the life -time or 
incumbency of the grantor of the lease shall be va lid and binding on the successors of the grantor, unless 
the same shall be granted for the working of mines, or for the clearing of jungle, or for the erection of 
dwelli ng houses or manufactories, or for tanks, canals, and similar works; and shall be approved by the 
Commissioner of the Division , such approval being certified by an endorsement on the lease under the 
signature of the Commissioner.  
II. Court of Wards and Rev enue authorities to have the like p
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL GHATWALI LAND ACT, 1859.pdf - page 2]
the 
signature of the Commissioner.  
II. Court of Wards and Rev enue authorities to have the like power in certain cases.  —If any of 
the said Ghatwalee  lands be at any time under the superintendence of the Court of Wards, or otherwise 
subject to the direct control of the Officers of Government, it shall be lawful for the Court of Wards or the 
Commissioner to grant leases for any such purpose as aforesaid ; and every lease so granted shall be valid 
and binding on all future possessors of the said lands, anything in the existing law to the contrary 
notwithstanding.  
 
_______  
  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL LAND HOLDER’ ATTENDANCE ACT, 1848.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE BENGAL LAND HOLDER’ ATTENDANCE ACT, 1848 
 
ACT NO. XX OF 1848  
Passed by the Governor General of India in Council on the 23d September 1848 . 
An Act for the establishment and maintenance of field boundary marks in the Presidency of 
Bombay.  
WHEREAS  by sundry Regulations of the Bengal Code, provision is made for the imposition of a daily 
fine, by the Board of Revenue or other authority exercising the powers of that Board, on any proprietor or 
farmer of land subject to the provisions contained in the s aid several Regulations, who, when duly 
summoned by the Collector or other Officer  exercising the power of Collector , shall omit or refuse to 
attend, or to cause his Officer or Agent to attend, or to furnish the accounts or documents required, and 
shall not shew sufficient cause for such omission ; and it is further provided that the fine, when confirmed 
by Government, is to be levied by same process as is prescribed for the recovery of arrears of revenue ; 
and whereas in many cases, by the delay thus occas ioned, the whole burden of the penalty is greatly 
increased beyond what would be necessary, if summary power were given to the Officer by whom the 
requisition is made, to impose and levy reasonable fines, subject to review by the Commissioner of 
Revenue an d other superior authority, It is enacted as follows:  
I. If any proprietor or farmer of land shall omit or refuse to attend, or to cause his Officer or Agent to 
attend, when duly summoned by the Collector, in any case specified in any of the said Regulatio ns, by the 
time prescribed in the notice issued by the Collector, or shall omit or refuse to furnish the accounts or 
documents required, and shall not shew sufficient cause for such omission, the Collector may impose of 
his own authority such daily fine, t o be payable daily until compliance with the requisition, as he may 
think adequate to the situation and circumstances in life or the defaulter, not exceeding in any case the 
da
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL LAND HOLDER’ ATTENDANCE ACT, 1848.pdf - page 1]
quate to the situation and circumstances in life or the defaulter, not exceeding in any case the 
daily fine of fifty Rupees: and the amount of such fine, accruing due from time to  time may be levied 
without further confirmation, by the same process as is prescribed for the recovery of arrears of revenue.  
II. The Collector shall forthwith report the imposition of every such fine, and the amount thereof, and 
also from time to time the amount levied, to the Commissioner of Revenue, who shall report the same for 
the information of the local Government.  
III. Every order passed by a Collector under this Act shall be appealable in the usual manner to the 
Commissioner o f Revenue, and other superior authority ; but no such appeal shall avail to prevent the 
levy of any fine so imposed pending the appeal.  
IV. Whenever the amount levied under any such order, issued for any default by authority of a 
Collector under this Act, shall have exceeded five hundred Rupees, the Collector shall report the case 
specially to the Commissioner of Revenue ; and no further levy for such default shall be made otherwise 
than by authority of the Commissioner of Revenue.  
V. Nothing in this Act co ntained shall be deemed to repeal the power of imposing daily fines and of 
levying the fines so imposed in the manner prescribed by the said several Regulations.  
VI. The word “Collector” used in this Act shall be taken to mean any person lawfully exercisin g the 
powers of a Collector.  
VII. This Act shall not extend to the North West Provinces of the Presidency of Bengal.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL LAND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1859.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE BENGAL LAND REVENUE SALES ACT , 1859 
____________ 
ARRANGEMENT  OF SECTION S. 
____________  
              
     SECTIONS.  
1. Laws repealed.  
2. What is an arrear of revenue.  
3. Latest day of payment.  
4. In Sylhet, personal property of defaulters may in the first instance be distrained and sold.  
5. Proviso in the case of certain descriptions of arrears.  
6. Notifications of sale to be issued, and no tender after latest day of payment to stop the sale.  
7. Notice to ryots, &. 8. Claims against Government held by a defaulter not to invalidate a sale.  
9. Deposit s receivable from persons not proprietors.  
10.Separation of shares held in common, by the opening of a separate account.  
11.Separation of shares consisting of specific portions of land, by the opening of  a separate      
account.  
12. If objection be made, parties to be referred to the Civil Court.  
13. Sale of separate shares.  
14. Entire estate ma y be sold under certain conditions.  
15. Deposit for the protection of an estate from sale.  
16. Withdrawal of the deposit.  
17. Estates under Court of Wards or attachment.  
18. Estates may be specially exempted from sale.  
19. Sales where to be made.  20. Adjournment of sales.  
21. Order of selling.  22. Deposit on account of purchase money.  23. F ull payment of purchase money.  
24. Re -sale.  
25. Appeals.  
26. Annulment of sale in special cases.  
27. Sales when final.  
28. Certificate of sales.  
29. Delivery of possession.  
30. Liability of purchaser.  
31. Application of purchase money.  
32. Notification of annulment of sale.  
33. Jurisdiction of Civil Courts in suits to annul sales.  
34. Effects of annulment by decree of Court of sales under this Act.  
35. If sale annulled purchase money to be refunded.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL LAND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1859.pdf - page 2]
2 
 36. Suit brought to oust a purchaser on the ground that the purchase was made for another 
person, to be dismi ssen. 
37. Rights of a purchaser of a permanently settled estate sold for its own arrears.  
38. Registration of talookdaree  tenurs created after settlemen t and held for terms of years.  
39. Common and special registry. 
40. Application for registry. 41. Procedure on application for common registry.  
42. P rocedure on application for  special registry.  
43. Registration of lease s of certain lands.  
44. Registrati on of old tenures.  
45. Time for application for registry of tenures and farms.  
46. Expenses of measurement, survey, or local enquiry. 
47. Civil Court not competent to order entry in the special register.  
48. Suit for the cancelment of the registry of a te nure or  farm.  
49. Proceedings of Revenue Authorities in the registration of tenures, &c.  
50. Effect of entry in the special register.  
51. Protection of talookdaree tenure s pending enquity, in case of sale of parent estate for arrears 
of revenue.  
52. Rights of a purchaser of an estate not permanently settled sold for its own arrears.  
53. Rights of a purchaser being a sharer in any estate.  
 And of a purchaser of an estate not sold for its own arrears.  
54. Rights of purchasers of shares of estate.  
55. Recovery of arrears due to defaulters.  
56. Punishment for contempt.  
57. Default in making deposit to be considered a contempt.  
58. Government may purchase at a sale.  
59. Fees and charges demandable by Collector.  
60. Regulations VII. 1822 and IX. 1825 to be  in force in certain estates.  
61. Interpretation.  
62. Application and commencement of this Act.    
    
 
 
   
 
   
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL LAND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1859.pdf - page 3]
3 
 THE BENGAL LAND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1859  
ACT NO. XI OF 1859.  
PASSED BY THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL OF INDIA.  
(Received the assent of the Govenor Geneml on the 4th May 1859.)  
An Act to improve the law relating to sales of Land for arrea rs of Revenu e in the Lower 
Provinces under the  Bengal Presidency . 
      W HEREAS  it is expedient to discontinue the practice of obtaining the pre vious  sanction of the Board 
of Revenue  to sales of estates for arrears of revenue, or other demands of Government, in the province of 
Cuttack: and whereas it is just that a person having a lien upon an estate, and paying the money necessary 
to protect it from sale for arrears o f revenue, should be re asonably secured: and whereas it is expedient to 
afford  sharers in estates, who duly pay their shares of the Sudder jumma of their  estates, easy means of 
protecting their shares from sale by reason of the default of their co-sharers:  and whereas it is expedient to 
afford landholders, particularly  absentees, facilities in guarding against the accidental sale of their estates 
for arrears  of revenue by reason of the neglect or fraud of their agents: and whereas it  is expedient to 
provide  for the voluntary registration of dependent talooks existing at the time of settlement: and whereas 
it is expedient to protect the holders  of registered under -tenures created since the settlement, and not 
resumable by the  grantors or their representatives, from loss by the avoidance of their tenures on the 
occasion of a sale of the superior estate for arrears of public revenue,  when the arrears can be realized  by 
such s ale: and to give absolute security  to such tenures by special registry, when shown to be  held at rents 
sufficient  for the security of the revenue : and it is therefore proper for the above and other purposes, to 
improve the law relating to sales of land for arrears of revenue  in the Provinces of Bengal, Behar and 
Orissa: It is enacted as follows :— 
I. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL LAND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1859.pdf - page 3]
 arrears of revenue  in the Provinces of Bengal, Behar and 
Orissa: It is enacted as follows :— 
I. Laws repealed .—Regulation X. 1818 (relating to collection of the public revenue from proprietor s 
and farmers of land in the District of Cuttack, & c) is hereby repealed; and from the date of the passing of 
this law, Act I of 1845 (regarding sales of land for arrears of revenue ), except in so far as it repeals other 
laws, and except in regard to sales made or advertised, to arrears and other demands realizable, and to suits comm enced and acts done, under authority thereof —shall cease to have effect in the Lower 
Provinces of Bengal.  
II. What is an arrear of revenue. —If the whole or a portion of a kist or instalment of any month of 
the era according to which the settlement and kistbundee of any mehal have been regulated, be unpaid on 
the first of the following month of such era, the sum so remaining unpaid shall be  considered an arrear of 
revenue.  
III. Latest day of payment .—Upon the promulgation of this Act, the Board of Revenue at Calcutta 
shall determine upon what dates all arrears of revenue and al l demands which, by the Regulations and 
Acts in force, are directed to be realized in the same manner as arrears of revenue, shall be paid up in each district under their jurisdiction, in default of which payment the estates ill arrear in those districts, except 
as hereinafter provided, shall be sold at public auction to the highest bidder. And the  said Board shall give 
notice of the dates so fixed in the official Gazette, and shall direct corresponding publication to be made, 
as far as regards each district in the language of that district, in the Office of the Collector or other Officer 
duly authorized to hold sales under this Act, in the Courts of the Judge, Magistrate, (or Joint Magistrate, 
as the case may be,) and Moonsiffs, and at every Thannah station  of that district; and the dates so fixed 
shall not be changed except by the said Board 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL LAND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1859.pdf - page 3]
ah station  of that district; and the dates so fixed 
shall not be changed except by the said Board by advertisement and notification, in the manner above 
described, to be issued at least three months before the close of the official year preceding that in which 
the n ew date is, or dates are, to take effect.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL LAND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1859.pdf - page 4]
4 
 IV. In Sylhet, personal property of defaulters may in the first instance be distrained and sold. —
Provided that in the district of Sylhet, the Collector may be authorized by the Board of Revenue to 
proceed in the f irst instance by the distress and sale of the personal property of defaulters, instead of by 
the sale of their estates.  
V. Proviso in the case of certain descriptions of arrears .—Provided always that no estate, and no 
share or interest in any estate, shall  be sold for the recovery of arrears or demands of the descriptions 
mentioned below, otherwise than after a notification in the language of the district  specifying  the nature 
and amount of the arrear or demand, and the latest date on which payment thereof shall be received, shall 
have been affixed for a period of not less than fifteen clear days preceding the date fixed  for payment 
according to Section III of this Act, in the Office of the Collector or other Officer duly authorized to hold sales under this Act, in the Court of the Judge within whose jurisdiction the land advertised lie s, and in 
the Moonsiff’s Court and P olice thannah of the division in which the estate or share of an estate to which 
the notification relate s is situated; or is the estate or share of an estate be situated within the jurisdiction of 
more than one Moonsiff’s Court or Police T hannah, in some one or more of such Courts or Thanna s ; and 
also at the cutcherry of the malgoozar or owner of the estate or share of an estate, or at some conspicuous 
place upon the estate or share of an estate, the same to be certified by the peon or other person employe d 
for the purpose.  
First . Arrears other than those  of the current year, or of the year immediately preceding.  
Secondly. Arrears due on account of estates other than that to be sold.  
Thirdly. Arrears of estates under attachment by order of any judicial  authority, or managed by the 
Collector in accordance with such order.  
Fourthly. Arrears due on
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL LAND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1859.pdf - page 4]
l  authority, or managed by the 
Collector in accordance with such order.  
Fourthly. Arrears due on account of tuccavee, poolbundee, or other demands  not being land revenue, 
but recoverable by the same process as arrears of land revenue.  
VI. Notifications of sale t o be issued, and no tender after latest day of payment to stop the              
sale.—The Collector or other Officer duly authorized to hold sales under this Act shall, as soon as 
possible after the latest day of payment fixed in the manner prescribed in S ection III of this Act, issue 
notifications in the language of the district, to be affixed in his own Office and in the Court of the Judge 
of the district, specifyi ng the estates or shares of estates which will be sold as aforesaid, and  the day on 
which the sale of the same will commence, which day shall not be less than  fifteen or more than thirty 
clear days from the date of affixing the notification  in the Office of the Collector or other Officer as 
aforesaid. And if the Government reve nue of any estate or share:  of an estate to be sold, exceed the sum 
of five hundred Rupees, a notification of the sale of such estate or share of an estate shall be published in 
the official Gazette. Except as hereinafter provided, all estates or shares of  estates so speci fic shall, on the 
day notified for sale, or on the day or  days following, be  put up to public auction by and in the presence of 
the Collector or  other  Officer as aforesaid, and shall be  sold to the highest bidder. And no pa yment, or 
tender  of payment, made after sunset of the said latest day of payment, shall bar or interfere with the sale, 
either at the time of sale or after its conclusion. 
VII. Notice to ryots, &c. —Whenever an estate or share of an estate is notified for sale as provided by 
Section VI of this Act, the Collector or other Officer as aforesaid shall affix a proclamation in the 
language of the district, in his own Office, and as soon thereafter as may
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL LAND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1859.pdf - page 4]
ix a proclamation in the 
language of the district, in his own Office, and as soon thereafter as may be in the Moonsiffs' Courts and 
Police Thannahs within which the estate or share of an estate, or any part of it, is situated, and also at the 
cutcherry of the malgoozar or the owner of the estate or share of an estate, or at some conspicuous place 
upon the estate or share of an estate, forbidding the ryots and under tenants to pa y to the defaulting 
proprietor any rent which has fallen due after the day fixed for the last day of payment, on pain of not being entitled to credit in their accounts with the purchaser for any sums so paid.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL LAND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1859.pdf - page 5]
5 
 VIII. Claims against Government held by a defa ulter not to invalidate a sale .—No claim to 
abatement or remission of revenue, unless the same shall have been allowed by the authority of 
Government , and no private demand or cause of action whatever, held or supposed to be held by any 
defaulter against G overnment, shall bar or render void or voidable a sale under this Act; nor shall the plea 
that money belonging to the defaulter, and sufficient to pay  the arrear of revenue due, was in the 
Collector's hands, bar or render void or voidable a sale under this  Act, unl ess such money stand in the 
defaulter's name alone and without dispute, and unless, after application in due  time made by the 
defaulter, or after the written agreement provided for in  Section XV of this Act, the  Collector shall have 
neglected, or  refused on insufficient grounds, to transfer it i n payment of the arrear of revenue due . 
IX. Deposit s receivable from persons not proprietors .—The Collector or other Officer as aforesaid 
shall, at any time before sunset of the latest day of payment determ ined according to Section III of this 
Act, receive as a deposit from any person not being a proprietor of the estate or share of an estate in arrear, the amount of the arrear of revenue due, to be credited in payment of the arrear at sunset as 
aforesaid, u nless before that time the arrear shall have been paid by a defaulting pro prietor of the estate. 
And in case the person so depositing, whose money shall have been credited in the manner aforesaid, shall be a party in a suit pending before a Court of Justic e for the possession of the estate or share fr om 
which the arrear is due, or any part thereof, it shall be competent to the said Court to order the said party to be put into temporary possession of the said estate or share or part thereof, subject to the r ules in force 
for taking security in the cases of parties in Civil suits. And if the person so depositing, whose money 
sha
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL LAND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1859.pdf - page 5]
g security in the cases of parties in Civil suits. And if the person so depositing, whose money 
shall have been credited as aforesaid, shall prove before a competent Civil Court that the deposit was made in order to protect an intere st of the said person, which would have been endangered or damaged by 
the sale, or which he believed in good faith would have been endangered or damaged by the sale, he shall be entitled to recover the amount of the deposit, with or without interest as the  Court may determine, from 
the defaulting proprietor, And if the party so depositing, whose money shall have been credited as 
aforesaid, shall prove before such a Court that the deposit was necessary in order to protect any lien he 
had on the estate or sha re or part thereof, the amount so credited shall be added to the amount of the 
original lien.  
X. Separation of sharesheld in common, by the opening of a separate account .—When a recorded 
sharer of a joint estate, held in common tenancy, desires to pay his shares of the government revenue 
separately , he may submit to the Collector a written application to that effect.  The application must 
contain a specification of the share held in the estate by the applicant. The Collector shall then cause to be 
published in his own Office, in the Court of the Judge, Magistrate (or Join Magistrate, as the case may 
be,) and Moonsiffs, and in the Police Thannahs in whose jurisdiction the estate or any part thereof is 
situated, as well as on som e conspicuous part of the estat e itself,  a copy of the application made to him. If, 
within six weeks from the date of the publication of these notices, no objection is made by any other 
recorded sharer, the Collecto r shall open a separate account  with the applicant, and shall  credit sep arately 
to his share all paym ents made by him on account of it.  The date on which the collector his sanction to the 
opening of a separate account, shall be held to be that from which the separate lia
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL LAND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1859.pdf - page 5]
sanction to the 
opening of a separate account, shall be held to be that from which the separate liabilities of the share of 
the applicant commence. 
XI. Separation of shares consisting of specific portions of land, by the opening of a separate 
account .—When a recorded sharer of a joint estate, whose share consists of a specific portion of the land 
of the estate, desires to pay his share of the Government r evenue separately, he may submit to the 
Collector a written application to that effect. The application must contain a specification of the land 
comprised in his share, and of the boundaries and extent thereof, together with a statement of the amount 
of sudder jumma heretofore paid on account of it. On the receipt of this application, the Collector shall 
cause it to be published ill the manner prescribed for publication of notice in the last preceding Section. In 
the event of no objection being urged by any  recorded co -sharer within six weeks from the time of 
publication, the Collector shall open a separate account with the applicant, and shall credit separately to 
his share all payments made by him on account of it. The date on which the Collector records his sanction 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL LAND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1859.pdf - page 6]
6 
 to the opening of a separate account, shall be held to be that from which the separate liabilities of the 
share of the applicant commence.  
XII. If objection be made, parties to be referred to the Civil Court .—If any recorded proprietor of 
the e state,  whether the same be held in common t enancy  or otherwise, object that the applicant has no 
right to the share claimed by hi m, or that his interest in the estate is less or other  than that claimed by him, 
or if the application be i n respect of a speci fic portion  of the land of an estate, that the amount of sudder 
jumma stated by the applicant to have been heretofore paid on account of such portion of land, is not the  
amount which has been recog nized by the other sharers as the jumma thereof, the Collec tor shall refer the  
parties  to the Civil Court, and shall suspend proceedings until the question at  issue i s judicially 
determined.  
XIII. Sale of separate shares. — Whenever the Collector shall have ordered a separate account or  
accounts to be kept for o ne or more shares, if the estate shall become liable to sale for arrears of revenue, 
the Collector or other Officer as aforesaid in the first place shall put up to sale only that share or those shares of the estate from which, accordi ng to the separate accoun ts, an arrear of revenue may be due. In 
all suc h cases notice of the intention  of excluding the share  or shares from which no arrear  is due  shall be 
given in the advertisement of sale prescribed in Section VI of this Act. The share or shares sold, together  
with the share or shares excluded from the sale, shall continue to constitute one integral estate, the share 
or shares sold being charged with the separate portion or the aggregate of the several separate portions of 
jumma assigned thereto.  
XIV. Entire es tate may be sold under certain conditions .—If in any case of sale held according to 
the provisions of the last preceding Section, the highest offer for the share ex
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL LAND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1859.pdf - page 6]
 held according to 
the provisions of the last preceding Section, the highest offer for the share exposed to sale shall not equal 
the amount of arrear due thereupon to the date of sale the Col lector or other Officer as aforesaid shall stop 
the sale, and shall declare that the entire estate will be put up to sale for arrear of revenue at a future                
date, unless the other recorded sharer or sharers, or one or more of them, shall with in ten days purchase 
the share in arrear by paying to Government the w hole arrear due from such share.  If such purchase be 
completed, the collector or other officer as aforesaid shall give such certificate and delivery of possession 
as are provided for in Sections XXVIII and XXIX of this Act, to the purchaser or purchasers, who shall 
have the same rights as if the share had been purchased by him or them at the sale. If no such purchase be 
made within ten days as aforesaid, the entire estate shall be sold, after notification for such period and 
publication in such manner as if proscribed in Section VI of this Act.  
XV. Deposit for the protection of an estate from sale. —If any recorded proprietor or co- partner of 
an estate shall deposit with the Collector money , or Government securities, endorsed and made payable to 
the order of the Collector, and shall sign an agreement pledging the same to Government by way of 
security for the jumma of the entire estate and authorizing the Collector to apply to the payment of any 
arrear of revenue that may become due from that estate the whole or any portion of the s aid money or 
securities that may be necessary for that purpose, then in the case of any arrear of revenue due from the said estate not being paid before sunset of t he latest day of payment fixed under III of this Act, the 
Collector shall apply to the payment of such arrear the said money or securities , as may be necessary ; and 
for this purpose the Collector shall first apply any money that may be in his 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL LAND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1859.pdf - page 6]
y be necessary ; and 
for this purpose the Collector shall first apply any money that may be in his hands and any interest that 
may be due upon such securities, and may then sell and transfer the securities, for any balance that may 
remain, And so long as any money or securities as aforesaid, sufficient to cover any arrear that may fall 
due, shall remain and he avai lable as aforesaid, the estate for the protection of which the said deposit was 
made shall be exempted from sale for arrears of revenue. All monies and securities so deposited shall be exempt from attachment otherwise than in execution of a decree of a Civ il Court.  
XVI. Withdrawal of the deposit .—It shall be competent to the person making a deposit under the 
provision of the last preceding Section, or his representative or assignee, at any time to withdraw the deposit and to revoke the pledge of the same.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL LAND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1859.pdf - page 7]
7 
 XVII. Estates under Court of Wards or under attachment —No estate shall be liable  to sale for the 
recovery of arrears which  have accrued during the period of its being. under the of the Court                     
of Wards; and no estate the sole property of  a minor or minors and descended to him or them by the 
regular course of inheritance duly notified to the Collector for the information of the Court of Wards, but 
of which .the Court of Wards has not assumed the management under Regulation VI. 1822, shall be sold 
for arrears of revenue accruing subsequently to his or their succession to the same, until the minor or 
minors, or one of them, shall have attained the full age of eighteen years. And no estate held under 
attachment by the revenue authorities otherw ise than by order of a judicial authority, shall be liable to sale 
for ar rears accruing whilst it was so held under attachment. And no estate held under attachme nt or 
managed by a Revenue Officer, in pursuance of an order of a judicial authority, shall be liable to  sale for 
the recovery of arrears of revenue  accruing during the period of such attachment or management until 
after the end of the year in which such arrears accrued.  
XVIII. Estates may be specially exempted from sale.—It shall be compe tent to th e Collector or 
other Officer as aforesaid, at any time before the sale of an estate or share of an estate shall have 
commenced, to exempt such estate or share from sale ; and in  like manner it shall be competent to the 
Commissioner of Revenue, at any time before the sale of an estate or share of an estate shall  have 
commenced, to exempt such estate or share from sale, by a special order to the Collector or other Officer 
as aforesaid to that effect in each case; and no such  sale shall be legal if held after·  the receipt of such 
order of exemption.  
Proviso .—Provided, however, and it is hereby  enacted, that the Collector or other Officer as aforesaid 
or the Commissioner s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL LAND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1859.pdf - page 7]
, and it is hereby  enacted, that the Collector or other Officer as aforesaid 
or the Commissioner shall duly record in a proceeding the teas on for granting such exemption ; and 
provided als o that an order for exemption so issued by the Commissioner shall not affect the legality of a 
sale which may have taken place before the receipt by the Collector or other Officer as aforesaid of the 
order of exemption.  
XIX. Sales where to be made. —Sales shall ordinarily be made by the Collector or other Officer as  
aforesaid in the land revenue Office at the Sudder Station of the District: provided, however, that it shal1 
be competent to the Board of Revenue to prescribe a place for holding sales other than such Office 
whenever they shall consider it beneficial to the parties concerned.  
XX. Adjournment of sales .— In case the Collector or other Officer as aforesaid shall be unable from 
Sickness, from occurrence of a holiday, or from any other cause, to commence the sale on the day of sale 
fixed as aforesaid  ; or if, having commenced it, he be unable, from any cause,                            to 
complete it; he shall be competent to adjourn it to the next day following, not being Sunday or  other  close 
holiday, recording his reasons for such adjournment, forwarding a copy  of such record to the 
Commissioner of Revenue, and announcing the adjournment by a written proclamation stuck up in his 
cutcherry ; and so on, from day to day, until he shall be able to commenc e upon, or to complete the sale; 
but, with the exception of adjournments so made, recorded, and reported,  each sale shall invariably be 
made on the day of sale fixed in the manner aforesaid.  
XXI. Order of selling .—On the day of sale fixed according to Sect ion VI of this Act sales shall 
proceed in regular order ; the estate to be sold bearing the lowest number on the towjee or register in use 
in the Collector’s Office of the district being put up first, and so on, in regular sequence; and it
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL LAND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1859.pdf - page 7]
in the Collector’s Office of the district being put up first, and so on, in regular sequence; and it shall not 
be law ful for the Collector or other Officer as aforesaid to put up any estate out of its regular order by 
number, except where it may be necessary to do so 011 default of deposit, as provided in Section XXII of 
this Act.  
XXII. Deposit oil account of purchase mo ney.—The party who shall be declared the purchaser of an 
estate or share of an estate at any such public sale as aforesaid, shall be required to  deposit or immediately or as soon after the conclusion  of th e sale of the estate  at share as the  Collector  or other 
Officer  as aforesaid may think necessary , either in cash Bank of Bengal Notes or  Post Bills or 
Government Securities to be valued at the market rate of the  day, duly en dorsed , twenty percent on the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL LAND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1859.pdf - page 8]
8 
 amount of his bid and in default of such deposit, the estate or share shall  forthwith be put up again and 
sold.  
XXIII. Full payment of purchase money .—The fu ll amount of purchas e money shall be made good 
by the  purchaser before sunset of the thirtieth day from that on which the  sale of the estate or share of all 
estate bought  by him took place, reckoning that day as one of the thirty ; or if the thirtieth day be a 
Sunday Or other close holiday, then on the first office day after the  thirtieth: and in default of payment 
within the prescribed period as aforesaid,  the deposit shall be forfeited to Government, the estate or share 
shall be resold, and the defaulting purchaser shall forfeit all claim to the estate or share, or to any part of 
the sum for which it may subsequently be sold. And in the event  of the proceeds of the sale which may be 
eventu ally consummated being less than the price bid by the defaulting bidder aforesaid, the difference 
shall be  leviable from him by any process authorized for realizing an arrear of public revenue , and such 
difference shall  be considered to be  a part of the  purchase money and shall be dealt with in the manner 
hereinafter prescribe for the  dispo sal th ereof.  
XXIV. Re -sale.—When default is made in the payment of purchase money a notification of the 
intended re -sale shall be published for the period and in the manner prescribed in Section VI of this Act, 
but such notification shall not be published until the expiration of three clear days after the day on which 
the default shall have occurred ; and if the Payment or tender of payment of the arrear on account of 
which the estate or share was first sold, and of any arrear which may have subsequently become : due shall be made b y or on behalf of the proprietor of the estate or share before sunset of the third day, the 
issue of the notification of re- sale shall be stayed. The rules contained in the last preceding Section shall 
be applicable
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL LAND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1859.pdf - page 8]
 of re- sale shall be stayed. The rules contained in the last preceding Section shall 
be applicable to every such re- sale. Provided that if default of payment of purchase money shall occur 
more than once, the amount to be recovered from the defaulting bidders shall be the difference between 
the highest bid and the proceeds of the sale  eventually consummated, which  amount may be  levied in 
manne r aforesaid from any of the defaulting bidders to the extent of the amount by which his bid exceeds 
the amount realized.  
XXV. Appeals .—It shall be lawful for the Commissioner of Revenue to receive an appeal against may 
sale made under this Act, if preferred to him on or before the fifteenth day from the date of sale, 
reckoning as in Section XXIII, or if preferred to the Collector or other Officer as aforesaid for 
transmission to the Commissioner, on or before the tenth day from the day of sale, and not                       
otherwise; and the Commissioner shall be competent in every case of appeal so preferred to annul any sale of an estate or share of an estate made under this Act, which shall appear to him not to have been 
conducted according to the provisi ons of this Act, awarding at compensation for his loss, if the sale shall 
have been occasioned by neglect of the proprietor, such compensation not to exceed the interest, at the 
highest rate of the current Government Securities of its being retained in the  Collector’s Office ; and the 
order of the Commissioner shall in such cases be final.  
XXVI. Annulment of sale in special cases. —It shall be competent to the Commissioner of Revenue, 
on the ground of hardship or injustice, to suspend the passing of  final o rders in any case of appeal from a 
sale, and to represent the case to the Board of Revenue, who, if they see cause, may recommend to the 
local Government to annul the sale ; and the local Government in any such case may annul the sale and 
cause the estate or share of an estate to be restored
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL LAND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1859.pdf - page 8]
nment in any such case may annul the sale and 
cause the estate or share of an estate to be restored to the proprietor on such conditions as may appear 
equitable and proper.  
XXVII. Sales when final .—All sales of which the purchase money has been paid up as prescribed in 
Section XXIII of this Act, and against which no appeal shall have been preferred, shall be final and conclusive at noon of the thirtieth day from the day of sale, reckoning the said day of sale as the first of 
the said thirty days. And sales against which all appeal ma y have  been preferred, and dismissed by  the 
Commissioner, shall be  final and conclusive from the date of such dismissal, if more than thirty days from 
the day of sale, o r if less, then at noon of the thirtieth day as above provided.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL LAND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1859.pdf - page 9]
9 
 XXVIII. Certificate of sales. —Immediately upon a sale be coming final and conclusive, the Collector 
or other Officer as aforesaid shall give to the purchaser a certificate of title in the form prescribe d in 
Schedule A annexed to this  Act. And the said certificate shall be deemed in any Court of Justice sufficient 
evidence of the title to the estate or share of an estate sold being vested in the person or persons named 
from the date specified ; a nd the Collector shall also notify such transfer by written proclamation in his 
own Officer and in the Courts of the Moonsiffs and Police Thannahs within whose jurisdiction any part of 
the estate or share sold shall be situated.  
XXIX. Delivery of possessio n.—The Collector or other Officer as aforesaid shall order delivery of 
possession of the estate or share purchased to be made by removing any person who may refuse to vacate 
the same, and by proclamation to the occupants of the property by beat of drum or in such other mode as 
may be customary, at some convenient place or places; and by affixing a copy of the certificate at the        
Mal cutchery or in some conspicuous place of the estate or share of an estate purchased.  
XXX. Liability of purchaser .—The pa rty certified as the proprietor of an estate or share of an estate 
by purchase under this Act, shall be answerable for all instalments of the revenue of Government which 
may fall due after the latest day of payment aforesaid.   
XXXI. Application of purchase  money .—The Collector shall apply the purchase money first to the 
liquidation of all arrears due upon the latest day of payment from the estate or share of an estate sold; and 
secondly to the liquidation of all outstanding demands debited to the estate or share of an estate in the 
public accounts of the District; holding the residue, if any, in deposit on account of the late recorded 
proprietor or proprietors of the estate share of an estate sold or their heirs or representati ves to be 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL LAND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1859.pdf - page 9]
ietor or proprietors of the estate share of an estate sold or their heirs or representati ves to be paid to 
his or their  receipt on demand in the manner following : to wit, in shares proportioned to their recorded 
interest in the estate or share of an estate sold, if such distinction of shares w ere recorded, or if not, then 
as an aggregate sum to the whole body of  proprietor s upon their joint receipt. And if before payment to 
the late proprietor or proprietors  of any surplus that may remain of the purchase money, the same be 
claimed by any creditor in satisfaction of a debt , such surplus shall not be payable to such claimant,  nor 
shall it be withheld from the proprietor, except under precept of a Civil Court.  
XXXII. Notification of annulment of sale .—The annulment by a Commissioner or by Government 
of a sale made under this Act shall be publicly notified by the Collector or ot her Officer as aforesaid, in 
the same manner as the becoming final and conclusive of sales is required to be notified by Section 
XXVIII of this Act; and the amount of deposit and balance of purchase money shall be forthwith returned 
to the purchaser with i nterest thereon at the highest rates of the current public Securities ; which shall be 
paid by the Government, unless the proprietor shall have become liable for the same under the provisions of Section XXV or Section XXVI of this Act.  
XXXIII. Jurisdiction of Civil Courts in suits to annul sales.—No sale for arrears of revenue or 
other demands realizable in the same manner as arrears of revenue are realizable made after the passing of 
this Act, shall be annulled by a Court of Justice, except upon the ground of its having been made contrary 
to the provisions of this Act, and then only on proof that the plaintiff has sustained substantial injury by 
reason of the irregularity complained of : and no such sale shall be annulled upon such ground, unless such 
ground shall have been declared and specified in an appeal mad
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL LAND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1859.pdf - page 9]
nulled upon such ground, unless such 
ground shall have been declared and specified in an appeal made to the Commissioner under Section 
XXV of this Act: and no suit to annul a sale made under this Act shall be received by any Court of Justice 
unless it shall be instituted within one year from the dat e of the sale becoming final and conclusive as 
provided in Section XXVII of this Act: and no person shall be entitled to contest the legality of a sale, after having received any portion of the purchase money. 
Proviso .—Provided, however, that nothing in this Act contained shall be construed to debar any 
person considering himself wronged by any act or omission connected with a sale under this Act, from his remedy in a personal action for damages against the person by whose act or omission he considers 
himse lf to have been wronged.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL LAND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1859.pdf - page 10]
10 
 XXXIV. Effects of annulment by decree of Courts of sales under this Act .—If a sale made under 
this Act be annulled by a final decree of a Civil Court application for the execution of such decree shall be 
made within six months afte r the date thereof, otherwise the party in whose favor such decree was passed 
shall lose all benefit therefrom. And no order for restoring such decreeholder to possession shall be passed until any amount of surplus purchase money that may have been paid aw ay by order of a Civil 
Court be repaid by him, with interest at the highest rate of the current Government Securities. And if such 
party shall neglect to pay any amount so recoverable, within six months from the date of such final 
decree, he shall lose all  benefit therefrom.  
XXXV. If sale annulled , purchase money to be refunded .—In the event of a sale being annulled by 
a final decree of a Court of Justice, and the former proprietor being restored to possession, the purchase 
money shall be refunded to the pu rchaser by Government, together with interest at the highest rate of the 
current public securities.  
XXXVI. Suit brought to oust a purchaser on the ground that the purchase was made for another 
person, to be dismissed .—Any suit brought to oust the certifie d purchaser as aforesaid on the ground 
that the purchase was made on behalf of another person not the certified purchaser, or on behalf partly of 
himself and partly of another person, though by agreement the name of the certified purchaser was used, 
shall be dismissed with costs.  
XXXVII. Rights of a purchaser of a permanently settled estate sold for its own                 
arrears.— The purchaser .of an entire estate in the permanently settled Districts of Bengal, Behar, and 
Orissa, sold under this Act for the recovery of arrears due on account of the same, shall acquire the estate 
free from all encumbrances which ma y have been imposed upon it after the time of settlement; and shall 
be entitled to a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL LAND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1859.pdf - page 10]
ances which ma y have been imposed upon it after the time of settlement; and shall 
be entitled to avoid and annul all under -tenures and  forthwith to eject all undertenants, with the following 
exceptions:  
First. Istemraree  or mokurrere e tenures which have been held at a fixed  rent from the time of the 
permanent settlement.  
Secondly . Tenures existing at the  time of settlement, which have not  been hel d at a fixed rent. 
Provided always that the rents of such tenures  shall be liable to  enhancement under any law  for the time 
being in force for the enhancement of the rent of such tenures.  
Thirdly. Talookdaree and other similar tenures created since the time of settlement and held 
immediately of the proprietors of estates, and farms for terms of years so held, when such tenures and 
farms have been duly registered under the provisions of this Act.  
Fourthly. Leases of lands whereon dwelling houses, manufactories, or other permanent buildings have 
been erected, or whereon gardens, plantations, tanks, wells, canals, places o f worship, or burning or 
burying grounds have been made, or wherein mines have been sunk. 
And such a purchaser as is aforesaid shall be entitled to proceed in the manner prescribed by any law 
for the time being in force for the enhancement of the rent of any land coming within the fourth class of 
exceptions above made, if he can prove the same to have been held at what was originally an unfair rent, 
and if the same shall not have been held at a fixed rent, equal to the rent of good arable land, for a term 
exceeding twelve years; but not otherwise.  
Proviso .—Provided always that nothing in this S ection contained shall be construed to entitle any 
such purchaser as aforesaid to eject any ryot having a right of occupancy at a fixed rent or at a  rent 
assessable according to fixed rules under the laws in force, or to enhance the rent of any such ryot 
otherwise than in the manner prescribed by such laws,  or otherwise than 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL LAND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1859.pdf - page 10]
the rent of any such ryot 
otherwise than in the manner prescribed by such laws,  or otherwise than the former propriet or, 
irrespectively of  all engage ments made since the time of settle ment, may have been entitled to do.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL LAND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1859.pdf - page 11]
11 
 XXXVIII. Registration of talook daree tenures created after settlement and held for  terms of 
years .—The following rules for the registration of talookdaree and other similar tenure created since the 
time of settlement, and held immediately of the proprietors of estates, and of farms for terms of years so 
held, shall be observed.  
XXXIX. Common and special registry .—There shall be two sets of regist ers, one for common 
registry  and one f or special registry. C ommo n registry shall secure such tenu res and farms against any 
auctio n pur chaser at a sale for a rrears of revenue except  the G overn ment. Special registry  shall secure 
such tenures and farm s against any auction purchaser  at a sale fo r arrears of revenue including the  
Government.  
XL. Application for registry .—The holder of any talookdaree , other similar tenure , such as  is 
described in Section XXXVIII of this Act, desirous of registering it, shall apply by petition to the Collector of the District to which the estate belongs. The application shall state when description of 
registry is desired, and shall contain the following particular s so far as the same are ascertainable: — 
1.  The Pergunnah or pergunnahs in which the tenure is situated.  
2.  The nature of tenure.  
3.  The name or names of the billage or villages whereof the land is composed, or wherein it is 
situated.  
4.  The area of the land comprised in the tenure, with its boundaries in complete detail.  
5.  The amount of rent payable annually for the tenure, and whether the rent is fixed for a rent of 
years or in perpetuity, and the duties, if any, required to be per formed on account of it.  
6.  The date of the deed constituti ng the tenure, or the date when the tenure was created.  
7.  The name of the proprietor who created the tenure.  
8.  The name of the original holder of the tenure.  
9. The name of the present pos sessor, and if he be not the original holder, the mode in which he 
succeeded to the ten
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL LAND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1859.pdf - page 11]
present pos sessor, and if he be not the original holder, the mode in which he 
succeeded to the tenure, whether by inheritance, gift, purchase, or otherwise, and whether he holds 
jointly or solely.  
Holders of such farms as are described in the said Section may apply in like manner for registry of 
the same. The application shall contain such of the foregoing particulars as are applicable to farms.  
XLI. Procedure on application f or common registry .—When the application is for common 
registry, the Collector shall  serve a notice on the recorded p roprietor or proprietor s of the estate in which 
the tenure or farm is  situated, or the authorized agent of such proprietor or proprietors, with a  copy of the 
application annexed; and shall cause a notice, with a copy  of the applica tion annexed, to be affixed in his 
Office, and at the malcutcherry  of the estate in which the tenure or farm is situated, or in such other place 
or places as in the opinion of the Collector may be best suited to give pu blicity to the application, 
requiring  the proprietor or any party  interested, within thi rty days from the issue  of the said notice, to f ile 
any objections he may  have to the registry of the tenure  or farm, or to any statem ent contained  in the 
application. If w ithin the limited time no objection is  made , the Collector shall register the tenure or farm. 
If within the limited time an objection is made any recorded proprietor, or by any party interested not 
being a proprietor, the Collector shall  examine the person so objecting  or his authorized a gent, and if it 
shall appear to him that such person has probable, ground of objection, the Collector shall suspend 
proceedings, and shall refer the parties to the Civil Court: otherwise he shall grant the application. If  the 
decision of the Civil Court be in favor of the applicant, the Collector, on the presentation of a copy of the 
final decree, shall register the tenure or farm.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL LAND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1859.pdf - page 11]
presentation of a copy of the 
final decree, shall register the tenure or farm.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL LAND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1859.pdf - page 12]
12 
 XLII. Procedure on application for special registry .—When the application is for special registry, 
the Collector shall serve and issue the notices prescribed in the last proceeding Section. If within the 
limited time no objection is made, the Collector shall cause any enquiry that he may deem necessary for 
the security of the Government revenue, to be made ; and if he is satisfi ed that the Government revenue of 
the pa rent estate is sufficient secured so far as it may be affected by the tenure or farm in question, he 
shall report the case to the commissioner, who, if also satisfied on that point, shall direct the tenure or farm to  be registered according to the application; otherwise the application shall be rejected. If within the 
limited time any recorded proprietor or any party interested not being a proprietor object to the registry, the Collector shall examine the person so ob jecting or his authorized agent, and if it shall appear to him 
that such person has probable ground of objection, shall suspend proceedings, and shall refer the parties to 
the Civil Court; otherwise he shall proceed as if no objection had been made. If the  decision of the Civil 
Court be in favor of the applicant, the Collector, on the presentation of a copy of the final decree, shall 
proceed as above provided for cases in which no objection is made within the limited time.  
XLIII. Registration of leases of certain lands .—Leases of lands of the description specified in the 
fourth exceptional class in Section XXXVII, may be registered, at the option of the holders, in the manner 
and under the rules hereinbefore provided for the registry of Talookdaree and othe r similar tenures.  
XLIV. Registration of old tenures. —Tenures of the first and second exceptional classes in Section  
XXXVII may be registered, at the option of the holders; and when so registered shall be entered only in 
the special register. Application for such registry shall contain the particulars spec
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL LAND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1859.pdf - page 12]
ered only in 
the special register. Application for such registry shall contain the particulars specified in Section XL so 
far as the same are ascertainable, and notices shall be served and issued in the manner prescribed in 
Section XLI. If within the limited time no objection is made by any recorded pr oprietor  or by any party 
interested  not being a proprietor, the Collector shall make such enquiries  as may be  necessary  to satisfied 
him as to the validity  of the tenure; and if the result be to satisfy him  that the tenure is valid, he shall 
report the case to the Commissioner, who, if also satisfied that the  tenure is valid, shall direct it to be 
entered  in the special register; otherwise the application for registry shall be rejected . If within the limited 
time any recorded proprietor or other party as  aforesaid  object to the registry of the tenure,  the Collector 
shall examine the person so  objecting of' his authorized agent, and if it shall appear to him that such 
person  has probable ground of objection, shall suspend proceedings, and refer the  parties to the Civil 
Court; otherwise he shall proceed as if no objection had been made. If the decision of the Civil Court be 
in favor of the applicant, the  Collector, on the presentation of a copy of the final decr ee, shall proceed as  
above provided for cases i n which no objection is made within the limited time.  
Proviso .—Provided always that nothing contained i n this Section shall be understood as rendering 
registration necessary  for the protection of bond fide tenures of the  description herein referred to.  
XLV. Time for application for registry of tenures and farms. —Application for registry existing 
tenures and farms must be made within three years after the passing of this Act Application for the 
registry of tenures created after the passing of this Act must be made within three months from the date of 
the deed constituting the tenure.  
XLVI.  Expenses of measurement, surve
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL LAND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1859.pdf - page 12]
e months from the date of 
the deed constituting the tenure.  
XLVI.  Expenses of measurement, survey, or local enquiry .—The actual expenses of any 
measurement, survey, or local enquiry made under Sections XLII and XLIV of this Act, shall be  borne by 
the party who applies for the registry of his tenure or farm; and such party may be required by the 
Collector from time to time to make such advances on this account as he may consider necessary.  
XLVII. Civil Court not competent to order entry in  the special register.—No Civil Court shall be 
competent to order the Revenue Aut horities to enter any tenure or  farm in the special register. Provided 
always that the refusal of the R evenue Authorities so to register any tenure or farm shall not affect th e 
title of the holder whatever  it may be.   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL LAND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1859.pdf - page 13]
13 
 XLVIII. Suit for the cancelment of the registry of a tenure or farm .— Subject to the general law 
of  limitation, any person thinking himself wronged by the registry of a tenure or farm, may file a suit for 
the can celment of the same.  
XLIX. Proceedings of Revenue Authorities in the registration of tenures .—In the execution of 
their function s in the registration of tenures and farms under this Act, all subordinate Revenue Authorities 
shall proceed in accordance with the general instructions which they may receive from the superior 
Revenue Authorities to whom they are subordinate, and from the local Government; and all orders passed 
under the Sections aforesaid shall be open to appeal in usual course. The order of a Co mmissioner for the 
special registry of a tenure under the provisions of this Act, shall be open at any time within one year from the date of registry to revision by the Board of Revenue or the local Government, on the ground of 
the Government Revenue not having been sufficiently secured or of the invalidity of the tenure, as the 
case may be.  
L. Effect of entry in the special register.—Entry in the special register shall be an effectual 
protection of the tenure or farm so registered, unless in a suit instituted by Government in a Civil Court 
within the period allowed for suits for the recovery of the public revenue a  decree  be passed pronouncing 
the registration to have been obtained by fraud, to the injury of the Government revenue . Provided that a 
tenure or farm in the hands of a bond fide purchaser for value shall not be avoided by reason of such 
fraud. But the tenure or farm shall be liable to such amount of rent as would have been fair and equitable 
at the time of the special registry thereof, such  amount to be fixed by the Collector.  
LI. Protection of talookdaree tenures pending enquiry, in case of sale of parent estate for arrears 
of revenue. —Tenures and farms of the third exceptional class described in Section  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL LAND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1859.pdf - page 13]
te for arrears 
of revenue. —Tenures and farms of the third exceptional class described in Section  XXXVII of this Act, 
for the special registration of which application shall be made within the prescribed time, and in respect of 
which the Collector shall have commenced the enquiry prescribed in Section XLII, shall, in case of the 
sale of the parent est ate for arrears of revenue, be protected pending the duration of such enquiry, and 
shall be protected eventually by registration, if the final award of the Revenue Authorities, upon such application, be in favor of the claimant.  
LII. Rights of a purchaser of an estate not permanently settled sold for its own                   
arrears.— The purchaser of an estate in a district not permane ntly settled, sold under this Act for the 
recovery of arrears  due on  account of the same, shall acquire the estate free f rom all encumbrances which 
may have been imposed upon it after the  time of settlement, and shall b e entitled to avoid and annul all  
tenures which may have originated with the defaulter or his predecessors,  being representatives or 
assignees of the original  engage r, as well as all agreements with ryots or the like settled or accredited by 
the first engager  or his representatives, subsequently to the last settlement, as well as all tenures which the 
first engager may, under the conditions of his settlement, have been competent to set aside, alter, or 
renew, saving always and except leases of lands whereon dwelling houses, manufactories, or other 
permanent buildings have been erected, or whereon  gardens, plantations, tanks, wells , canals, places of 
worship, or  burning or burying grounds have been made, wherein mines have been sunk, which leases or 
engagements shall, so as the land is duly appropriated to such purposes, and the stipulated rent paid, 
continue in force and effect. Provided that nothing contained in this Section shall be construed to entitle 
any purchaser of land at a publi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL LAND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1859.pdf - page 13]
at nothing contained in this Section shall be construed to entitle 
any purchaser of land at a public sale for arrears of revenue to demand a higher rate of rent from any 
persons whose tenure or agreement may be annulled as aforesaid, than  was demandable by the cases in 
which suc h persons may have  held their lands under engagements, stipulating for a lower rate  of rent than 
would have been justly demandable  for the land, or in cases in which it may be proved that, according to 
the custom of  the pergunnah, mouzah , or other local division, such persons are liable to be called upon for 
any new assessment, or other demand not interdicted by the regulations of Government. 
LIII. Rights of a purchaser being a sharer in any estate. —Excepting sharers in estates under 
butwarrah who may hav e saved their shares from sale under Sections XXXIII and XXXIV Regulation 
XIX. 1814, and sharers with whom the Collector, under Sections X and Xl of this Act, has opened 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL LAND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1859.pdf - page 14]
14 
 separate accounts, any recorded or unrecorded proprietor or co- partner, who may purcha se the estate of 
which he is proprietor or co- partner; or who by re -purchase or otherwise may recover possession of the 
said estate, after it has been sold for arrears under this Act; and likewise any purchaser of an estate sold 
for arrears or demands other than those accruing upon itself; shall by such purchase acquire the estate 
subject to all its encumbrances existing at the t ime of sale and shall not acquire any rights in respect to 
under -tenants or ryots, with  were not possessed by the previous proprie tor at the time of the sale of the 
said estate.  
LIV. Rights of purchasers of shares of estate.— When a share or shares of  an estate may be sold 
under the provision s of Section XIII or Section XIV, the purchaser shall acquire the share or shares 
subject to a ll encumbrances, and shall not acquire any rights which were not possessed by the previous 
owner or owners.  
LV. Recovery of arrears due to defaulters.—Arrears of rent which on the latest day of payment may 
be due to the defaulter from his under -tenants or ryots, shall, in the event of a sale, be recoverable by him 
after the said latest day, by an y process except distraint which might have been used by him for that 
purpose on or before the  said latest day. 
LVI. Punishment for contempt .—Any Collector or other  Officer as aforesaid conducting a sale 
under  this Act shall be competent to punish any contempt committed in his presence in open cutcherry or 
office for the time being, by fine, to an extent not exceeding two hundred Rupees, commutable, if not 
paid, to imprisonment in the Civil jail for a period not exceeding one month; and the Magistrate to whom 
such an offender may be sent by a Collector or other Officer as aforesaid, shall carry his sentence into 
effect. Provided that an appeal from any order passed u nder this Section  shall lie to the Revenue 
Commissioner, whose decision sha
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL LAND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1859.pdf - page 14]
rom any order passed u nder this Section  shall lie to the Revenue 
Commissioner, whose decision shall be final.  
LVII. Default in making deposit to be considered a contempt .—-A default to make good a bid by 
making the deposit required by Section XXII of this Act, shall be held to be a  contempt. 
LVIII. Government may purchase at a sale. —When an estate is put up for sale under this Act for 
the recovery of arrears of revenue due thereon, if there be no bid, the Collector or other Officer as 
aforesaid may purchase the estate on account  of the Government for one Rupee, or if the highest bid be  
insufficient to cover the said arrears and those subsequently accruing up to the date of sale, the Collector 
or other Officer as aforesaid may take or purchase the estate on account of the Government at the highest 
amount bid; in both which cases the Government shall acquire the property subject to the provisions of 
this Act.  
LIX. Fees and charges demandable by Collector. —The Collector on the part of the Government 
shall be entitled to demand from applicants under Sections  X and XI, Sections XV and XVI, and Sections 
XL, XLIII, and XLIV of this Act, fees not exceeding the rates specified in Schedule B to this Act 
annexed, which schedule shall be taken as part of this Act; and applications under the s aid Sections shall 
not be received unless the said fees are tendered therewith.  
LX. Regulations VII. 1822 and IX. 1825 to be in force in certain estates .—The provisions of 
Regulation VII, 1822 and Regulation IX. 1825 shall be in force in every estate in a ny part of which a 
measurement, survey, or local enquiry may be made under this Act; and in every estate purchased or 
taken on account of Government under this Act.  
LXI. Interpretation .—In the construction of this Act the word “Collector” shall include a Deputy 
Collector or other Officer exercising by the authority of Government the powers of a Collector or deputy 
Collector.  
LXII. Application of Act 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL LAND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1859.pdf - page 14]
 authority of Government the powers of a Collector or deputy 
Collector.  
LXII. Application of Act .—The operation of this Act shall be confined to such parts of the Lower 
Provinces in the Presidency of Fort William in Bengal as are or shall be subject to the general Regulations 
of that Presidency.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL LAND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1859.pdf - page 15]
15 
 SCHEDULE A.  
I certify that A. B has purchased under Act No. XI of 1859 the mehal (or share of a mehal) specified 
below, standing in the towjee of the district of and that his purchase took effect on the day of (being the 
day after that fixed for last day of payment). 
(Signed) D E  
 Collector  
 
 
__________  
 
SPECIFICATION.  
(if of an entire Mehal.)  
 
 
 
Towjee number  
Name of Mehal  
Name  of the former proprietor  
Sudder jumma  
 
(if of a Share of a Mehal.)  
 
Towjee number of the entire Mehal  
Name of the entire Mehal  
Sudder Jumma of  the entire Mehal  
Description of the share sold  
Subordinate Towjee number of the share sold  
Name of the former proprietor of the share sold  
Sudder  Jumma for which the share sold is separately liable.  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL LAND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1859.pdf - page 16]
16 
 SCHEDULE B.  
Fees.  
 
For filling an application under Section X or Section XI for opening a separate account for a share of 
an entire estate.  
If the annual jumma of the share do not exceed 250 Rupees, …………..25    0   0  
If the annual jumma of the share exceed 250 Rupees and do not exceed 1000 Rupees, at the rate of ten 
per cent upon the jumma. 
If the annual jumma of the share exceed 1,000 Rupees, at the rate of ten per cent upon 1,000 Rupees,  
and two per cent upon all above that amount.  
For filing an application for a deposit of money or Government Securities under Section XV, half 
percent. on the amount deposited.  
For any interest on Government Securities so deposited, drawn by the Collector, half per cent. of the 
amount drawn.  
For filling an application for withdrawal of a deposit under Section XVI, half per cent . of the amount 
withdrawn.  
For filing an application under Section XL, XLIII, or XLIV for the registration of an under -tenure or  
farm.  
If the annual rent of the under -tenure do not exceed 500 Rupees, 25   0   0  
If the annual rent of the under -tenure exceed 500 Rupees and do not exceed 1,000 Rupees, at the rate 
of five per cent. upon the rent.  
If the annual rent of the under -tenur e exceed 1,000 Rupees, at the above rate up to 1,000 Rupees, and 
at one per cent. upon all above that amount.  
 
 
___________  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL MILITARY POLICE ACT, 1892.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE BENGAL MILITARY POLICE ACT, 1892  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Enrolment and discharge of Military Police -officers . 
4. Classes and grades of Military Police -officers.  
5. More heinous offences . 
6. Less heinous offences.  
7. Minor punishments . 
8. Place of imprisonment . 
9. Saving of prosecutions under other laws.  
10. Conferment of magisterial powers on Police -officers.  
11. Disciplinary and other powers of Commandants and Second s-in-Command of Military Police 
otherwise than in respect of Military Police . 
12. Privileges of Commandants and Seconds -in-Command of Military Police as Police -officers . 
13. Power to make rules.  
 THE SCHEDULE.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL MILITARY POLICE ACT, 1892.pdf - page 2]
2 
 THE BENGAL MILITARY POLICE ACT, 1892  
ACT NO. V OF 1892  
PASSED BY THE GOVERNOR  GENER NAL  OF INDIA IN  COUNCIL . 
(Received the assent of the Governor General on the 25 th March, 1892 .) 
________  
An Act for the Regulation of the Bengal Military Police.  
WHEREAS  it is expedient to make provision for the better regulation of the Bengal Reserve Poli ce; 
It is hereby enacted as follows: — 
1. Title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Bengal Military Police                     
Act, 1892.  
(2) It extends to the whole of the territories subject to the Lieutenant -Governor of Bengal: and  
(3) It shall come into force on such day as the Local Government may, by notification in the Calcutta 
Gazette, appoint in this behalf.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless there is something repugnant in the subject or context, — 
 (1) “Military Police -officer” means a person appointed to the Bengal Police Force under section 7 of 
Act V of 1861, who has signed the statement in the schedule to this act, in accordance with the provisions 
of this Act:  
(2) “active service” means service aga inst hostile tribes or other persons in the filed:  
(3) “District Magistrate” includes a Deputy Commissioner, an Assistant  Commissioner in charge of a 
sub-division, and the Superintendent of the South  Lushai Hill:  
(4) “Commandant” means a person appointed b y the Local Government to be a Commandant of 
Military Police and includes a District Superintendent of Police and an Assistant  District Superintendent of 
Police in charge of the civil police of a district or of a sub -division:  
(5) “Second -in-Command” means  a person appointed by the Local Government to be a Second -in-
Command of Military Police, and includes an Assistant  District Superintendent of Police not in charge of 
the civil police of a district or of a sub -division : and  
(6) the expression “reason to be lieve,” “criminal force,”  “assault,” “fraudulently” and “voluntarily 
causing h
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL MILITARY POLICE ACT, 1892.pdf - page 2]
ssion “reason to be lieve,” “criminal force,”  “assault,” “fraudulently” and “voluntarily 
causing hurt” have the meaning assigned to them respectively  in the Indian Penal Code  (XV of 1860) . 
3. Enrolment and discharge of Military Police -officers .—(1) Before an officer appointed to the 
Bengal Police Force under section 7 of Act V of 1861 is appointed to be a Military Police -officer, the 
statement in the schedule shall be read and if necessary explained to him in the presence of a Magistrate, 
Commandant or  Second -in-Comma nd, and shall be signed by him in acknowledgment of its having been 
so read to him.  
(2) Notwithstanding any notice given under  section 9 of Act V of 1861, a Military Police -officer shall 
not be entitled to be discharged from the Bengal Police Force except in accordance with the terms of the 
statement which he has signed under this Act.  
4. Classes and grades of Military Police -officers .—(1) There may be all or any of the following 
classes of Military Police -officers, which shall take rank in the order mentio ned, namely:  — 
(i) subadars -major,  
(ii) subadars,  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL MILITARY POLICE ACT, 1892.pdf - page 3]
3 
 (iii) jamadars,  
(iv) havildars -major,  
(v) havildars,  
(iv) naiks,  
(vii) buglers, and  
(viii) sepoys,  
and such grades in each class as the Local Government may direct.  
(2) The expression “superior officer” in this Act means in relation to any Police -officer — 
(a) any officer of a higher class than or of a higher grade in the same class as himself, and  
(b) any Second -in-Command, Commandant or District Magistrate.  
5. More heinous offences .—A Military Police -officer who — 
(a) begins, excites, causes or joins in any mutiny  or sedition or, being present at any mutiny  or 
sedition, does not use  his utmost endeavors to suppress it, or, knowing or having  reason to believe in 
the existence of any  mutiny, or of any intention to mutiny,  does not without delay give information  
thereof to his commanding or other superior  officer; or  
(b) uses, or attempts to use, criminal force to or commits an assault on, his superior officer, whether 
on or off duty; or  
(c) shamefu lly abandons or delivers up any garrison, fortress, post or guard which is committed to 
his charge or which it is his duty to defend; or  
(d) directly or indirectly holds correspondence with, or assists or relieves, any person in arms 
against the State, or omits to discover  immediately to his commanding or other  superior officer any 
such corresponde nce coming to his knowledge: or  
who, while on active service, — 
(e) disobeys the lawful command of his superior officer; or  
(f) deserts the service; or  
(g) being a sentry, sleeps upon his post, or quits it without being regularly relieved or without              
leave; or  
(h) without authority leaves his commanding officer, or his post or party, to go in search of plunder; 
or 
(i) quits his guard, picquet, p arty or patrol without being regularly relieved or without leave; or  
(j) uses criminal force to, or commits an assault  on, any person bringing provisions or other 
necessaries to camp or quarters, or forces s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL MILITARY POLICE ACT, 1892.pdf - page 3]
n assault  on, any person bringing provisions or other 
necessaries to camp or quarters, or forces safeguard, or without aut hority breaks into any h ouse or any 
other place for plunder, or plunders, destroys or damages any property of any kind; or  
(k) intentionally causes or spreads a false alarm in action, camp, garrison or quarters,  
shall be punished with transportation for life or for a term of not  less than seven years, or with imprisonment 
for a term m uch may extend to fourteen years, or with fine w hich may extend to th ree months ’ pay, or with 
fine to that  extent in addition to such  sentence of transportation or imprisonment, as the case  may be, as 
may be passed upon  him under this section.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL MILITARY POLICE ACT, 1892.pdf - page 4]
4 
 6. Less heinous offences .—A Military Police -officer who — 
(a) is in a state of, intoxication when on or for any  duty or on parade or on the line of march; or  
(b) strikes or attempts to force any sentry; or,  
(c) being in command of a guard, picquet or patrol, refuses to receive any prisoner duly committed 
to his charge, or without proper authority releases any prisoner, or neg ligently suffers any prisoner to 
escape; or,  
(d) being under arrest or in confinement, leaves his arrest or confinement before he is set at  liberty 
by proper authority; or  
(e) is grossly insubordinate or insolent to his superior officer in the execution of his office;  or 
(f) refuses to superintend or assist in the making  of any field -work or  other work of any description  
ordered to be made either in quarters  or in the field; or  
(g) strikes or otherwise ill -uses any Military  Police -officer subordinate to him in rank  or position; 
or 
(h) being in command at any post or on the march,  and receiving a complaint that any one  under 
his command has beaten or ot herwise  maltreated or oppressed any person, or has  committed any riot 
or trespass, fails, on  proof of the truth of the complaint, to have  due reparation made as far as possible 
to the inj ured person and to report t he case to  the proper authority; or  
(i) designedly or through neglect injures or loses, or  fraudulently disposes of, his arms, clothes,  
tools, e quipments, ammunition, accoutrements  or Military Police necessaries, or any  such articles 
entrusted to him or belonging  to any other person; or  
(j) malingers, or feigns or produces disease or  infirmity in himself, or intentionally delays  his cure, 
or aggravates his disease or infirmity; or  
(k) with intent to render himself or a ny other person unfit for service, voluntarily causes  hurt to 
himself or any other person; or   
who, while not on active service,  — 
(l) disobeys t he lawful command of his superior  officer; or   
(m) p
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL MILITARY POLICE ACT, 1892.pdf - page 4]
le not on active service,  — 
(l) disobeys t he lawful command of his superior  officer; or   
(m) plunders, destroys or damages any property  of any kind; or   
(n) being  a sentry, sleeps upon his post or quits it  without being regularly relieved or wit hout                 
leave; or  
(o) deserts  the service;   
shall be punished with imprisonm ent for a ter m which may extend to one year, or wit h fine which  may 
extend to three months' pay, or with both.  
7. Minor punishments. —(1) A District Magistrate, Commandant or Second -in-Command,  or an 
officer not being below the rank of subadar commanding a separate detachment or an outpost or in 
temporary com mand at the headquarters  of a d istrict during the absence of the District  Magistrate,  
Commandant and Seco nd-in-Com mand, may, without a for mal trial, award to any Military  Police -officer 
who is subject to his autho rity any of the following punish ments for the commiss ion of any petty offence 
against discipline which is not otherwise  provided for in this Act, or whi ch is not of a sufficiently serious 
nature to call for a prosecution  before a Crimi nal Court, that is to say — 
(a) imprisonm ent to the extent of seven days in the quarter -guard or such other place as may be 
considered suitable, with forfeiture of all pay and allowances during its co ntinuance;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL MILITARY POLICE ACT, 1892.pdf - page 5]
5 
 (b) punishment drill, extra guard, fatigue, or other duty, not exceeding thirty days in duration, wit h 
or without confineme nt to quarters . 
(2) Any one of these punishments may be awarded separately or in co mbination with any one or more 
of the others.  
8. Place of imprisonment .—A person sentenced under this Act to imprison ment for  a period not 
exceeding three months shall,  when he is also di smissed from the Bengal Police  Force, be imprisoned in 
the nearest or such other jail  as the Local Government may, by general or special  order, direct; but, when 
he is not also dismissed from  that force, he may, if the convicting officer or District  Magist rate so directs, 
be confined in the quarter -guard or such other plac e as the convicting officer or District  Magistrate may 
consider suitable.  
9. Saving of prosecutions under other laws. —(1) Nothing in this Act shall prevent any person from 
being prosecuted  under Act V of 1861, or under any order or rule made under t hat Act or under any other 
enactment for the time being in force for any act or omission punishable hereunder, or from  being liable if 
so prosecuted to any other or higher penalty than is provid ed for that act or omission by this Act:  
(2) Provided that no person shall be punished twice for the same offence.  
10. Conferment of magisterial powers on Police -officers .—Notwithstanding anything in                     
Act V   of 1861 or in any  other enact ment for the time being in force, the Local Government may invest any 
Police -officer not below the rank of Commandant with the powers of  Magistrate of any class for the 
purpose of enquiring into or trying any offence committed by a Military Police -officer  and punishable under 
Act V of 1861 or this Act.  
11. Disciplinary and other powers of Commandants and Second s-in-Command of Military Police 
otherwise than in respect of Military Police .—Subject to such rules as the Local Government may make 
in this behalf,  a Comm
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL MILITARY POLICE ACT, 1892.pdf - page 5]
of Military Police .—Subject to such rules as the Local Government may make 
in this behalf,  a Commandant or Second -in Command of Military Police shall have, with respect to Police -
officers appointed to the Bengal Police Force under section 7 of  Act V of 1861, who are not Military Police -
officers, the same disciplinary po wers as a District Superi ntendent of Police has with respect to them under 
that section . 
12. Privileges of Commandants and Seconds -in-Command of Military Police as Police -officers .— 
A Commandant or Second -in-Command of Military Police shall be entitled to all the privileges which a 
Police -officer has under sections 42 and 43 of Act V of 1861, section 125 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872  
(I of 1872), and any other enactment for the time being in force.  
13. Power to make rules .—The Local Government may, as regards the Military Police  make such 
orders and rules consistent with th is Act as it thinks expedient.  
________  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL MILITARY POLICE ACT, 1892.pdf - page 6]
6 
 THE SCHUDULE.  
STATEMENT.  
(See sections  2 and 3.) 
AFTER  you have served for three years in the Bengal Military Police, you may, at any time when not 
on active service, apply for your discharge, through the officer to whom you may be subordinate, to a 
Commandant of Military Police or to the District Magistrate of the district in which you may be serving, 
and you will be granted your discharge after two months from the date of your application unless your 
discharge would cause the vacancies in the Bengal Military Police to exceed one -tenth of the sanctioned 
stren gth; in that case you must remain until this objection is waived by competent authority or removed. 
But when on active service you have no claim to a discharge, and you must remain and do your duty until 
the necessity for retaining you in the Bengal Milita ry Police ceases, when you may make your application 
in the manner hereinbefore prescribed. In the event of your re -enlistment, after you have been discharged, 
you will have no claim to reckon for pension or any other purpose your service previous to your discharge.  
(Signature of Police -officer in acknowledgement of the above  A. B.  
       having been read to him)  
 
Signed in my presence after I had ascertained that  C.D. Magistrate, Commandant  
                                                                                              Second -in-Command . 
A. B. understood the purport of what he signed.  
 
  
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL, AGRA AND ASSAM CIVIL COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE BENGAL, AGRA AND ASSAM CIVIL COURTS ACT, 1887  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Title, extent and commencement.  
2. Repeal.  
CHAPTER II 
CONSTITUTION OF CIVIL COURTS  
3. Classes of Courts.  
4. Number of District Judges, Subordinate Judges and Munsifs.  
5. [Repealed. ]. 
6. Vacancies among District or Subordinate Judges.  
7. [Repealed. ]. 
8. Additional Judges.  
9. Administrative control  of courts.  
10. Temporary charge of District Court.  
11. Transfer of  proceedings on vacation of office of Subordinate Judge.  
12. [Repealed. ]. 
13. Power to fix local limits of jurisdiction of Courts.  
14. Place of sitting of Courts.  
15. Vacations of Courts.  
16. Seals of Courts.  
17. Continuance of proceedings of Courts ceasing to have jurisdiction.  
CHAPTER III 
ORDINARY  JURISIDICTION  
18. Extent of original jurisdiction of District or Subordinate Judge . 
19. Extent of jurisdiction of Munsif.  
20. Appeals from District and Additional Judges.  
21. Appeals from Subordinate Judge s and Munsifs.  
CHAPTER IV  
SPECIAL  JURISDICTION  
22. Power to transfer to Subordinate Judges appeals from Munsifs.  
23. Exercise by Subordinate Judge or Munsif of jurisdiction of District Court in certain 
proceedings.  
24. Disposal of proceedings referred to in last foregoing section.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL, AGRA AND ASSAM CIVIL COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 2]
2 
 SECTIONS  
25. Power to invest Subordinate Judges and Munsifs with Small Cause Court jurisdiction.  
CHAPTER V . —[MISFEASANCE .] Rep. by the A. O. 1937.  
26. [Repealed .]. 
27. [Repealed .]. 
28. [Repealed .]. 
29. [Repealed .]. 
CHAPTER VI . —[MINISTERIAL  OFFICERS .] Rep. by the A. O. 1937.  
30. [Repealed .]. 
31. [Repealed .]. 
32. [Repealed .]. 
33. [Repealed .]. 
34. [Repealed .]. 
35. [Repealed .]. 
CHAPTER VII  
SUPPLEMENTAL  PROVISIONS  
36. Power to confer powers of Civil Courts on officers.  
37. Certain decisions to be according to Native law.  
88. Judges not to try suits in which they are interested.  
39. Subordination of Courts to District Court.  
40. Application of Act to State Courts of Small Causes . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL, AGRA AND ASSAM CIVIL COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 3]
3 
 THE BENGAL, AGRA AND ASSAM CIVIL COURTS ACT, 1887  
ACT NO. 12 OF 18871 
[11th March, 1887.]  
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to Civil Courts in Bengal, the 
North -Western Provinces and Assam.  
WHEREAS  it is expedient to consolidate and amend the law relating to Civil Courts in 
Bengal, the North -Western Provinces and Assam; It is hereby enacted as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Title, extent and commencement. —(1)This Act may be called the Bengal, 2[Agra] and Assam 
Civil Courts Act, 1887.  
(2) It extends to the territories 3[which were on the 11th March, 1887,] respectively 
administered by the Lieutenant -Governor of Bengal, the Lieutenant -Governor of the North -
Western Provinces and the Chief Commissioner of Assam, except such portions of those 
territories as for the time bein g are not subject to the ordinary civil jurisdiction of the High 
Courts 4***; and  
(3) It shall come into force on the first day of July, 1887.  
2. Repeal .—5*           *                     *            *                        * 
(2)6*** all Courts constituted, appointments, nominations, rules and orders made, 
jurisdiction and powers conferred and lists published under the Bengal Civil Courts Act, 
1871 (6 of 1871)7, or any enactment thereby repealed, or purporting expressly or impliedly 
to have been so constituted, made, conferred and published, shall be deemed to have been 
respectively constituted, made, conferred and published under this Act; and  
(3)Any enactment or document referring to the Bengal Civil Courts Act, 1871 (6 of 1871)7, or to any 
enactment thereby repealed, shall be construed to refer to this Act or to the corresponding portion thereof.  
  
                                                   
1. This Act has been declared by notification under the Scheduled Districts Act, 1874 (14 of 1874), s. 3, to be in 
force in the following Scheduled Districts, namely: —the districts of Hazaribagh, Ranchi, Palamau and 
Manbhum, and 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL, AGRA AND ASSAM CIVIL COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 3]
lowing Scheduled Districts, namely: —the districts of Hazaribagh, Ranchi, Palamau and 
Manbhum, and ParganasDhalbhum, the Chaibbas sa Municipality, and the Porahat Estate in the district of 
Singhbhum in the Chota Nagpur Division. It has also been declared in force in the Angul District by the Angul 
Laws Regulation, 1936 (5 of 1936), s. 3 and Sch.  
 It is in force in the SonthalParganas  for certain purposes: see the SonthalParganas Justice Regulation, 1893 (5 of 
1893).  
 It has been extended to the Sambalpur district by the Sambalpur Civil Courts Act, 1906 (Ben. 4 of 1906); to the 
areas transferred to the Province of Orissa from the Madra s Presidency and the Central Provinces by the Orissa 
Laws Regulation, 1936 (1 of 1936), s. 4; and to the District of Koraput and certain areas of the Ganjam Agency, 
by the Koraput and Ganjam Agency Repealing and Extension of Laws Regulation, 1951 (Orissa R egu. 5 of 1951).  
 It has been amended in its application to — 
 West Bengal, by Ben. Act 19 of 1935, West Ben. Acts 59 of 1950, 16 of 1957, 26 of 1969, 55 and 58 of 1978;  
 Bihar and Orissa, by B. & O Act 4 of 1922;  
 Agra, by U.P. Acts 5 of 1925 and 4 of 1936;  
 Assam, by Assam Acts 6 of 1935, 17 of 1974 and 1 of 1979;  
 Bihar, by Bihar Act 12 of 1960 and Uttar Pradesh by U.P. Acts 14 of 1970 and 57 of 1976.  
2. Subs. by Act 16 of 1911, s. 2, for “North -Western Provinces ”. 
3 Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “for the time being ”. 
4. The words “and except the Jhansi Division ” rep. by Act 20 of 1890, s. 9.  
5.   Sub-section ( 1) rep. by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and the First Schedule.  
6. The word “But” rep.s. 2 and the First Schedule, ibid. 
7. Act 6 of 1871 was rep. by s. 2 of  this Act.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL, AGRA AND ASSAM CIVIL COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 4]
4 
 CHAPTER II  
CONSTITUTION   OF  CIVIL COURTS  
3. Classes of Courts. —There shall be the following classes of Civil Courts under this Act, namely: — 
(1) the Court of the District Judge;  
(2) the Court of the Additional Judge;  
(3) the Court of the Subordinate Judge; and  
(4) the Court of the Munsif.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Bihar  
Amendment in Section -3 of the Bengal, Agra and Assam Civil Courts Act, 1887 (Act 12 of 
1887).- In Bengal, Agra and Assam Civil Courts Act 1887 (Act, 12 of 1887) (herein after referred to as 
the said Act) in Clause -(3) of Section -3 for the words "Subordinate Judge" words and bracket "Civil 
Judge (Senior Division)" and in Clause (4) for the word s "Munsif " the words and bracket "Civil Judge 
(Junior Division)" shall be substituted"  
[Vide  Bihar Act 14 of 2014, s. 2]  
1[4. Number of District Judges, Subordinate Judges and Munsifs. —The State Government may 
alter the number of District Judges, Subordinate Judges and Munsifs now fixed.] 
5.[Number of Munsifs. ] Rep. by the Decentralization Act, 1914 (4 of 1914), s. 2 and the Schedule, 
PartI. 
6.Vacancies among District or Subordinate Judges. —(1) Wheneverthe office of District 
Judge or Subordinate Judge is vacant by reason of the death, resignation or removal of the Judge or 
other cause, or whenever 2(an increase in the number of District or Subordinate Judges has been 
made under the  provisions  of section 4], the 3[State Government or, as the case may be, the High 
Court] may fill up the vacancy or appoint the additional District Judges or Subordinate Judges 
4***. 
(2) Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent a State Government from a ppointing a 
District Judge or Subordinate Judge to discharge, for such period as it thinks fit, in addition to the 
functions devolving on him as such District Judge or Subordinate Judge, all or any of the functions 
of another District Judge or Subordinate Judge, as the case may be.  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 6 of A
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL, AGRA AND ASSAM CIVIL COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 4]
strict Judge or Subordinate Judge, as the case may be.  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 6 of Act XII of 1887. —In section 6 of the Bengal, Agra  and Assam Civil 
Court Act, 1887, herein after in this chapter referred to as the principal Act, in sub -section (2), for 
the words “state G overnment” the words “High Court” shall be substituted.  
[Vide  Uttar Pradesh Act 17 of 1991, s. 2]  
7.[Vacancies among Munsifs. ]Rep. by the A. O. 1937.  
8.Additional Judges. —(1) When the business pending before any District Judge requires the aid 
of Additional Judges for its speedy disposal, the State Government may, 5[having consulted] the High 
Court 6***, appoint such Additional Judges as may be requisite.  
                                                   
1. Subs. by 38 of 1920, s. 2 and the First Schedule, for section 4.  
2. Subs. by s. 2 and the First Schedule, ibid.,for “the G.G. in C. has sanctioned an increase of the number of District Judges or 
Subordinate Judges”.  
3. Subs. by the A. O. 1937, for “L. G.”.  
4. The words “as the case may be”rep., ibid. 
5. Subs., ibid., for “upon the recommendation of”.  
6. The words “and with the previous sanction of the G. G. in C.”rep. by Act 16 of 1911, s. 3.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL, AGRA AND ASSAM CIVIL COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 5]
5 
 (2)Additional Judges so appointed shall discharge any of the functions of a District Judge which the 
District  Judge may assign to them, and, in the discharge of those functions, they shall exercise the same 
powers as the District Judge.  
9.Administrative cont rol of Courts. —Subject  to the superintendence of the High Court, the District 
Judge shall have administrative control over all the Civil Courts under this Act within the local limits of 
his jurisdiction.  
10. Temporary charge of District Court. —(1) In the e vent of the death, resignation or removal 
of the District Judge, or of his being incapacitated by illness or otherwise for the performance of his 
duties, or of his absence from the place at which his Court is held, the Additional Judge, or, if an 
Additiona l Judge is not present at that place, the senior Subordinate Judge present thereat, shall, 
without relinquishing his ordinary duties, assume charge of the off ice of the District Judge, and t hat 
continue in charge thereof until the office is resumed by the D istrict Judge or assumed by an officer 
appointed thereto.  
(2) While in charge of the office of the District Judge, the Additional Judge or Subordinate Judge, as 
the case may be, may, subject to any rules which the High Court may make in this behalf, exerci se any of 
the powers of the District Judge.  
11. Transfer of proceedings on vacation of office of Subordinate Judge. —(1) In the event of 
the death, resignation or removal of a Subordinate Judge, or of his being incapacitated by illness or 
otherwise for the performance of his duties, or of his absence from the place at which his Court is 
held, the District Judge may transfer all or any of the proceedings pending in the Court of the 
Subordinate Judge either to his own Court or to any Court under his administra tive control competent 
to dispose of them.  
(2) Proceedings transferred under sub -section (1)shall be disposed of as if they had been instituted in 
the Court to
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL, AGRA AND ASSAM CIVIL COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 5]
ansferred under sub -section (1)shall be disposed of as if they had been instituted in 
the Court to which they are so transferred:  
(3) Provided that the District Judge may re -transfer to the Court  of the Subordinate Judge or his 
successor any proceedings transferred under sub -section (1)to his own or any other Court.  
(4) For the purposes of proceedings which are not pending in the Court of the Subordinate Judge 
on the occurrence of an event referred to in sub -section (1),and with respect to which that Court has 
exclusive jurisdiction, the District Judge may exercise all or  any of the jurisdiction of that Court.  
12. [Temporary charge of office of Munsif. ]Rep. by the A.O. 1937.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment  of Act no. 12 of 1887.— In the  Bengal,  Agra  and Assam  Civil Courts  Act, 
1887  hereinafter  referred  to as the principal  Act,— 
(a) in Section 3,  4, 6, 10, 11, 13, 18, 21, 22, 23, 24 and 25, for the words  ‘‘Civil  
Judge’’  and ‘‘Civil  Judges’’  wherever  occurring,  the words  ‘‘Civil  Judge  (Senior  Division)’’  
and ‘‘Civil  Judges  (Senior  Division)’’  shall  respectively  be substituted;  
(b) in Sections  3, 4, 13, 19, 21, 22, 23, 24 and 25, for the words ‘‘Munsif’’ an 
‘‘Munsifs’’ wherever occurring, the words  ‘‘Civil  Judge  (Junior  Division)’’  and ‘‘Civil 
Judges  (Junior Division)’’  shall  respectively  be substituted;  
(c) for the existing  marginal  headings  to the sections  shown  in Column I of the table below, 
the marginal headings as shown  in Column  II thereof  shall  be substituted,  namely  :— 
Sect  ion Marginal  headings  as hereby  substituted  
4 Number  of District  Judges;  Civil  Judges  (Senior  
Division) and  Civil  Judges  (Junior Division) 
6 Vacancies  among  District  or Civil  Judge  (Senior  Division)  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL, AGRA AND ASSAM CIVIL COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 6]
6 
 11 Transfer  of proceedings  on vacation  of office  of Civil  Judge  (Senior  
Division)  
18 Extent  of original  jurisdiction  of District  or Civil  Judge  
(Senior  Division)  
19 Extent  of  jurisdiction of  Civil  Judge  (Junior  Division) 
21 Appeals from Civil Judges (Senior Division) and Civil  
Judges  (Junior Division) 
22 Power  to transfer  to Civil  Judges  (Senior  Division)  appeal from  Civil  Judges  (Junior  Division) 
23 Exercise  by Civil  Judge  (Senior  Division)  or Civil  Judge  (Junior  division)  
of  jurisdiction  of  District Court  in certain  proceedings.  
25 Power  to invest  Civil  Judges  (Senior  Division)  and Civil  Judges  (Junior 
Division)  with  Small  Cause Court  Jurisdiction.  
[Vide  Uttar Pradesh Act 25 of 1995, s. 2]  
Bihar  
Amendment of section 12 of 1887. — In the said Act, the word "Subordinate Judge" and the word 
"Munsif" wherever used shall be substituted by the words and bracket "Civil Judge (Senior Division)" 
and "Civil Judge (Junior Division)" respectively.  
[Vide Bihar Act 14 of 2014, s. 3]  
13. Power to fix local limits of jurisdiction of Courts. —(1)The State Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, fix and alter  the local limits of the jurisdiction of any Civil Court 
under this Act.  
(2) If the same local jurisdiction is assigned to two or more Subordinate Judges or to two or more 
Munsifs, the District Judge may assign to each of them such civil business cognizabl e by the Subordinate 
Judge or Munsif, as the case may be, as, subject to any General or special orders of the High Court, he 
thinks fit.  
(3) When civil business arising in any local area is assigned by the District Judge under sub -
section ( 2) to one of two or more Subordinate Judges, or to one of two or more Munsifs, a decree or 
order passed by the Subordinate Judge or Munsif shall not be invalid by reason only of the case in 
which it was made having arisen wholly or in part  in a place beyond t he local ar
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL, AGRA AND ASSAM CIVIL COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 6]
y of the case in 
which it was made having arisen wholly or in part  in a place beyond t he local are a if that place is 
within the local limits fixed by the State Government under sub -section (1). 
(4) A Judge of a Court of Sma ll Causes appointed to be also a Subordinate Judge or Munsif is a 
Subordinate Judge or Munsif, as the case may be, with in the meaning of this section.  
(5) The present local limits of the jurisdiction of every Civil Court under this Act shall be deemed to 
have been fixed under this section.  
14. Place of sitting of Courts. —(1)The State Government may, by notification inthe O fficial 
Gazette, fix and alter the place or places at which any Civil Court under this Act is to be held.  
(2)All pl aces at which any such Courts ar e now held shall be deemed to have been fixed under this 
section.  
15. Vacations of Courts. —(1) Subject to such orders as may be made 1*** 2[*** by the State 
Government 3***] the High Court shall prepare a list of days to be observed in each year as close 
holidays in the Civil Courts.  
(2) The list shall be published in the official Gazette.  
                                                   
1. The words “by the G.G. in C., in the case of  the High Court at Calcutta, and”rep. by the A. O. 1937.  
2.  Ins. by Act 38 of 1920, s. 2 and the First Schedule.  
3. The words “in other cases” rep. by the A.O. 1937.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL, AGRA AND ASSAM CIVIL COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 7]
7 
 (3) A judicial act done by a Civil Court on a day specified in the list shall not be invalid by reason 
only of its having been done on that day.  
16. Seals of Courts. —Every Civil Court under this Act shall use a seal of such form and dimensions 
as are prescribed by  the State Government.  
17. Continuance of proceeding of Courts ceasing to have jurisdiction. —(1) Where any 
Civil Court under this Act has from any cause ceased to have jurisdiction with respect to any 
case, any proceeding in relation to that case which, if  that Court had not ceased to have 
jurisdiction, might have been had therein may be had in the Court to which the business of the 
former Court has been transferred.  
(2)Nothing in this section applies to cases for which provision is made in section 623 or 
section 649 of the Code of Civil Procedure1 (14 of 1882) or in any other enactment for the 
time being in force.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Assam  
Amendment of section 17 .—In sub -section (2) of section 17 of the said Act, for the words and 
figures "in Section 623 or Section 649 of the Code of Civil Procedure" the words and figures "in  sections 
36, 37 and 114  of, and Rule 1 of Order XLVII in Schedule I to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908" shall 
be substituted . 
[Vide Assam Act 6 of 1935, s. 3]  
Bihar  
Amendment of Section 17 of Act XII of 1887 .— In sub -section (2) of Section 17 of the Bengal, 
Agra and Assam Civil Courts Act, 1887 (XII of 1887) (hereinafter referred to as the said Act), for the 
words and figures "in Section 623 or Section 649 of the Code of Civil Pro cedure" the words and figures 
"in Sections 36, 37 and 114 of, and Rule 1 of Order XLVII in Schedule I to the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908" shall be  substituted.  
[Vide Bihar Act 12 of 1960, s. 2]  
CHAPTER III  
ORDINARY JURISDICTION  
18. Extent of original jurisdiction of District or Subordinate Judge. —Save as otherwise 
provided by any enactment for the time being in force, the jurisdiction of a District Ju
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL, AGRA AND ASSAM CIVIL COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 7]
 otherwise 
provided by any enactment for the time being in force, the jurisdiction of a District Judge or 
Subordinate Judge extends, subject to the provisions of section 15 of the Code of Civil 
Procedure2 (14 of 1882), to all original suits for the time being cognizable by Civil Courts.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Assam  
Amendment of section 18 and 39 .—In Section 18 of the Said Act, after the words "Code of Civil 
Procedure", the figures "1908" shall be inserted . 
[Vide Assam Act 6 of 1935, s. 4]  
  
                                                   
1. In Bengal and Assam, for the words and figures “in s. 623 or s. 649 of the Code of Civ il Procedure” the words 
and figures “in ss. 36, 37 and 114 of, and rule 1 of Order XLVII in Sch. I to, the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,” 
have been subs. by Bengal Act 19 of 1935 and Assam Act 6 of 1935, respectively. In Agra, Bihar and Orissa, 
also, the reference to the old enactment should be construed in the same way: see the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908 (Act 5 of 1908), s. 158.  
2. In Bengal and Assam, the figures “1908,” have been ins. at this place by Bengal Act 19 of 1935 and Assam Act 6 
of 1935, re spectively. In Agra, Bihar and Orissa.also, the reference to the old enactment should be construed in 
the same way: see the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908), s. 158.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL, AGRA AND ASSAM CIVIL COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 8]
8 
 Bihar  
Amendment of Section 18 of Act XII of 1887.  - In Section 18 of the said Act, after the words "Code of 
Civil Procedure", the figures "1908" shall be  inserted.  
[Vide Bihar Act 12 of 1960, s. 3]  
119.Extent of jurisdiction of Munsif. —(1) Save as afor esaid, and subject to the provi sions 
of sub -section ( 2),the jurisdiction of a Munsif extends to all like suits of which the value does 
not exceed one thousand rupees. 
(2)The State Government may, on the recommendation of the High Court, direct, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, with respect to any Munsif named therein, that his 
jurisdiction shall extend to all like suits of such value not exceeding two thousand rup eesas  
ma y b e specified in the not ification:  
2[Provided that the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, delegate 
to the High Court its powers under this section.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Assam  
Amendment of section 19 .—In sub -section (2) of section 19 of the said Act, for the words 
beginning with “that his jurisdiction” and ending with “in the notification” the following shall 
be substituted, namely: - 
“(a) that his jurisdiction shall extend to all like suits of such value not exceeding two 
thousand rupees as may be specified in the notification, or  
(b) that so long as he holds Court at a place where the Co urt of a Subordinate Judge is 
held his jurisdiction shall extend to all like suits of such value  not exceeding three 
thousand rupees as may be so specified.”  
[Vide Assam Act 6 of 1935, s. 5]  
Amendment of section 19 .—In the Principal Act, in Section 19 - 
(i) in sub -section (1), for the words “seven thousand rupees” , the words “fifty thousand rupees” 
shall be substituted.  
(ii) in sub -section  (2), for the words “twenty five thousand rupees”  the words “two lakhs rupees” 
shall be substituted.  
[Vide Assam Act 44 of 2005 , s. 2]  
Amendment of section 19 .—In section 19 of the principal Act, -- 
(1) in sub -section (1), for the
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL, AGRA AND ASSAM CIVIL COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 8]
 
Amendment of section 19 .—In section 19 of the principal Act, -- 
(1) in sub -section (1), for the words “one thousand  rupees” at the end the words “ three thousa nd 
rupees” shall be substituted:  
(2) for sub -section (2) the following shall be substituted, namely: - 
“(2) The State Government may, on the recommendation of the High Court, direct, by 
notification in the Official Gaze tte with respect to any Munsif named therein that his jurisdiction shall 
extend to all like suits of such value not exceeding five thousand rupees as may be specified in the 
notification:  
                                                   
1. S. 19 does not apply to Honorary Munsifs and Benches, in the U. P.: see the U. P. Honorary Munsifs Act, 1896 
(U.P. 2 of 1896), s. 13. This section has been diversely amended in Bengal, Bihar and Orissa, Agra and Assam 
by Ben. Act 19 of 1935, s. 5, B. &O. Act 4 of 1922, s. 2, U.P. Act 5 of 1925, ss. 2 and 3, and Assam Act 6 of 
1935, s. 5, respectively.  
2. Ins. by Act 4 of 1914, s. 2 and the Schedule, Part I.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL, AGRA AND ASSAM CIVIL COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 9]
9 
 Provided that the State Government may, by notification in the Offic ial Gazette, delegate to the 
High Court its powers under this section.”  
[Vide Assam 9 of 1965, s. 2] 
Amendment of section 19 .—(1) In section 19 of the principal Act, in sub -section (1), for the words 
“three thousand rupees” the words “seven thousand rupees” shall be substituted.  
(2) In section 19 of the principal act, in sub -section (2) for the words “ten thousand rupees” the words 
“twentyfive thousand rupees” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Assam Act 7 of 1993, s. 2]  
Uttarakhand  
Amendment of sub -section (2) of section 19 .—In sub -section (2) of section 19 of the Bengal, Agra 
and assam Civil Courts Act, 1887 — 
“(2) Words ‘one lac’ for the words ‘twenty  five thousand’ shall be substituted.  
[Vide Uttara nchal Act 20 of 2005, s. 2]  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 19 of act 12 of 1887 .—for section 19 of the Bengal, Agra and Assam Civil 
Courts Act, 1887, hereinafter in this Chapter referred to as the principal Act, the following section shall 
be subs tituted, namely: -- 
“19 (1) Save as aforesaid, and subject to  the provisions of sub -section (2), the jurisdiction of a 
Munsif extends to all like suits of which the value doe s not exceed five thousand rupees.  
(2) The State Government may, on the recommendation of the High Court, direct by notification 
in the officia l Gazette, with respect to any Munsif named therein, that his  jurisdiction  shall extend to 
all like suits of such value not exceeding ten thousand rupees as may be specified in the notification:  
  Provided that the State Government may, the notification i n the official Gazette, delegate to the 
High Court its powers under this section.”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 57 of 1976 , s. 27]  
Amendment of section 19 .—In section 19 of the principal Act, - 
(a) in sub -section (1), for the words "five thousand rupees"  the wor ds "ten thousand rupees" shall be 
substituted;  
(b) for sub -section (2), the fo
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL, AGRA AND ASSAM CIVIL COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 9]
 rupees"  the wor ds "ten thousand rupees" shall be 
substituted;  
(b) for sub -section (2), the following sub -section shall be  substituted namely: - 
"(2) the High Court may direct by notification in the official  Gazette, with respect to any music 
named therein, that his  Jurisd iction shall extend to all like suits of such value not  exceeding twenty 
five thousand rupees as may be specified in  the notification.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 17 of 1991, s. 3]  
Amendment of section 19 of Act no. XII of 1887 .— In section 19 of the Bengal, Agra and Assam Civil 
Court Act, 1887 hereinafter in this Chapter referred to as the principal Act, – 
(a) in sub -section (1) for the words “ten thousand rupees” the words “one lakh rupees” shall be 
substituted;  
(b) in sub -section (2) for the words “twenty fi ve thousand rupees” the words “five lakh rupees” 
shall be substituted.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 14 of 2015, s. 2 ]  
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL, AGRA AND ASSAM CIVIL COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 10]
10 
 Bihar  
Amendment of Section 19 of Act 12 of 1887.  - In Section 19 of the Bengal, Agra and Assam Civil 
Courts Act, 1887 (Act 12 of 1887) (hereinafter referred to as the said Act).  
(i) in sub -section (1) for the words "two thousand" the words "twenty thousand" shall be  substituted ; 
(ii) in sub -section (2) for the words "five thousand" the words "thirty thousand" shall be  substituted . 
[Vide Bihar Act 19 of 1987, s.  2] 
Amendment of section 19 of the Act, 12 of 1887 .— In the said Act in Section -19 the words                         
"the Jurisdiction of Munsif extends to all like suits of which the value does not exceed Thirty thousand 
rupees" sh all be substituted by the words, numbers and bracket "the Jurisdiction of Civil Judge (Junior 
Division) extends to all like suits of which the value does not exceed rupees 1,50,000/ -(One lac fifty 
thousand rupees)".  
[Vide Bihar Act 14 of 2014, s. 4]  
Amendm ent of Section 19 of Act XII of 1887.  - In Section 19 of the said Act, - 
(i) in sub -section (1), for the words "one thousand", the words "two thousand" shall be  substituted ; 
and 
(ii) in sub -section (2), for the words "four thousand", the words "five thousan d" shall be  substituted . 
[Vide Bihar Act 12 of 1960, s. 5]  
20. Appeals from District and Additional Judges. —(1) Save as otherwise provided by any 
enactment for the time being in force, an appeal from a decree or order - of a District Judge or Additional 
Judge shall lie to the High Court.  
(2) An appeal shall not lie to the High Court from a decree or order of an Additional Judge in any 
case in which, if the decree or order had been made by the District Judge, an appeal would not lie to that 
Court.  
21. Appe als from Subordinate Judges and Munsifs. —(1) Save as aforesaid, an appeal from  a 
decree or order of a Subordinate Judge shall lie — 
(a) to the District Judge where the value of the original suit in which or in any proceeding 
arising out of which the decree or order wa
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL, AGRA AND ASSAM CIVIL COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 10]
alue of the original suit in which or in any proceeding 
arising out of which the decree or order was made did not exceed five thousand rupees, and  
(b) to the High Court in any other case.  
(2) Save as aforesaid, an appeal from a decree or order of a Munsif shall lie to the District Judge.  
(3) Where the function of receiving any appeals which l ie to the District Judge under sub -section ( 1) 
or sub -section ( 2) has been assigned to an Additional Judge, the appeals may bepreferred to the 
Additional Judge.  
(4) The High Court may, with the previous sanction of the State Government, direct, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, that appeals lying to the District Judge under sub -section ( 2) from all or any of the 
decrees or orders of any Munsif shall be preferred to the Court of such Subordinate Judge as may be 
mentioned in the notification, a nd the appeals shall thereupon be preferred accordingly.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Assam  
Amendment of section 21 .—In the Principal Act, in section  21, in sub -section (1), in            
clause (a), for the words “fifty thousand rupees” the words “five lakh rupees” sh all be 
substituted.  
(a) to the District Judge where the value of the original suit in which or in any 
proceeding arising out of which, the decree or order was made, whether instituted or 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL, AGRA AND ASSAM CIVIL COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 11]
11 
 commenced or decided before or after the commencement of the Uttar Pr adesh Civil Laws 
Amendment Act, 1968, was less than twenty thousand rupees; and  
(b) to the High Court, in any other case.  
(I-A) An appeal from a decree or order of  Civil Judge where the value of the original 
suit in which, or in any proceeding arising out of which, the decree or order was made 
exceeded ten thousand rupees but was less than twenty -thousand rupees instituted in the 
High Court before the date of commencement of the Uttar Pradesh Civil Laws Amendment 
Act, 1970, and pending in the High Court  immediately before the said date, not being an 
appeal in which arguments have been concluded before the said date and only judgment 
disposing of the appeal remains to be pronounced, shall stand transferred to the District 
Judge having jurisdiction who may  either decide it himself or assign it to any Additional 
Judge sub -ordinate to him.  
(I-B) The period of limitation prescribed for filing an appeal from a decree or order of a 
Civil Judge where the value of the original suit in which, or in any proceeding arising out of 
which, the decree or order was made exceeded ten thousand rupees but was less than twenty 
thousand rupees and the decree or order was made before December 2, 1968, shall, 
notwithstanding anything in the Limitation Act, 1963, be deemed to be and always to have 
been the same as if the appeal continued to lie to the High Court.’’  
(b) to the High Court, in any other case.  
(I-A) An appeal from a decree or order of  Civil Judge where the value of the original 
suit in which, or in any proceeding ari sing out of which, the decree or order was made 
exceeded ten thousand rupees but was less than twenty -thousand rupees instituted in the 
High Court before the date of commencement of the Uttar Pradesh Civil Laws Amendment 
Act, 1970, and pending in the High Court immediately before the said date, not being an 
appeal in which arguments have been concluded bef
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL, AGRA AND ASSAM CIVIL COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 11]
rt immediately before the said date, not being an 
appeal in which arguments have been concluded before the said date and only judgment 
disposing of the appeal remains to be pronounced, shall stand transferred to the District 
Judge having jurisdiction wh o may either decide it himself or assign it to any Additional 
Judge sub -ordinate to him.  
(I-B) The period of limitation prescribed for filing an appeal from a decree or order of 
a Civil Judge where the value of the original suit in which, or in any proceed ing arising out 
of which, the decree or order was made exceeded ten thousand rupees but was less than 
twenty thousand rupees and the decree or order was made before December 2, 1968, shall, 
notwithstanding anything in the Limitation Act, 1963, be deemed to  be and always to have 
been the same as if the appeal continued to lie to the High Court.’’  
 [Vide  Assam Act 44 of 2005 , s. 3]  
Amendment of section 21 .—In section 21 of the principal Act, in clause (a) of                             
sub-section (1), for th e word s “five thousand rupees” the words “seven thousand rupees” shall 
be substituted.  
[Vide  Assam  Act 9 of 1965, s. 3]  
Amendment of section 21. --In section 21 of the principal Act, in sub -section (1), in clause 
(a), for the words “twenty thousand rupees”,  the words “fifty thousand rupees” shall be 
substituted.  
[Vide  Assam Act 7 of 1993, s. 3]  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 21  of Act XII of 1887 .--In section 21 of the Bengal, Agra and Assam Civil 
Courts Act, 1887, as amended in its application to Uttar Pradesh (hereinafter referred to as the Bengal, 
Agra and Assam Civil Courts Act), for sub -section (1), the following sub -section shall be substituted,  
namely :— 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL, AGRA AND ASSAM CIVIL COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 12]
12 
 “(1) Save as aforesaid, an appeal from a decree or order of a Civil Judge shall lie — 
(a) to the  District Judge where the value of the original suit in which or in any proceeding arising 
out of which, the decree or order was made, whether instituted or commenced or decided before or 
after the commencement of the Uttar Pradesh Civil Laws Amendment Act , 1968, was less than 
twenty thousand rupees; and  
(b) to the High Court, in any other case.  
(I-A) An appeal from a decree or order of a Civil Judge where the value of the original suit in which, 
or in any proceeding arising out of which, the decree or or der was made exceeded ten thousand rupees but 
was less than twenty thousand rupees instituted in the High Court before the date of commencement of 
the Uttar Pradesh Civil Laws Amendment Act, 1970 and pending in the High Court immediately before 
the said da te, not being an appeal in which arguments have been concluded before the said date and only 
judgement disposing of the appeal remains to be pronounced, shall stand transferred to the District Judge 
having jurisdiction who may either decide it himself or a ssign it to any Additional Judge subordinate to 
him.  
(I-B) The period of limitation prescribed for filing an appeal from  a decree or order of a Civil Judge 
where the value of the original suit in which, or in any proceeding arising out of which, the decree or 
order was made exceeded ten thousand rupees but was less than twenty thousand rupees and the decree or 
order was  made before December 2, 1968, shall notwithstanding anything in the Limitation Act, 1963, be 
deemed to be and always to have been the  same as if the appeal continued to lie to the High Court. ” 
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act  14 of 1970, s. 4 ] 
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 21 .—In section 21 of the principal Act, - 
(a) for sub -sections (1), (1 -A) and (1 -B), the following sub -sections shall be  
substituted, namely : – 
"(1) Save as aforesaid an appeal from a decr
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL, AGRA AND ASSAM CIVIL COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 12]
owing sub -sections shall be  
substituted, namely : – 
"(1) Save as aforesaid an appeal from a decree or order of  a Civil Judge shall lie, – 
(a) to the High Court in any case other than a case referred  to in clause (b) ;  
(b) to the District Judge where the value of the original suit  in which or in any 
proceeding arising out of which the decree or  order was made (either instituted or 
commenced before or after  the relevant date) did not exceed one lakh rupees or such  
higher amount not exceeding five lakh rupees as the High  Court may fix fr om time to 
time by notification in the official  Gazette.  
Explanation —For the purposes  of this sub-section  and sub-section (1 -A) and  
(1-B) relevant  date means  the date of  commencement  of the Uttar  Pradesh Civil  
Laws  (Amendment)  Act, 1991  or, as the case may be, the date of commencement  
of notification  made  under  clause  (b) of sub- section  (1). 
(1-A) An appeal,  from  a decree  or order  of a Civil  Judge  where  the value  of 
the original suit  in which,  or in any  proceeding  arising  out of which  the decree  or 
order  was made  was not more  than  amount  fixed  by or under  clause  (b) of sub-
section  (1) instituted  in High  Court  and pending  in  the  High Court  immediately  
before  the relevant  date,  shall stand  transferred  to the District  judge  having  
jurisdiction  who may either  decide  it himself  or assign  it to any additional Judge  
subordinate  to him : 
Provided  that any judgment,  decree  or order  passed  in such  an appeal  by the 
High  Court  after  the relevant  date shall  be valid  as if the High  Court  had 
withdrawn  the appeal  under  section  24 of the Code  of Civil  Procedure,  1908.  
(1-B) The  period of  limitation  prescribed  for filing  an  appeal from  a decree  or 
order  of  a  Civil  Judge  made  before  the relevant  date,  which lay to  the High 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL, AGRA AND ASSAM CIVIL COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 12]
  the High 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL, AGRA AND ASSAM CIVIL COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 13]
13 
 Court  immediately  before  such  date but lies to the District  Judge  under  sub - 
section (1) shall  not withstanding anything  to the contrary  contained  in the 
Limitation Act,  1963,  be deemed to  be and always  to have  been  the same  as if the 
appeal  continued  to lie to the High  Court.";  
(b) in sub-section  (4), the words  "with  the previous  sanction  of the State  
Government,'  shall  be omitted . 
[Vide  Uttar Pradesh Act 17 of 1991, s. 4]  
Amendment of section 21 .—In section 21 of the principal Act, in sub -section (1), in clause (b), – 
(a) for the words “one lakh rupees” the words “five lakh rupees” shall be substituted; and  
(b) for the words “five lakh rupees” the words “twenty -five lakh rupees” shall be substituted.  
[Vide  Uttar Pradesh Act 14 of 2015, s. 3]  
Bihar  
Amendment of Section 21 of Act XII of 18 87.—In clause (a) of sub -section (1) of Section 21 of the 
Bengal, Agra & Assam Civil Courts Act, 1887 (XII of 1887), for the words "did not exceed five thousand 
rupees", the word "was less than ten thousand rupees" shall be substituted . 
[Vide  Bihar Act 1959, s. 2]  
Amendment of section 21 of Act 12 of 1887. —In the Bengal, Agra and Assam Civil Courts 
Act, 1887 (Act 12 of 1887) clause (a) of sub -section (1) of section 21 for the words “sixty 
thousand” the words “two lakhs” shall be substituted.  
[Vide  Bihar Act 19 of 1996, s. 2]  
Amendment in section 21 of the Act, 12 of 1887 .—In the said act in Clause (a) of sub -section 
(1) of section -21 the words “Two lacs rupees” shall be substituted by the number, bracket  and  
words “rupees 10,000/ -(rupees Ten lacs)”  
[Vide  Bihar Act 14 of 2014, s. 5]  
Amendment in section 21 of Act 12 of 1887. —In section (a) of sub -section (1) of Section 21 
of the said Act of the words “ten thousand” the words “sixty thousand” shall be substituted.  
[Vide  Bihar Act 19 of 1987, s. 3 ] 
CHAPTER IV 
SPECIAL  JURISDICTION  
22. Power to transfer to Subordinate Judges appeals fro
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL, AGRA AND ASSAM CIVIL COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 13]
 s. 3 ] 
CHAPTER IV 
SPECIAL  JURISDICTION  
22. Power to transfer to Subordinate Judges appeals from Munsifs. —(1)A District Judge may 
transfer to any Subordinate Judge under his administrative control any appeals pending before him from 
the decrees or orders of Munsifs.  
(2) The District Judge may withdraw any appeal so transferred, and either hear and dispose of it 
himself or transfer it to a Court under his administrative control competent to dispose of it.  
(3) Appeals transferred under this section shall be disposed of subj ect to the rules 
applicable to like appeals when disposed of by the District Judge.  
123. Exercise by Subordinate Judge or Munsif of jurisdiction of district Court in certain 
proceedings .—(1) TheHigh Court may, by general or special order, authorize any Subordinate 
Judge or Munsif to take cognizance of, or any district J udge to transfer to a Subordinat e Judge or 
Munsif under his administrative control, any of the proceedings next hereinafter mentioned or any 
class of those proceedings specified in the order. 
                                                   
1. S. 23 does not apply to Honorary Munsifs and Benches in the U. P.: see the U.P. Honorary Munsifs Act, 1896 (U.P. 2 of 
1896), s. 13.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL, AGRA AND ASSAM CIVIL COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 14]
14 
 (2) The proceedings referred to in sub -section ( 1) are the following, namely: — 
(a) proceedings under Bengal Regulation 5, 1799 (to limit the Interference of the Zillah and City 
Courts of D ewanny  Adawlut in the Execution of Wills and Administration to the Estates of persons 
dying intestate);  
1*             *   *                  *             *  
2*             *       *      *                                             *   
(d) proceedings un der the Indian Succession Act, 1865 (10 of 1865),3 and the Probate and 
Administration Act, 1881 (5 of 1881)4 which cannot be disposed of by District Delegates; and 
(e)references by Collectors under section 322C of the Code of Civil Procedure (14 of 1882).4 
(3) The District Judge may withdraw any such proceedings taken cognizance of by, or transferred to, 
a Subordinate Judge or Munsif, and may either himself dispose of them or transfer them  to a Court under 
his administrative control competent to dispose of t hem.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Assam   
Amendment of section 23 .—In sub -section (2) of section 23 of the said Act, -- 
(1) in clause (d) for the words and figures “the Indian Succession Act, 1865, and the Probate and 
Administration Act, 1881”, the words and figures “the Indian Succession Act, 1925”, shall be 
substituted; and  
(2) in clause (e), for the word and figures “section 322C”, the words “paragraph 5 of the Third 
Scheduled “ shall be substituted and after the words “Code of Civil Procedure” the figure “1908” 
shall be added.  
[Vide Assam Act 6 of 1935, s. 6]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Bihar  
Amendment of Section 23 of Act XII of 1887 .— In sub -section (2) Section 23 of the said Act, — 
(i) in clause (d), for the words and figures “the Indian Succession Act, 1865, and the proba te and 
Administration Act, 1881”. The words and figures “the Indian Succession Act, 1925” shall be substituted 
; and  
(ii) clause (e) shall be omitted.  
[Vide Bihar  Act 12 of 1960 , s. 5 ] 
524. Disposal of proceedings re
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL, AGRA AND ASSAM CIVIL COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 14]
clause (e) shall be omitted.  
[Vide Bihar  Act 12 of 1960 , s. 5 ] 
524. Disposal of proceedings referred to in last foregoing section. —(1) Proceedings taken 
cognizance of by, or transferred to, a Subordinate Judge or Munsif, as the case may be, under 
thelast foregoing section shall be disposed of by him subject to the rules applicable to like 
proceedings when disposed of by the District Jud ge: 
Provided that an appeal from an order of the Munsif in any such proceedings shall lie to the District 
Judge.  
                                                   
1. Clause ( b) relating to proceedings  under Act 40 of 1858 or Act 9 of 1861 rep. by Act 8 of 1890, s. 2 and Sch.  
2. Clause ( c)relating to applications for certificates under Act 27 of 1860 was rep. by Act 7 of 1889.  
3. See now the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925). In Bengal and Assam,  this cl. has been formally amended by Ben. Act 
19 of  1935 and Assani Act 6 of 1935 , respectively.  
4. See now the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908), Sch. III. This cl. has been omitted in Bengal by Ben. Act 19 of 
1935 and formally amended in As sam by Assam Act 6 of 1935.  
5. Ss. 24 and 25 do not apply to Honorary Munsifs and Benches in the U.P.; see the U.P. Honorary Munsifs Act, 1896 (U.P. 2 of 
1896), s. 13.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL, AGRA AND ASSAM CIVIL COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 15]
15 
 (2)An appeal from the order of the District Judge on the appeal from the order of a munsif under this 
section shall lie to the High Court if a further appeal from the order of the District Judge is allowed by the 
law for the time being in force.  
125. Power to invest Subordinate Judges and Munsifs with Small Cause Court 
Jurisdiction. —The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazett e, confer, within 
such local limits as it thinks fit, upon any Subordinate Judge or Munsif the jurisdiction of a 
Judge of a Court of Small Causes under the Provincial  Small Cause Courts Act, 1887 (9 of 1887) 
for the trial of suits, cognizable by such Court s, up to such value not exceeding five hundred2 
rupees in the case of a Subordinate Judge or 3[two hundred and fifty4 rupees] in the case of a 
Munsif as it thinks fit, and may withdraw any jurisdiction so conferred:  
4[Provided that the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, delegate to the 
High Court its powers under this section.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Assam   
Amendment of section 25 .—In section 25 of the said Act, for the words "five hundred rupees", the 
words "seven hundred and fifty rupees" and for the words "two hundred and fifty rupees", the words 
"three hundred rupees" shall be substituted.  
[Vide Assam Act 6 of 1 935, s. 7]  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 25 .—For section 25 of the Bengal, Agra and Assam Civil Courts Act, 1887 the  
following section shall be substituted, namely: -- 
“25. The State Government may, by notification in the Gazette, confer within such local limits as 
it thinks fit, upon any Civil Judge or Munsif the jurisdiction of a Judge of a Court of Small Causes 
under the Provincial Small Causes Courts Act, 1887, for the trial of suits cognizable by such Courts, 
up to such value not exceeding one thousand rupees in the case of a Civil Judge or five hundred rupee 
in the case of  a Munsif  as it thinks fit, and may withdra w any jurisdiction 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL, AGRA AND ASSAM CIVIL COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 15]
 five hundred rupee 
in the case of  a Munsif  as it thinks fit, and may withdra w any jurisdiction so conferred:  
Provided that the State Government may, by notification in the Gazette delegate to the High 
Court its powers under th is section.”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 14 of 1970, s. 5]  
Amendment of section 25 of Act XII of 1887 --Section  25 of the Bengal, Agra and Assam Civil Courts 
Act, 1887, as  amended in its application to Uttar Pradesh shall be re -numbered as sub -section  (1) thereof, 
and— 
(i) in sub -section (1), as so re -numbered, for the existing proviso,  the following proviso shall be 
substituted, namely : –  
‘‘Provided that in relation to suits of the nature referred to in the  proviso to sub -section (3) of 
section 15 of the said Act the references in  this sub -section to one thousand rupees and five 
hundred rupees shall  be construed r espectively as references to five thousand rupees and  one 
thousand rupees.’’ ;  
(ii) after sub -section (1) as so re -numbered, the following sub -section shall be inserted, namely : – 
‘‘(2) The State Government may by notification in the official  Gazette, conf er upon any 
District Judge or Additional District Judge he  jurisdiction of a Judge of a Court of Small Causes 
                                                   
1. See now the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908), Sch. III. This cl. has bee n omitted in Bengal by Ben. Act 19 of 
1935 and formally amended in Assam by Assam Act 6 of 1935.  
2. In Bengal and Assam the limits are seven hundred and fifty and three hundred, respectively: see Ben. Act 19 of 1935 and 
Assam Act 6 of 1935.  
3. Subs. by Act  16 of 1911, s. 4, for “one hundred rupees”.  
4. Ins. by 4 of 1914, s. 2 and Sch., Pt. I.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL, AGRA AND ASSAM CIVIL COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 16]
16 
 under the Provincial  Small Cause Courts Act, 1887, for the trial of all suits (irrespective of  their 
value), by the lesser for the eviction of a l essee from a building  after the determination of his 
lease, or for the recovery from him of rent  in respect of the period of occupation thereof during 
the continuance of  the lease or of compensation for the use and occupation thereof after  such 
determinati on of lease, and may withdraw any jurisdiction so  conferred.  
Explanation — For the purposes of this sub -section, the  expression ‘building’ has the same 
meaning as in Article (4) in the  Second Schedule to the said Act.  
(3) The State Government may by notific ation in the official  Gazette delegate to the High 
Court its powers under this section.’’  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 37 of 1972, s. 5]  
Amendment of section 25 .— In section 25 of the principal Act, in sub -section (1)  as amended from time 
to time in its application to Uttar  Pradesh, - 
(a) for the words "one thousand rupees" and "five  hundred rupees" the words "two thousand 
rupees" and  "one thousand rupees" shall respectively be substituted;  
(b) for the proviso, as substituted by the Uttar  Pradesh Civil Law s Amendment Act, 1972  (U.P 
Act 37 of 1972),  the following  proviso shall be substituted, namely : - 
"Provided that in relation to suits of the nature  referred to in the proviso to sub -section (3) of 
section 15  of the said Act the reference in this sub -sectio n to two  thousand rupees and one 
thousand rupees shall be  construed respectively as references to five thousand  rupees and two 
thousand rupees."  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 57 of 1976, s. 28]  
Amendment  of section 25 .—In section  25 of the principal  Act,- 
(a) for sub-sections  (1) the following  sub-sections  shall  be substituted,                  
namely  :– 
"(1) The High  Court  may  by notification in  the official  Gazette,  confer  
within  such  local  limits  as it thinks  fit, upon  any Civil  Judg
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL, AGRA AND ASSAM CIVIL COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 16]
e official  Gazette,  confer  
within  such  local  limits  as it thinks  fit, upon  any Civil  Judge  or Munsif  the 
jurisdiction  of a Judge  of a Court  of Small Causes  under the  Provincial  Small 
Cause  Courts  Act, 1887  for the trial of suits  cognizable  by such  Courts.  up to 
such  value  not exceeding  five thousand  rupees  as it thinks  fit and may  
withdraw  any jurisdiction  so conferred  : 
Provided that in relation to suits of the nature referred to  in the proviso  to 
sub-section  (2) of section 15 of  the said Act, the reference  in this sub-section  to 
five thousand  rupees  shall  be construed as  reference  to twenty  five thousand 
rupees.";  
(b) in sub-section (2), for the  words  "State  Government"  the word  "High  Court"  
shall  be substituted  ; 
(c) sub-section  (3) shall  be omitted  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 17 of 1991, s. 5] 
Uttar Pradesh  
Section 25 of the Bengal, Agra and Assam Civil Courts Act, 1887, as amended in its application to Uttar 
Pradesh shall be re -numbered as sub -section (1) thereof, and — 
“Provided that in relation to suits of the nature referred to in the proviso to sub -section (3) of section 
15 of the said Act the references in this sub -section to one thousand rupees and five hundred rupees shall 
be constructed respectively as references to five thousand rupees and one thousand rupees. ” 
(ii) after sub -section (1) as so re -numbered, the following sub -section shall be inserted, namely : — 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL, AGRA AND ASSAM CIVIL COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 17]
17 
 “(2) Th e State Government may by notification in the official Gazette confer upon any District 
Judge or Additional District Judge the jurisdiction of a Judge of a Court Act, 1887, for the trial of all 
suits (irrespective of their value), by the lessor for the evi ction of a lessee from a building after the 
determination of his lease, or for the recovery from him of rent in respect of the period of occupation 
thereof during the continuance of the lease or of compensation for the use and occupation thereof 
after such  determination of lease, and may withdraw any jurisdiction so conferred.  
Explanation —For the purpose of this sub -section, the expression ‘building’ has the same 
meaning as in Article (4) in the Second Schedule to the said Act.  
(3) The State Government may by notification in the official Gazette delegate to the High Court 
its powers under this section.”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act  37 of 1972, s. 5   ] 
Bihar  
Amendment of Section 25 of Act XII of 1887.  - In Section 25 of the said Act, for the words "five 
hundred rupees", the words "seven hundred and fifty rupees" and for the words "two hundred and fifty 
rupees", the words "three hundred rupees" shall be  substituted . 
[Vide Bihar Act 12 of 1960, s. 6]  
CHAPTER V . —[MISFEASANCE .]Rep. by the A. O. 1937.  
26. [Suspension or removal of Judges by Local Government .] Rep., ibid . 
27. [Suspension of Subordinate Judge by High Court .] Rep., ibid . 
28. [Suspension or removal of Munsif by High Court. ] Rep., ibid.  
29. [Suspension of Munsif by District Judge .] Rep., ibid. 
CHAPTER VI. —[MINISTERIAL  OFFICERS .].Rep., ibid. 
30. [Appointment and removal of ministerial officers of District Courts .].Rep., i bid. 
31. [Appointment and removal of ministerial officers of other Courts .]Rep., i bid. 
32. [Appointment and removal of ministerial officers on joint establishments .]Rep., i bid. 
33. [General powers of District Judge .]Rep., i bid. 
34. [Transfer of ministerial officers .]Rep., i
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL, AGRA AND ASSAM CIVIL COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 17]
3. [General powers of District Judge .]Rep., i bid. 
34. [Transfer of ministerial officers .]Rep., i bid. 
35. [Recovery of fines .]Rep., i bid 
CHAPTER VII 
SUPPLEMENTAL  PROVISIONS  
36. Power to confer powers of Civil Courts on officers. —(1) The State Government may 
invest with the powers of any Civil Court under this Act, by name or in virtue of office, — 
(a) any officer in the Chutia Nagpur, 1[Sambalpur], Jalpaiguri or Darjeeling District, or 
in any par t of the territories administered by the Chief Commissioner of Assam except the 
district of Sylhet, or,  
(b) after consultation with the High Court, any officer serving in any other part of the territories 
to which this Act extends and belonging to a class defined in this behalf by the State Government 
2*** . 
                                                   
1. Ins. by 4 of 1906, s. 6.  
2. The words “with the previous sanction of the G. G. in C.”rep. by Act 38 of 1920, s. 2 and the First Schedule, 
Part I.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL, AGRA AND ASSAM CIVIL COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 18]
18 
 (2) Nothing in 1[sections 4, 5, 6, 8, 10 or 11] applie s to any officer so invested, but all the 
other provisions of this Act shall, so far as those provisions can be made applicable, apply to 
him as if he were a Judge of the Court with the powers of which he is invested.  
(3) Where, in the territories mentione d in clause (a) of sub -section (1),the same local 
jurisdiction is assigned to two or more officers invested with the powers of a Munsif, the officer 
invested with the powers of a District Judge may, with the previous sanction of the State 
Government, delegate his functions under sub -section ( 2) of section 13 to an officer invested 
with the powers of a Subordinate Judge or to one of the officers invested with the powers of a 
Munsif.  
(4) Where the place at which the Court of an officer invested with powe rs under sub -section 
(1) isto be held has not been fixed under section 14, the Court may be held at any place within 
the local limits of its jurisdiction.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Assam  
Amendment of section 36 .—In section 36 of the principal Act, in clause (a) of sub-section (1), 
for the words “territories administered by the Chief Commissioner of Assam except the district 
of Sylhet” occurring between the words “the” and “or” the words “State of Assam” shall be 
substituted.  
[Vide  Assam Act 9 of 1965, s. 4]  
237. Cer tain decisions to be according to Native law. —(1) Where in any suit or other 
proceeding it is necessary for a Civil Court to decide any question regarding succession, 
inheritance, marriage or caste, or any religious usage or institution, the Muhammadan law  in 
cases where the parties are Muhammadans, and the Hindu law in cases where the parties arc 
Hindus, shall form the rule of decision except in so far as such law has, by legislative enactment, 
been altered or abolished. 
(2)In cases not provided for sub -section ( 1)or by any other law for the time being in force, 
the Court shall act according to justice, equity a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL, AGRA AND ASSAM CIVIL COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 18]
or by any other law for the time being in force, 
the Court shall act according to justice, equity and good conscience.  
38. Judges not to try suits in which they are interested. —(1) The presiding officer of a 
Civil Court shall not try any spit or o ther proceeding to which he is a party or in which he is 
personally interested.  
(2) The presiding officer of an appellate Civil Court under this Act shall not try an appeal against a 
decree or order passed by himself in another capacity.  
(3) When any such suit, proceeding or appeal as is referred to in sub -section ( 1)or sub -
section ( 2) comes before any such officer, the officer shall forthwith transmit the record of the 
case to the Court to which he is immediately subordinate, with a report of the circumsta nces 
attending the reference.  
(4) The superior Court shall thereupon dispose of the case under section 25 of the Code of Civil 
Procedure (14 of 1882)3. 
(5) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the extraordinary original civil 
jurisdiction of t he High Court.  
                                                   
1. Subs. by the A. O. 1937, for “sections 4 to 8 (both inclusive), or sections 10 to 12 (both inclusive), or sections 27 to 35 (both 
inclusive)”.  
2. The provisions of this section, in so far as they are inconsistent with - the provisions of the Muslim Personal Law 
(Shariat) Application Act, 1937 (26 of 1937), rep. by s. 6 of that Act, but have been revived by s. 3 of Act 16 of 
1943.  
3. See now s. 24 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908). In Bengal and Assam, that reference has 
been formally subs. by Ben. Act 19  of 1935 and Assam Act 6 of 1935 respectively.  
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BENGAL, AGRA AND ASSAM CIVIL COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 19]
19 
  
 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Assam   
Amendment of section 38 .—In sub -section (4) of section 38 of the said Act, for the words and 
figures "section 25  of the Code of Civil Procedure", the words and figures "section 24  of the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908" shall be substituted.  
[Vide Assam Act 6 of 1 935, s. 8]  
Bihar  
Amendment of Section 38 of Act XII of 1887.  - In sub -section (4) of Section 38 of the said Act, for the 
words and figures "Section 25 of the Code of Civil Procedure", the words and figures "Section 24 of the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908" shall be  substituted . 
[Vide  Bihar Act 12 of 1960, s. 7]  
39. Subordination of Courts to District Court. —For the purposes of the last foregoing 
section the presiding officer of a Court subject to the administrative control of the District 
Judge shall be deemed to be immediately subordinate to the Court of the District Judge, and, 
for the purposes of the Code of Civil Procedure (14 of 1882), the Court of such an officer 
shall be deemed to be of a grade inferior to that of the Court of the District Judge.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Assam  
In Section 39 of the Said Act, after the words "Code of Civil Procedure", the figures "1908" shall be 
inserted . 
[Vide Assam Act 6 of 1935, s. 4]  
Bihar  
Amendment of Section 39 of Act  XII of 1887.  - In Section 39 of the said Act, after the words "Code of 
Civil Procedure", the figures "1908" shall be  inserted.  
[Vide Bihar Act 12 of 1960, s. 8]  
40. Application of Act to State Courts of Small Causes. —(1) This section and sections 15, 
32, 37, 38 and 39 apply to Courts of Small Causes constituted under the Provincial Small Cause 
Courts Act, 1887 (9 of 1887).  
(2) Save as provided by that Act, the other sections of this Act do not apply to those 
Courts.  
 
_________  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BIRTHS, DEATHS AND MARRIAGES REGISTRATION ACT, 1886.pdf - page 1]
1 THE BIRTHS, DEATHS AND MARRIAGES REGISTRATION ACT, 1886  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Extent.  
3. Definitions.  
4. Saving of local laws.  
5. Power s exercisable from time to time  
CHAPTER II  
GENERAL  REGISTRY  OFFICES OF BIRTHS , DEATHS AND MARRIAGES  
6. Establishment of general registry offices and appointment of Registrars General.  
7. Indexes to be kept at general registry office.  
8. Indexes to be open to inspection.  
 9. Copies of ent ries to be admissible in evidence.  
10. Superintendence of Registrars by Registrar General.  
CHAPTER III  
REGISTRATION OF BIRTHS AND DEATHS  
A.—Application of this Chapter  
11. Persons whose births and deaths are registrable.  
B.—Registration Establishment  
12. Power for State Government to appoint Registrars for its territories.  
13. [Omitted .]. 
14. Registrar to be deemed a public servant.  
15. [Repealed .]. 
16. Office and attendance of Registrar.  
17. Absence of Registrar or vacancy in his office.  
18. Register book s to be supplied and preservation of records to be provided for.  
C.—Mode of registration  
19. Duty of Registrar to register births and deaths of which notice is given.  
20. Persons authori sed to give notice of birth.  
21. Persons authori sed to give notice of death.  
22. Entry of birth or death to be signed by person giving notice.  
23. Grant of certificate of registration of birth or death.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BIRTHS, DEATHS AND MARRIAGES REGISTRATION ACT, 1886.pdf - page 2]
2 SECTIONS  
24. Duty of Registrars as to sending certified copies of entries in register books to Registrar  General.  
25. Searches and copies of entries in register books.  
26. Exceptional provision for registration of certain births and deaths.  
D.—Penalty for False Information  
27. Penalty for willfully giving false information.  
E.—Correction of Errors  
28. Correction of entry in register of births or deaths.  
CHAPTER IV  
AMENDMENT OF MARRIAGE  ACTS 
29. [Repealed .].  
30. [Repealed .].  
 31. [Repealed .].   
CHAPTER V  
SPECIAL  PROVISIONS AS TO CERTAIN  EXISTING  REGISTERS  
32. Permission to persons having custody of cer tain records to send them within one year to Registrar 
General.  
33. Appointment of Commissioners to examine registers.  
34. Duties of Commissioners.  
35. Searches of lists prepared by Commissioners and grant of certified copies of entries.  
35A. Constitution of additional Commissions for purposes of this Chapter.  
CHAPTER VI  
RULES  
36. Rules.  
37. [Repealed .]. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BIRTHS, DEATHS AND MARRIAGES REGISTRATION ACT, 1886.pdf - page 3]
3 THE BIRTHS, DEATHS AND MARRIAGES REGISTRATION ACT, 1886  
ACT NO. 6 OF 18861 
[8th March , 1886 .] 
An Act to provide for the voluntary Registration of certain Births and Deaths, for the 
establishment of General Registry Offices for keeping Registers of certain Births, Deaths and 
Marriages, and  for certain other purposes . 
WHEREAS  it is expedient to provide for the voluntary registration of births and deaths among certain 
classes of persons, for the more effectual registration of those births and deaths and of the marriages 
registered under Act 3 of 18722, or the Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872 (15 of 1872) and of certain 
marriages registered under the Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 18653 (15 of 1865), and for the 
establishment of general registry offices for keeping registers of those births , deaths and marriages;  
AND WHEREAS it is also expedient to provide for the authentication and custody of certain existing 
registers made otherwise than in the performance of a duty specially enjoined by the law of the country in 
which the registers were k ept, and to declare that copies of the entries in those registers shall be 
admissible in evidence;  
It is hereby enacted as follows: —  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Births, Deaths and Marriages 
Registration Act, 1886; and  
(2) It shall come into force on such day4 as the Central Government , by notification in the Official 
Gazette , directs.  
5*   *   *   *   * 
6[2. Extent. —This Act extends7 to the whole of India except  8[the territories which , immediately 
before the 1st November, 1956, were comprised in Part B States].]  
3. Definitions .—In this Act, unless there is something repugna nt in the subject or                          
context,—“sign” includes mark, when the person making the mark is unable to write his name;  
“prescribed ” means prescribed by a rule made  9*** under this Act; and  
“Registrar of Births and Deaths ” mea
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BIRTHS, DEATHS AND MARRIAGES REGISTRATION ACT, 1886.pdf - page 3]
 ” means prescribed by a rule made  9*** under this Act; and  
“Registrar of Births and Deaths ” means a Registrar of Births and Deaths appointed under this 
Act. 
4. Saving o f local laws .—Nothing in this Act, or in any rule made under this Act, shall affect any law 
heretofore or hereafter passed providing for the registration of births and deaths within particular local 
areas.  
                                                           
1. This Act has been extended to and brought into force in Dadra and Nagar Haveli (w.e.f. 1 -7-1965) by Reg. No. 6 of 1963, s. 2 
and the First Schedule (with modification), to Goa, Daman and Diu by Reg. 11 of 1963, s. 3 and the Schedule (with 
modification).  
2. See now the Special Marriage Act, 1954 (43 of 1954).  
3. See now the Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 1936 (3 of 1936).  
4. The 1st October, 1888, see Gazette of India, 1888, Part I, p. 336.  
5. Sub-section ( 3) rep. by Act 12 of 1891, s . 2 and the First Schedule . 
6. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for section 2.  
7. It has been declared in force in the Sonthal Parganas by s. 3 of the Sonthal Parganas  Settlement Regulation, 1872 (3 of 1872). 
It has also been partially extended to Berar by the Berar Laws Act, 1941 (4 of 1941).  
8. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2),  Order  1956, for “Part B States”.  
9. The words “by the G.G. in C.” rep. by the A.O. 1 937. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BIRTHS, DEATHS AND MARRIAGES REGISTRATION ACT, 1886.pdf - page 4]
4 5. Power s exercisable from time to time .—All powers conferred by this Act may be exercised from 
time to time as occasion requires.  
CHAPTER II  
GENERAL  REGISTRY  OFFICES OF BIRTHS , DEATHS AND MARRIAGES  
6. Establishment of general registry offices and appointment of Registrars General .—(1) Each 
State Government — 
(a) shall establish a general registry office for keeping such certified copies of registers of births 
and deaths registered under this Act, or marriages registered under Act 3 of 18721 (to provide a form  
of marriage in certain cases ) or the Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872 ( 15 of 1872), or, beyond the 
local limits of the ordinary original civil jurisdiction of the High Court of Judicature at Bombay, 
under the Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 18652 (15 of 1865), as may be sent to i t under this Act, or 
under any of the three last -mentioned Acts, as amended by this Act; and  
(b) may appoint to the charge of that office an officer, to be called the Registrar General of Births, 
Deaths and Marriages, for the territories under its administ ration:  
3*   *   *   *   * 
7. Indexes to be kept at general registry office .—Each Registrar General of Births, Deaths and 
Marriages shall cause indexes of all the certified copies of registers sent to his office under this Act , or 
under Act 3 of 18721 the Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872 (15 of 1872), or the Parsi Marriage and 
Divorce Act, 18652 (15 of 1865), as amended by this Act, to be made and kept in his office in the 
prescribed form.  
8. Indexes to be open to inspection .—Subject to the payment of the prescribed fees the indexes so 
made shall be at all reasonable time open to inspection by any person applying to inspect them, and 
copies of entries in the certified copies of the registers to which the indexes relate shall be given to all 
persons a pplying for them.  
9. Copies of entries to be admissible in evidence .—A copy of an entry given under the last 
foregoing section shal
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BIRTHS, DEATHS AND MARRIAGES REGISTRATION ACT, 1886.pdf - page 4]
tries to be admissible in evidence .—A copy of an entry given under the last 
foregoing section shall be certified by the Registrar General of Births, Deaths and Marriages, or by an 
officer authori sed in this behalf by the St ate Government and shall be admissible in evidence for the 
purpose of proving the birth, death or marriage to which the entry relates.  
 10. Superintendence of Registrars by Registrar General .—Each Registrar General of Births, 
Deaths and  Marriages shall exe rcise a general superintendence over the Registrars of Births and Deaths in 
the territories for which he is  appointed.  
CHAPTER III  
REGISTRATION OF BIRTHS AND DEATHS  
A.—Application of this Chapter  
11. Persons whose births and deaths are registrable .—(1) The  persons whose births and deaths 
shall, in the first instance, be registrable under this Chap ter are the following, namely: — 
(a) in 4[the territories to which this Act extends] the members of every race, sect or tribe to which 
the Indian Succession Act,  18655 (10 of 1865)  applies, and in respect of which an order under section 
332 of that Act is not for the time being in force, and all persons professing the Christian religion;  
                                                           
1. See now the Special Marriage Act, 1954 (43 of 1954).  
2. See now the Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 1936 (3 of 1936).  
3. Sub-section ( 2) rep. by the A.O. 1937.  
4. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2), Order 1956 , for “a Part A State or a Part C State”.  
5. See now the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925), s. 3.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BIRTHS, DEATHS AND MARRIAGES REGISTRATION ACT, 1886.pdf - page 5]
5 1*   *   *   *  * 
(2) But the State Government by notification in the Official Gazette, may  2*** extend the operation of 
this Chapter to any other class of persons either generally or in any local area.  
B.—Registration Establishment  
12. Power for State Government to appoint Registrars for its territories .—The State Government 
may appoint, either by name or by virtue of their office, so many persons as it thinks necessary to be 
Registrars of Births and Deaths for such local areas within the territories under its administration as it 
may define and, if it sees fit, for any class of p ersons within any part of those territories.  
13. [Power for Central Government to appoint Registrars for Indian States ]. Omitted . by the A.O. 
1950.  
14. Registrar to be deemed a public servant .—Every Registrar of Births and Deaths shall be 
deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
15. [Power to remove Registrars ].—Rep. by the A.O . 1937.  
16. Office and attendance of Registrar .—(1) Every Registrar of Births and Deaths shall have an 
office in the local area, or within the part of the territories or dominions for which he is appointed.  
(2) Every Registrar of Births and Deaths to whom the State Government may direct this sub -section 
to apply shall attend at his office for the purpose of registering births and death s on such days and at such 
hours as the Registrar General of Births, Deaths and Marriages may direct, and shall cause to be placed in 
some conspicuous place on or near the outer door of his office his name, with the addition of Registrar of 
Births and Deat hs for the local area or class for which he is appointed, and the days and hours of his 
attendance.  
17. Absence of Registrar or vacancy in his office .—(1) When any Registrar of Births and Deaths to 
whom the State Government may direct this section to apply3, not being a Registrar of Births and Deaths 
for a local area in the town of Calcutta, Ma
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BIRTHS, DEATHS AND MARRIAGES REGISTRATION ACT, 1886.pdf - page 5]
 to apply3, not being a Registrar of Births and Deaths 
for a local area in the town of Calcutta, Madras or Bombay is absent, or when his office is temporarily 
vacant, any person whom the Registrar General of Births, Deaths and Marriages appoints in this behalf, 
or, in default of such appointment the Judge of the District Court within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction the Registrar ’s office is situate, or such other officer as the State Government appoints in this 
behalf, shall be the Registrar of Births and Dea ths during such absence or until the State Government fills 
the vacancy.  
(2) When any such Registrar of Births and Deaths for a local area in the town of Calcutta, Madras or 
Bombay is absent, or when his office is temporarily vacant, any person whom the Re gistrar General of 
Births, Deaths and Marriages appoints in this behalf shall be the Registrar of Births and Deaths during 
such absence or until the State Government fills the vacancy.  
(3) The Registrar General of Births, Deaths and Marriages shall report to the State Government all 
appointments made by him under this section.  
18. Register books to be supplied and preservation of records to be provided for .—The State 
Government shall every Registrar of Births and Deaths with a sufficient number of register books of 
births and of register books of deaths, and shall make suitable provision for the preservation of the 
records connected with the registration of births and deaths.  
                                                           
1. Clause ( b) omitted by the A.O. 1950.  
2. The words “with the previous approval of the G.  G. in C .,” om itted by the Act 38 of 1920, s . 2 and  the First Schedule . 
3. The section has been declared by the Government of Madras to apply to all Registrars appointed by that Government under 
section 12, see Mad. R . and O.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BIRTHS, DEATHS AND MARRIAGES REGISTRATION ACT, 1886.pdf - page 6]
6 C.—Mode of registration  
19. Duty of Registrar to register births and deaths of which notice is given .—Every Registrar of 
Births and Deaths of notice of a birth or death within the local area or among the class for which he is 
appointed, shall, if the notice is given within the presc ribed time and in the prescribed mode by a person 
authorized by this Act to give the notice, forthwith make an entry of the birth or death in the proper 
register book:  
Provided that — 
(a) if he has reason to believe the notice to be in any respect false, he  may refuse to register 
the birth or death until he receives an order  from the Judge of the District Court directing him to make 
the entry and prescribing the manner in which the entry is to be made; and  
(b) he shall not enter in the register the name of a ny person as father of an illegitimate child, 
unless at the request of the mother and of  the person acknowledging himself to be the father of the 
child.  
 20. Persons authori sed to give notice of birth .—Any of the following persons may g ive notice of a 
birth, namely: — 
(a) the father or mother of the child;  
(b) any person present at the birth;  
(c) any person occupying, at the time of the birth, any part of the house wherein the child was 
born and having knowledge of  the child having been born in the house;  
(d) any medical practitioner in attendance after the birth and having personal knowledge of birth 
occurred;  
(e) any person having charge of the child.  
21. Persons authori sed to give notice of death .—Any of the following persons may g ive notice of a 
death, na mely:— 
(a) any relative of the deceased having knowledge of any of the particulars required to be 
registered concerning the death;  
(b) any person present at the death;  
(c) any  person occupying, at the time of the death, any part of the house wherein the death 
occurred and having knowledge of the deceased having died in the house;  
(d) any person in attendance during the last 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BIRTHS, DEATHS AND MARRIAGES REGISTRATION ACT, 1886.pdf - page 6]
 knowledge of the deceased having died in the house;  
(d) any person in attendance during the last illness of the deceased:  
(e) any person who has seen t he body of the deceased after death.  
22. Entry of birth or death to be signed by person giving notice .—(1) When an entry of a birth or 
death has been made by the Registrar of Births and Deaths under section 19, the person giving notice of 
the birth or deat h must sign the entry in the register in the presence of the Registrar:  
1[Provided that it shall not be necessary for the person giving notice to attend before the Registrar or 
to sign the entry in the register if he has given such notice in writing and has furnished to the satisfaction 
of the Registrar such evidence of his identity as may be required by any rules made by the State 
Government in this behalf.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 9 of 1911, s. 2.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BIRTHS, DEATHS AND MARRIAGES REGISTRATION ACT, 1886.pdf - page 7]
7 (2) Until the entry has been so signed, 1[or the conditions specified in t he proviso to sub-section ( 1) 
have been complied with ] the birth or death shall not be deemed to be registered under this Act.  
(3) When the birth of an illegitimate child is registered, and the mother and the person acknowledging 
himself to be the father of the child jo intly request that person may be registered as the father, the mother 
and that person must both si gn the entry in the register in the presence of the Registrar.  
23. Grant of certificate of registration of birth or death.—The Registrar of Births and Deaths 
shall, on application made at the time of registering any birth or death by the person giving notice of the 
birth or death, and on payment by him of the prescribed fee, give to the applicant a certificate in the 
prescribed form signed by the Registrar, of having registered the birth or death.  
24. Duty of Registrars as to sending certified copies of entries in register books to Registrar 
General .—(1) Every Registrar of Birth and Deaths in  2[the territories to which this Act extends] shall 
send to the Registr ar General of Birth, Deaths and Marriages for the territories within which the local area 
or class for which he is appointed is situate or resides, at the prescribed intervals, a true copy certified by 
him, in the prescribed form, of all the entries of bir ths and deaths in the register book kept by him since 
the last of those intervals:  
Provided that in the case Registrars of Births and Deaths who are clergymen of the Churches of 
England, Rome and Scotland the Registrar may, if so directed by his ecclesiast ical superior, send the 
certified copies in the first instance to that superior, who shall send them to the proper Registrar General 
of Births, Deaths and Marriages.  
In this sub -section “Church of England ” and “Church of Scotland ” means the Church of England and 
the Church of Scotland as by law established respectively; and “Church of
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BIRTHS, DEATHS AND MARRIAGES REGISTRATION ACT, 1886.pdf - page 7]
the Church of England and 
the Church of Scotland as by law established respectively; and “Church of Rome ” means the Church 
which regards the Pope of Rome as its spiritual head.  
3*   *   *   *   * 
4*   *   *   *   * 
25. Searches and copies of entries  in register books .—(1) Every Registrar of Births and Deaths 
shall, on payment of the prescribed fees, at all reasonable times, allow searches to be made in the register 
books kept by him, and give a copy of any entry in the same.  
(2) Every copy of an entry in a register book given under this section shall be certified by the 
Registrar of Births and Deaths, and shall be admissible in evidence for the purpose of proving the birth or 
death to which the entry relates.  
26. Exceptional provision for registra tion of certain births and deaths .—Notwith standing 
anything in section 19, the  5[State Government] may make  rules6 authori sing Registrars of Births and 
Deaths, on conditions and in circumstances to be specified in the rules, to register births and deaths 
occurring outside the local areas or classes for which they are appointed.  
D.—Penalty for False Information  
 27. Penalty for wi llfully giving false information .—If any person willfully makes, or causes to be 
made, for the purpose of being inserted in any register of births or deaths, any false statement in 
connection with any notice of a birth or death under this Act, he shall be punished with imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 9 of 1911, s. 2.  
2. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2), Order 1956 , for “Part A States or Part C States”.  
3. Sub-section ( 2) omitted  by the A.O. 1950  
4. The proviso rep. by the A.O. 1937.  
5. Subs . by Act 9 of 1911, s . 3 for “G.G. in C. ”. 
6. For rules made under section 26 conjointly with sections 28 and 36, see Gazette of India, 1888, P art. I, p. 336, and different 
loca
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BIRTHS, DEATHS AND MARRIAGES REGISTRATION ACT, 1886.pdf - page 7]
onjointly with sections 28 and 36, see Gazette of India, 1888, P art. I, p. 336, and different 
local Rules and Orders. All rules made by the G.G. in C. under this Act, before 1911, shall be deemed to have been made by 
the S tate Governments, see section 6 of Act 9 of 1911.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BIRTHS, DEATHS AND MARRIAGES REGISTRATION ACT, 1886.pdf - page 8]
8 E.—Correction of Errors  
28. Correction of entry in register of births or deaths .—(1) If it is proved to the satisfaction of a 
Registrar of Births and Deaths that any entry of a birth or death in any register kept by him under this Act 
is erroneous in form or substance, he may, subject to such  rules1 as may be made by the  2[State 
Government] with respect to the conditions and circumstances on and in which errors may be corrected, 
correct the error by entry in the margin, without any alteration of the original entry, and shall sign the 
marginal entry and add thereto the date of the correction.  
(2) If a certified copy of the entry has already been sent to the  Registrar General of Births, Deaths and 
Marriages, the Registrar of Births and Deaths shall make and send a separate certified copy of the original 
erroneous entry and of the marginal correction therein made.  
CHAPTER IV  
AMENDMENT OF MARRIAGE  ACTS 
29. [Addition of new section after section  13, Act 3 of 1872 ]. Rep. by the Repealing Act , 1938 (1 of 
1938),  s. 2 and the Schedu le. 
30. [Amendment of the Indian Christian Marriage Act,  1872 ]. Rep. by s. 2 and the Schedule , ibid . 
 31. [Addition of new section after section  8 of the Parsi Marriage and Divorce  Act, 1865 ]. Rep. by   
s. 2 and the Schedule , ibid . 
CHAPTER V  
SPECIAL  PROVISIONS AS TO CERTAIN  EXISTING  REGISTERS  
32. Permission to persons having custody of certain records to send them within one year to 
Registrar General .—If any person in  3[the territories to which this Act extends] has for the time being 
the custody of any register or record of birth, baptism, naming , dedication, death or burial of any persons 
of the classes referred to in section 11,sub section ( 1), or, of any register or record of marriage of any 
persons of the classes to which Act III of 1872  or the Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872(15of 1872) or 
the Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 1865 (15 of 1865)  applies, and if such register or reco
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BIRTHS, DEATHS AND MARRIAGES REGISTRATION ACT, 1886.pdf - page 8]
72) or 
the Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 1865 (15 of 1865)  applies, and if such register or record has been 
made otherwise than in performance of a duly specially enjoined by the law of the country in whi ch the 
register or record was kept, he may,  4[at any time before the first day April, 1891,] send the register or 
record to the office of the Registrar General or Births, Deaths and Marriages for the territories within 
which he resides,  5***. 
33. Appointme nt of Commissioners to examine registers .—6[(1) Any State Govern ment in the case 
of registers or records sent under section 32 to the Registrar General for the territories under its 
administration, 7*** may appoint so  many persons as it 8*** thinks fit to  be Commissioner for examining 
such registers or records.]  
                                                           
1. For rules made under section 26 conjointly with sections 28 and 36, see Gazette of India, 1888, Part. I, p. 336 and different 
local Rules and orders. All rules made by the G.G. in C. under this Act, befo re 1911, shall be deemed to have been made by 
the State Government, see section 6 of Act 9 of 1911.  
2. Subs.  by Act 9 of 1911, s . 3 for “G.G. in C.”.  
3. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2), Order 1956 , for “a Part A State or a Part C State”.  
4. Subs. by Act 16 of 1890, s. 1, for “within one year from the date on which this Act comes into force”.  
5. Certain words including the proviso which was inserted by Act 38 of 1920, s. 2 and the Schedule, omitted by the A.O. 1950.  
6. Subs. by Act 38 of 1920, s. 2 and the First Schedule , for sub-section ( 1). 
7. Certain words omitted  by the A.O. 1950.  
8. The words “or he, as the case may be ,” rep. by the A.O. 1937.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BIRTHS, DEATHS AND MARRIAGES REGISTRATION ACT, 1886.pdf - page 9]
9 (2) The Commissioners so appointed shall hold office for such period as the 1[authority appointing 
them], by the order of appointment, or any subsequent order, directs.  
34. Duties of Commissioners .—(1) The Commissioners appointed under the last foregoing section 
shall enquire into the state, custody and authenticity of every such register or record as may be sent to the 
Registrar General of Births, Deaths and Marriages under section 32;  
and shall deliver to the Registrar General a descriptive list or descriptive lists of all such registers or 
records, or portions of registers or records, as they find to be accurate and faithful.  
(2) The list or lists shall contain the prescribed particulars and refer to the registers or records, or to 
the portions of the registers or records, in me prescribed manner.  
(3) The Commissioners, shall also certify in writing, upon some part of every separate book or 
volume containing any such register or record, or  portion of a register or record, as is referred to in any 
list or lists made by the Commissioners, that it is one of the registers or records, or portions of registers or 
records, referred to in the said list or lists.  
35. Searches of lists prepared by Co mmissioners and grant of certified copies of entries .—(1) 
Subject to the payment of the prescribed fees, the descriptive list or lists of registers or records, or 
portions of registers or records, delivered by the Commissioners to the Registrar General of Births, 
Deaths and Marriages shall be, at all reasonable times, open to inspection by any person applying to 
inspect it or them, and copies of entries in those registers or records shall be given to all persons applying 
for them.  
(2) A copy of an entry giv en under this section shall be certified by the Registrar General of Births, 
Deaths and Marriages, or by an officer or person authori sed in this behalf by the State Government and 
shall be admissible in evidence for the purpose of proving th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BIRTHS, DEATHS AND MARRIAGES REGISTRATION ACT, 1886.pdf - page 9]
is behalf by the State Government and 
shall be admissible in evidence for the purpose of proving the birth, baptis m, naming, dedication, death, 
burial or marriage to which the entry relates.  
2[35A. Constitution of additional Commissions  for purposes of this Chapter. —(1) 3*** The State 
Government  4[may by notification in the Official Gazette] appoint more Commissions5 than one for the 
purposes of section 33, each such Commission consisting of so many and such members, and having its 
functions restricted to the disposal, under this Act and the rules there under, of such registers and records 
sent under section 32 to the Registrar General, as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) If more Commissions than one are appointed in exercise of the power conferred by sub -section 
(1), then references in this Act to the Commissioners shall be construed as references to the membe rs 
const ituting a Commission so appoint ed.] 
CHAPTER VI  
RULES  
6[36. Rules. —7[(1) The State Government, for each State  8*** may make rules to carry out the 
purpose of this Act.]  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the f oregoing power, such rules may — 
(a) fix the fees payable under this Act;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 1920, s. 2 and Sch. 1, for “G.G. in C”.  
2. Section 35A was added by the Births, Death and Marriages Registration Act, (1886) Amendment Act, 1890 (16 of 1890), s. 2, 
which was repealed by the Devolution Act, 1920 (38 of 1920), s. 3 and the Second Schedule. The present sub -section ( 1) was 
subs. for the original sub -section by the Devolu tion Act, 1920 (38 of 1920), s. 2 and the First Schedule, and sub -section ( 2), 
was inserted by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1934 (24 of 1934), s. 2 and the First Schedule.  
3. The words “The Central Government or” omitted  by the A.O. 1950.  
4. Subs. by th e A.O. 1937, for “if he or it thinks fit, may by notification in the Gazette 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BIRTHS, DEATHS AND MARRIAGES REGISTRATION ACT, 1886.pdf - page 9]
1950.  
4. Subs. by th e A.O. 1937, for “if he or it thinks fit, may by notification in the Gazette of India or the local Official Gazette, as the 
case may be”.  
5. For Commissioners appointed under this section, see Gazette of India, 1890, Pt. I, p. 744.  
6. Subs. by Act 9 of 191 1, s. 4, for section 36.  
7. Subs . by the A.O. 1937, for sub -section  (1). 
8. The words “and the Central Government for British subjects in Indian States ” omitted  by the A.O. 1950 . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BIRTHS, DEATHS AND MARRIAGES REGISTRATION ACT, 1886.pdf - page 10]
10 (b) prescribe the forms required for the purposes of this Act;  
(c) prescribe the time within which, and the mode in which, persons authori sed under this Act to 
give notice of a birth or death to a Registrar of Births and Deaths must give the notice;  
(d) prescribe the evidence of identity to be furnished to a Registrar of Birth and Deaths by 
persons giving notice of a birth or death in cases whe re personal attendance before such Registrar is 
dispensed with;  
(e) prescribe the registers to be kept and the form and manner in which Registrars of Births and 
Deaths are to register births and deaths under this Act, and the intervals at which they are to  send to 
the Registrar General of Births, Deaths and Marriages true copies of the entries of births and deaths in 
the registers kept by them;  
(f) prescribe the conditions and circumstances on and in which Registers of Births and Deaths 
may correct entries of births and deaths in registers kept by them;  
(g) prescribe the particulars which the descriptive list or lists to be prepared by the Commissioner 
appointed under Chapter V are to contain, and the  manner in which they are to refer to the registers or 
records, or portions of registers or records, to which they relates; and  
(h) prescribe the custody in which those registers or records are to kept.  
(3) Every power to make rules conferred by this Act is subject to the condition of the rules being 
made after p revious publication.  
(4) All rules made under this Act shall be published in the Official Gazette and on such publication 
shall have effect as if enacted in this Act.]  
37. [Procedure for making and publication of rules ]. Rep. by the Births, Deaths and Marr iages  
Registration  (Amendment ) Act, 1911 (9 of 1911) s. 5.  
 
___________  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMABY RENT-FREE ESTATES ACT, 1852.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE BOMABY RENT -FREE ESTATES ACT, 185 2 
ACT NO. XI OF 1852  
[Passed on  the 13th February , 1852.] 
Recites expediency of providing  means of settling claims against Government in certain districts : and 
that rules of Bombay  R. 17, 1827, Chap. 9, 10, and R. 6,  1833, Cl. 1. Do not apply to districts not under 
Government Regulations: enacts.  
1. No order of Government regarding title to lands in any of the non -regulation dist ricts shall be  
questioned in any Court of law on  ground of inconsistency with this Act.    
2, 3. Governor of Bombay may appoint in recited districts an Inam Commissioner with assistants :            
who ( 3) shall discharge their duties according to rules in Schedule to this Act.  
4.  Claims to exemption shall be determined according to Rules in Schedule B.  
5. Each Inam Commissioner to have same authority for examination of witnesses and taking evidence 
and inflicting penalties as the Civil Courts.  
6. Bribery, extortion and generally all act of abuse under the Commission shall be punishable as 
criminal offences without prejudice to civil remedy.  
7. No decision of Inam Commissioner, & c. shall be questioned in Court of law.  
       assistants.  
Rule 1 . Defines the functions of the Inam Commissioner and his assistants . 
Rule 2 . Gives appeal against orders of Assistant Commissioner . 
Rule 3. And subsequent rules prescribe the mode of proceeding to es tablish  claims.  
Schedule B. Rules for adjudication of title to estates claimed as Inam.  
Rule 1. Confines all Inams  already declared permanent by competent authority competency of officer 
shall be decided if questioned . 
Rule 2. Land to be hereditary if expressly made so by Sunnud, provided, (1) that Sunnud was made by 
competent authority; (2)  that no illegal conditions are attached to the tenure; and (3) that is was not reoked, 
& c. 
Rule 3. An uninterrupted holdi ng for 60 years before the introduction of heir in possession all the time. 
The right not to des
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMABY RENT-FREE ESTATES ACT, 1852.pdf - page 1]
di ng for 60 years before the introduction of heir in possession all the time. 
The right not to descend on heirs y adoption, not on femal e heirs.  
Rule 4. Lands held for 40 years in the male line to continue to be held for one more generation; but not 
by an adopted heir; (1) what shall be sufficient proof of authorized possession ; (2)claim to be allowed 
unless to grounds of it be disproved;  and (3) what shall be deemed the time of the introduction of British 
Government.  
Rule 5. None so numbered.  
Rule 6. Exemptions not protected by above rules to be abolished on demise of incumbent: and ( 1) bond 
fide holder to be deemed incumbent; ( 2) this privilege not to ext end to persons holding by fraud.  
Rule 7. Lands h eld for support of Mosques, & c. not to be resumed. (4) if they have been enjoyed for 
40 years; (5) What shall be deemed sufficient proof of enjoyment ; (6) but this rule not to apply in f avor of 
private holdings (7) see the provision.  
Rule 8. Lands held under on official tenure intended to be permanent not to be resumed; but this rule 
is subject to several complicated provisions, not capable of abridgment.  
Rule 9. On resumption of lands a moiety may be continued to widows of last incumbent, &c. in case of 
destitution.  
Rule 10. Makes discretionary with Government to apply these rules to certain specified kinds of lands.  
Rule 11. Empowers the G. in C. to relax the rules ; who also shall inter pret them.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMABY RENT-FREE ESTATES ACT, 1852.pdf - page 2]
2 
  
 
An Act for the Adjudication of Titles to certain Estates claimed to be wholly or partially Rent -free in 
the Presidency of Bombay.  
WHEREAS  in the Territories of the Deccan Kandeish, and Southern Mahratta Country, and in other 
Districts more rec ently annexed to the Bombay Presidency, claims against Government on account of Inams 
and other Estates wholly or partially exempt from payment of Land Revenue are excepted from the 
cognizance of the ordinary Civil Courts, and incapable of being justly dis posed of under the Rules for the 
determination of Titles, and the Rules of Procedure contained in Chapters IX. and X. of Regulation X VII. 
of 1827 of the Bombay Code and their Supplements; and whereas it is desirable that the said claims should 
be tried and  determined without further delay. It is declared and enacted as follows:  
I.  The Rules in Chapters IX. and X. of Regulation X VII. of 1827, and in Clause 1 of Regulation            
VI. of 1833 of the Bombay Code, do not apply to any of the Districts of the  Bombay Presidency which 
were not brought under the General Regulations of Government by Regulation XX VIII. of 1827 of the 
Bombay Code; and no order hitherto passed regarding the continuance or resumption of lands in any of the 
said Districts held or claim ed from Government as wholly or partially free of assessment, shall be liable to 
be questioned in any Court of Law, on the grounds of any interpretation nr construction of the Law, which 
may be inconsistent with the declarations made and the rules prescrib ed by this enactment.  
II. The Governor of Bombay in Council may appoint in any Zillah or other division of the Territories 
subject to the Presidency of Bombay, which were not brought under the General Regulations of 
Government by the said Regulation XXVIII . of 1827, an Inam Commissioner with so many Assistants, and 
such subordinate Establishment, as may be necessary for the purposes hereinafter mentioned.  
III. The duties of each 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMABY RENT-FREE ESTATES ACT, 1852.pdf - page 2]
stablishment, as may be necessary for the purposes hereinafter mentioned.  
III. The duties of each Inam Commissioner and his Assistants shah be discharged according to the 
Rules in Schedule A. annexed to this Act.  
IV. In the adjudication of claims to exempt lands or interests therein, the titles of claimants shall he 
determined by the Rules in Schedule B. annexed to this Act.  
V. Each Inam Commissioner sand his Assistants shall hav e the same authority to procure the attendance 
of witnesses, and to take evidence, as now is, or from time to time may be, by Law vested in the ordinary 
Civil Courts; and so far as concerns the penalties for not giving evidence, for false testimony, for re sistance 
of process, contempts, and other like matters, connected with cases under cognizance by any one of the said 
Officers, his Office shall be held to be a Court of Civil Jurisdiction of the same authority as the superior 
Civil Court of the Zillah or D istrict in which his Office from time to time shall be established. Provided 
that all complaints against,  or appeals from the proceedings of the Inam Commissioner or any of his 
Assistants, in exercise of the authority conferred on them respectively by this  Section, shall be made under 
the second Rule of Schedule A. annexed to this Act, and shall not be cognizable by any other authority or 
in any other manner than as therein specified.  
VI. Bribery, extortion, and generally all acts of abuse, or misapplicatio n of authority, or other 
misconduct, committed by any Officer belonging to the Establishment of the Inam Commission, or 
temporarily employed therein under the provisions of this enactment, shall be punishable as criminal 
offences with fine and ordinary imp risonment without labour for a period not exceeding five years, and the 
receipt of a present, directly or indirectly, by any such Officer from any person against whom or in whose 
behalf he may be officially employed, shall be considered extortion. And no p
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMABY RENT-FREE ESTATES ACT, 1852.pdf - page 2]
inst whom or in whose 
behalf he may be officially employed, shall be considered extortion. And no p enalty or punishment 
adjudicated under this Clause shall preclude any other Civil prosecution to which the offender may be 
liable.  
VII. No decision or order of the Inam Commissioner, or of any of his Assistants, or of the Governor in 
Council, under the pro visions of this enactment, so long as the same shall be in force under such provisions, 
shall be questioned or avoided in any Court of Law; and no Commissioner or Assistant Commissioner, or 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMABY RENT-FREE ESTATES ACT, 1852.pdf - page 3]
3 
 other person acting under the provisions of this Act, shall be lia ble to be sued in any Civil Court for any 
act bonâ fide  done or ordered to be done by him in pursuance of the said provisions.  
 
______ ___ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMABY RENT-FREE ESTATES ACT, 1852.pdf - page 4]
4 
 SCHEDULE A  
Rules for defining the duties of each Inam commissioner and his assistants  
1. The duty of the Inam Commissioner and his Assistants shall be to investigate, in the manner 
prescribe d by this enactment, the titles of persons holding or claiming against Government the possession 
or enjoyment of Inams or Jagheers, or any interest therein, or claiming exemption from the payment of 
Land Revenue, and generally to act according to the instr uctions of Government in all matters not 
specifically provided for in this enactment.  
2. All orders of the Assistant Commissioners shall be appealable to the Inam Commissioner, who shall 
also have the authority of revising and of modifying, reversing or an nulling, if necessary, their orders and 
proceedings, and the orders and proceedings of the Inam Commissioner shall be in like manner appealable 
to, and subject to modification, reversal, or annulment by the Governor of Bombay in Council, whose orders 
shall  in every case be final.  
3. The Inam Commissioner or his Assistants shall receive from the persons holding or claiming to hold 
lands or any interest therein exempt from the payment of Revenue, statements explaining the nature of the 
title by which the land s or interests are so held, and shall take and record the evidence offered in support of 
such statements.  
4. These statements may be received, either directly by the Officers of the Inam Commission, or through 
the medium of the Revenue Authority of the Tal ooka in which the land or interest so held or claimed as 
exempt is situated; or in which the alleged proprietor resides, without any previous procedure, except a 
general invitation to such landholders of a District who shall hold or claim to hold lands exe mpt as aforesaid 
to state the nature of their titles.  
5. But when such general invitation is not sufficiently attended to, a notice may be issued to any party 
holding or claiming to hold any lands or any interest therein wholly or part
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMABY RENT-FREE ESTATES ACT, 1852.pdf - page 4]
be issued to any party 
holding or claiming to hold any lands or any interest therein wholly or partially exempt as afore said, 
requiring him personally, or by his Agent, to shew his title. The notice issued in such cases shall state the 
nature of the investigation which is intended, and shall call upon the alleged proprietor of the exempt lands 
or interest held or claimed to  be held exempt as aforesaid, to attend either personally or by an authorized 
Agent, at a specified place, and within a specified period, (which shall never be less than two months from 
the date of the notice being served,) to explain the nature of his tit le to hold such lands or interest exempt 
as aforesaid, and to produce all the evidence forthcoming to prove it. The notice shall further explain that a 
failure to comply with its terms will render the land, or interest to which it relates, liable to attach ment.  
6. The notice shall be served upon the party holding or claiming to hold the land or interest exempt as 
aforesaid, or, if his place of residence be not known, upon the person acting for him, or in default of such, 
upon the person in charge of the lan d or interest.  
7. If such persons cannot be found, a notice shall be posted in the Office of the Native Revenue Officer 
of the District, and in the Chouree, or most public place of the village, where the land or interest under 
inquiry is situated, calling on any person who may claim as proprietor to appear, either personally or by his 
Agent, to prove his title within six months from the date of the notice, under penalty of the attachment of 
the land or interest, and on failure of the appearance of a claiman t, the land or interest shall be liable to 
attachment.  
8. The attachment provided for by Rules 5 and 7 shall be enforced by the Collector or Chief Revenue 
Authority of the District in which the land to which it relates is situated, at the written requisiti on of the 
Inam Commissioner or his Assistant, which shall 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMABY RENT-FREE ESTATES ACT, 1852.pdf - page 4]
es is situated, at the written requisiti on of the 
Inam Commissioner or his Assistant, which shall be a sufficient warrant to the Collector for the attachment 
of the land, and for the collection of the rents accruing therefrom on account of Government during its 
attachment.  
9. As soon as possible  after the receipt of the statements in each District, and of the evidence by which 
they are supported, they shall be tested by the entries in the Government accounts and State records, and 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMABY RENT-FREE ESTATES ACT, 1852.pdf - page 5]
5 
 by any other evidence procurable, whether in favor of Government o r of the claimants, and decisions shall 
then be passed on them as to the continuance, resumption, or full or partial assessment of the lands.  
10. In cases where the notices provided for in Sections V. and VII. fail to procure the attendance of the 
persons to whom they are addressed, and no claimant appears to prosecute his claim, the Commissioner or 
Assistant Commissioner shall proceed to ascertain the facts of the case from such evidence as may he 
forthcoming or procurable, and shall pronounce such decisio n thereupon as to him shall seem just regarding 
the lands or interests to which the notices referred.  
11. An attachment enforced under Rule 8 shall be removed by the Collector or Chief Revenue Authority 
by whom it was made, on receipt of a communication fr om the Inam Commissioner or his Assistant, 
certifying that he considers the attachment to be no longer necessary; but the rents collected from the land 
during its attachment shall in no case be restored to the alleged proprietor, except under the general o r 
special instructions of Government.  
12. Certified copies of decisions, made according to the provisions of Rule 9, shall be delivered as soon 
as possible after each decision is passed, to the persons on whose claims the decision shall have been 
pronounce d, or their agents; and copies of all decisions made in the absence of any claimant, according to 
the provisions of Rule 10, shall he sent to the Mamlutdar, or other Revenue manager of the talook in which 
the lands to which they relate are situated, who sh all deliver them to the parties affected by them, should 
they be discoverable, or otherwise cause them to be publicly posted in the village to which the lands in 
question belong.  
13. Decisions, affecting any lands or any interests therein, passed under thi s enactment, shall be carried 
into execution by the Collector or Chief Revenue Authority of the District in
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMABY RENT-FREE ESTATES ACT, 1852.pdf - page 5]
ent, shall be carried 
into execution by the Collector or Chief Revenue Authority of the District in which the lands to which they 
relate are situated, at the requisition of the Inam Commissioner or his Assistant, in any manner which may, 
from time to time, be prescribed by the Governor of Bombay in Council.  
14. In all cases where a person may be desirous of appealing against any decision of the Inam 
Commissioner or his Assistants, he shall apply by a petition, addressed to the Authority by whom, acc ording 
to Rule 2, his appeal is cognizable, which petition shall be presented to such Authority within one hundred 
days from the date of the decree appealed against, a copy of which must accompany the petition of appeal, 
and no appeal which is not so made shall be admitted, without proof of the existence of a just and necessary 
cause for its not having been preferred in due time; and it is hereby provided, that no decree passed by the 
Inam Commissioner or any of his Assistants, shall be liable to be set asi de for want of form in the 
proceedings, but only for matters affecting the justice of the decision.  
SCHEDULE B  
Rules for the adjudication of titles to estates claimed as Inam or exempt from payment of land 
revenue  
1. Regarding Inams already declared permanent by competent authority since the introduction 
of the present Government. —All lands held under a specific and absolute declaration by the British 
Government, or any competent officer acting under it, that they were to be continued hereditarily or in 
perpetuity exempt, wholly or partially, from the payment of Revenue, are to be so continued according t o 
the purport of such declaration.  
Provision 1st.—If any question shall arise as to the competency of the officer to make or give such 
declaration as aforesaid, the Commissioner or Assistant Commissioner is to suspend his judgment, and 
report the circumsta nces of the case to the Governor of Bombay in Council, to whom a power is hereby 
re
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMABY RENT-FREE ESTATES ACT, 1852.pdf - page 5]
t the circumsta nces of the case to the Governor of Bombay in Council, to whom a power is hereby 
reserved of determining finally whether such officer was competent to make or give such declaration, and 
the Commissioner or Assistant Commissioner, upon receiving the determi nation of the said Governor in 
Council, shall decide accordingly.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMABY RENT-FREE ESTATES ACT, 1852.pdf - page 6]
6 
 2. Regarding claims to per sonal Inams, not yet adjudicated under the present Government. —
Any land held under a sunnud declaring it to be hereditary, shall be so continued according to the t erms of 
the sunnud.  
Provision  1st.—Provided that the grant was either made, or specifically recognized, by Authority 
competent to alienate Government Revenue in perpetuity, the question of which recognition and 
competency is to be referred to and determine d by Government in the manner prescribed by Provision 1st, 
Rule 1.  
Provision  2nd.—And provided that there be nothing in the conditions of the tenure which cannot be 
observed without a breach of the laws of the land, or the rules of public decency.  
Provision  3rd.—And provided that the grant was not afterwards revoked or disallowed, or an alteration 
of its terms ordered or recognized by a competent authority.  
3. All lands uninterruptedly held as wholly or partially exempt from assessment for a period of sixty 
years before the introduction of the British Government, and then in the authorized possession of a grandson 
in male descent, or male heir of the body of such grandson of the original grantee, shall continue to be so 
held so long as there shall be  in existence any male heir of the body of the person who was incumbent at 
the introduction of the British Government, tracing his lineage from such incumbent through male heirs 
only.  
4. All lands, uninterruptedly held as wholly or partially exempt from as sessment, for a period of forty 
years before the introduction of the British Government, and then in the authorized possession of a son, or 
male heir of the body of a son of the original grantee, are to be continued for one succession further than 
that of the person who was incumbent at the introduction of the British Government, that is, until the death 
of his last surviving son.  
Provision  1st.—The authorized possession contemplated by Rules 8 and 4 does not involve the 
necessity of proving
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMABY RENT-FREE ESTATES ACT, 1852.pdf - page 6]
.—The authorized possession contemplated by Rules 8 and 4 does not involve the 
necessity of proving any specific authority from, or recognition by, the Government or Paramount Power. 
The mere entry of the holding, as continued in the genuine accounts of the District Officers (even in those 
not audited and passed by the Government of the time being), will be sufficien t to bring it under the heads 
of “uninterrupted” and “authorized” so far as regards the purposes of this Rule; provided only that there are 
no entries in the Collectorate accounts, which shew that the holding of such lands exempt as aforesaid must 
have bee n unauthorized by the Government or Paramount Power.  
Provision  2nd.—If there be not evidence forthcoming to disprove a claimant's assertion that his holding 
has been undisputedly enjoyed for the number of years and descents requisite to fulfil the conditio ns of 
Rules 3 and 4 respectively, his prescriptive right shall be admitted.  
Provision 3 rd.—The introduction of the British Government is to be reckoned from the time the East 
India Company became the Government or Paramount Authority over each District as regards its Inams. In 
the Territories ceded by or conquered from the Peshwa, therefore, whether Khalsat Mahals or Serinjams, 
&c., held exclusive of Inams, &c., the introduction of the British Government will date from the close of 
that of the Peshwa. But i n case of the lapse of an independent principality, or of a jagheer more ancient than 
the Peshwa's Government, and over the Inams of which he did not claim any authority, the introduction of 
the British Government should be reckoned only from the date at w hich the general management of the 
Districts may have come into the hands of the Company, and in case any question shall arise as to the 
precise date when the East India Company became the Government over any district, or when the general 
management of any  District came into their hands, such question shall be referred t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMABY RENT-FREE ESTATES ACT, 1852.pdf - page 6]
en the general 
management of any  District came into their hands, such question shall be referred to and determined by 
Government in the manner prescribed by Provision 1 st, Rule 1.  
6. Land held as wholly exempt from payment of Revenue, or on partial assessment, the possession of 
which is not continuable under the preceding Rules, is to be resumed on the demise of the incumbent.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMABY RENT-FREE ESTATES ACT, 1852.pdf - page 7]
7 
 Provision  1st.—In case the incumbent at the time of the introduction of the British Government may 
have died, the permission to hold for life is to be extended to t he person in whose name the land may be 
continued, when the investigation is commenced, if there be no fraud apparent, nor other reason for 
withholding this indulgence.  
Provision  2nd.—When land is evidently held by fraud recently committed, (as when an Ina m which 
was resumed under the late Government has been re -occupied under the present Government without 
authority, of as when a pretended Inam is found to have originated. Since the introduction of this 
Government with the connivance of District or Village  Officers), it shall be at once resumed, not being 
continuable under this or any of the preceding Rules.  
7. Regarding claims to Inams apparently permanent by the nature of the objects for which they 
are held, and not merely personal .—All lands held for the  support of Mosques, Temples, or similar 
Institutions, of the permanent character of which there can be no doubt, are to be continued permanently, 
even though their permanent continuance may not have been expressly provided for when they were 
granted.  
Prov isions  1st, 2nd and 3 rd.—The same as the corresponding Provisions of Rule 2 of this Schedule in 
those cases in which Title Deeds or other Records proving the circumstances of the original grant, or its 
specific recognition by competent authority, are forth coming.  
Provision  4th.—When there is no proof forthcoming to shew whether or not an Inam, coming under 
the Provisions of this Rule, was granted, or even specifically recognized by a competent authority, still, if 
it has been undisputedly enjoyed for a peri od of forty years before the introduction of the present 
Government, it shall be permanently continued, and enjoyment proved by the mere entry of the Inam, as 
continued in genuine accounts of the District Officers, (even in those not passed by the Governme 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMABY RENT-FREE ESTATES ACT, 1852.pdf - page 7]
 
continued in genuine accounts of the District Officers, (even in those not passed by the Governme nt of the 
time being,) is to be considered sufficiently “uninterrupted” to give an Inam the benefit of this provision, if 
there be no entries in the Government accounts which shew that it must have been unauthorized by them.  
Provision 5th.—If the forthcomi ng records do not go far enough back to test the existence of enjoyment 
of the duration contemplated in Provision 4th as establishing full prescriptive title in such Inams, still, if so 
far as they do go, they are not opposed to the claimant's assertion th at sufficient enjoyment has taken place, 
the prescriptive title of the Inam shall be admitted according to his assertions, unless there be other evidence 
forthcoming to disprove them.  
Provision  6th.—The peculiar advantages of this Rule shall not apply to t he holdings of individuals in 
their own names for the performance of ceremonial worship, claims to which must be decided under the 
Rules for personal claims.  
Provision  7th.—When claims of the denomination coming under this Rule are found to be unsupported 
by proof of original valid title, and are proved void of sufficient prescriptive enjoyment, they are to be 
adjudicated according to Rule 6.  
8. All lands authorizedly  held by an official tenure which it is evident from local usage was meant to 
be hereditary, and has been so considered heretofore, even though there be no sunnuds declaring it to be 
so,—for instance, Inams which form the authorized emoluments of any hered itary office, as of Kazees, 
Tillage Joshees, &c., and are not merely personal, —are to be continued permanently.  
Provisions  1st, 2nd and 3 rd.—The same as the corresponding Provisions of Rule 2 of this Schedule in 
those cases in which Title Deeds or other Re cords, proving the circumstances of the original grant, or its 
specific recognition by competent authority, are forthcoming,  
Provision  4th.—When there is no pro
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMABY RENT-FREE ESTATES ACT, 1852.pdf - page 7]
specific recognition by competent authority, are forthcoming,  
Provision  4th.—When there is no proof forthcoming to shew whether or not an Inam, coming under 
the provisions of this Rule, was gra nted or even specifically recognized by competent authority, still if it 
has been undisputedly enjoyed as an official and not merely personal holding from the earliest period to 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMABY RENT-FREE ESTATES ACT, 1852.pdf - page 8]
8 
 which the forthcoming evidence does relate, it shall be continued permanently as official emolument, unless 
the claimant's own statement renders this course improper.  
Provision  5th.—The provisions of this Rule are not in any way to apply to emoluments continued for 
service performed to the State, as the Service Wuttuns of Desaees, S urdesaees, Nargowdas, Deshpandes, 
Patells, Coolkurnees, Mhars, Tulwars, whose claims are to be disposed of according to the Rules which are 
or may be established for the regulation of such holdings.  
Provision  6th.—It is to be understood that mere length of  enjoyment of land as Inam by an official 
person is not of itself sufficient to entitle a claim to be brought under this Rule.  
Provision  7th.—If a holding, claimed under this Rule, be found incapable of permanent continuance 
under it, the claimant shall be  allowed the advantages of any of the preceding Rules of this Schedule which 
may be applicable to his case.  
9. Regarding Provision for the Widows of the last incumbents of resumed holdings. —On the 
resumption of any lands under the Rules of this Schedule a moiety, or other portion may be continued to 
the Widows of the last incumbents during their lives, in cases of proved poverty and destitution.  
Provision  1st.—In the case of a holding, which is recognizable as an hereditary personal Inam, the 
widow of a pro prietor who dies without surviving male issue, or other heirs to whom his Inam will of 
necessity descend, is by right his sole heir, and during her life, the Inam cannot be regarded as having lapsed 
to Government: it should therefore, in such a case, he co ntinued undiminished during the widow's life.  
10. Regarding the exception of certain tenures from the application of these Rules. —These Rules 
shall not be necessarily applicable to Jageers, Serinjams, or other tenures for service to Government, or 
tenures of a Political nature, the titles and continuance of which shall be determined as heretof
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMABY RENT-FREE ESTATES ACT, 1852.pdf - page 8]
r 
tenures of a Political nature, the titles and continuance of which shall be determined as heretofore under 
such Rules as Government may find it necessary to issue from time to time.  
11. Regarding the modification and interpretation of these Rules. —Any of these Rul es may be 
relaxed in favor of claimants under instructions from the Governor of Bombay in Council, in whom shall 
also be vested the power of interpreting the precise meaning of any of the Rules respecting which a question 
may arise.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMBAY CIVIL COURTS’ ACT, 1869.pdf - page 1]
1 THE BOMBAY CIVIL COURTS ’ ACT, 1869  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
Preamble.  
SECTIONS  
PART I.—Preliminary . 
1. Short title. Extent of Act.  
2. [Repealed .]. 
PART II.—Districts and Sadr Stations.  
3. Alteration and creation of Districts.  
4. Position  of Sadr station.  
PART III.—District  Courts.  
5. District Judges.  
First District Judges.  
6. Situation of District Court.  
7. Original jurisdiction of District Judge.  
8. His appellate jurisdiction.  
9. Control and inspec tion of Courts.  
10. Writs and orders.  Reports and returns.  
11. Seal of District Judge.  
PART IV.—Joint Judges . 
12. Power to appoint Joint Judges.  
13. Enactments apply ing to District Judge to apply to Joint Judge. Joint Judge’s seal.  
PART V.—Assistant Judges . 
14. Power to appoint Assistant Judges.  
15. Situation of Assistant Judge’s Court.  
16. Original jurisdiction of Assistant Judge.  
17. Appellate jurisdiction of Assistant Judge.  
18. Continuance of Assistant Judge’s appellate jurisdiction.  
19. Power to invest As sistant Judge with powers of District Judge.  
20. Assistant Judge to use seal of District Judge.  
PART VI.—Subordinate Judges . 
21. Number of Subordi nate Civil Courts.  
22. Appointment of Subordinate Judges.  
22A. Power to fix local limits of Jurisdiction of Subordinate Judges.  
23. Situat ion of Subordinate Courts.  
24. Classes of Subordinate Judges.  
Jurisdiction of Subordinate Judge of first class.  
Jurisdiction of Subordinate Judge  of second class.  
25. Special jurisdiction of Subordinate Judge of first class.  
 Subject to verification and c onfirmation by the Department.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMBAY CIVIL COURTS’ ACT, 1869.pdf - page 2]
2 SECTIONS  
26. Appeals from his decision.  
27. Appellate jurisdiction of Subordinate Judge of first class.  
28. Power to invest Subordinate Judges with small cause powers.  
29. Seal of Subordinate Judge.  
30. [Repealed .]. 
31. [Repealed .]. 
32. Reference of Gov ernment suits.  
Removal or suspension.  
33. Commission of enquiry into alleged misconduct.  
34. Suspension of Sub ordinate Judges by High Court or Dis trict Judge.  
Saving of power of Government to suspend or dismiss.  
PART VII.—Temporary vacancies . 
35. Temporary vacancy of office of District Judge.  
36. Delegation of powers of District Judge.  
37. Temporary vacancy of office of Subordinate Judge.  
PART VIII. —Ministerial Officers . 
38. Appointment, et c., of ministerial officers.  
39. Duties of ministerial officers.  
40. Power to appoint Clerks of the Courts.  
PART IX.—Miscellaneous . 
41. Rules for keeping proceedings.  
42. Fees for process.  
43. Sittings of Courts.  
Vacation.  
SCHEDULE .—[Repealed .].
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMBAY CIVIL COURTS’ ACT, 1869.pdf - page 3]
3 THE BOMBAY CIVIL COURTS ’ ACT, 1869  
ACT NO. 14 OF 1869  
[19th March , 1869 .] 
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relati ng to the District and Subordi nate Civil Courts in 
the Presidency of Bombay.  
Preamble .—Whereas it is expedient to consolidate and amend t he law relating to the District and 
other subordinate Civil Courts in the Presidency  of Bombay; It is hereby enacted as follows: —  
PART I.—Preliminary . 
1. Short title. Extent  of Act. —This Act may be called “The Bombay Civil Courts ’ Act, 1869, ” and 
extends only to the territories (other than Sind) under the  Government of the Governor of Bombay in 
Council in which the Code of Civil Procedure is now in force. But the Governor of Bombay in Council 
may, by notification in the Government Gazette, extend this Act to any other of the territories under such 
Government in which the said Code is not in force, or to Sind.  
2. [Repeal of enactments ].—Rep. by the Obsolete enactments Act , 1870  (14 of 1870), s. 1 and 
Schedule , Part II (w.e.f . 5-4-1870).  
PART II.—Districts and Sadr Stations.  
3. Alteration and creation of Districts. —The Governor of Bombay in Council may from time to  
time, by noti fication in the Government Gaz ette, alter the limits of exist ing Zilas (which shall hereafter be 
called Districts) and create new Districts for the purposes of this Act.  
4. Position of Sadr station. —The Governor of Bombay in Council may also from time to time, by 
notification in the Government Gazette , alter the position of the Sa dr station in any District, and fix the 
position of the Sadr station in any new District.  
PART III.—District  Courts.  
5. District Judges. —There shall be in each District a District Court presided over by a Judge to be 
called th e District Judge. He shall be appointed by the Governor of Bombay in Council by whose 
authority only he shall be liable to be suspended or removed from his appointment.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
6. Situation of District Court. —The 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMBAY CIVIL COURTS’ ACT, 1869.pdf - page 3]
spended or removed from his appointment.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
6. Situation of District Court. —The District Judge shall ordinarily hold the District Court at the 
Sadr station in his District, but may, with the previous sanction of the High Court, hold it elsewhere 
within the District.  
7. Original jurisdiction of District Judge. —The District Court shall be the principal Court of 
origin al civil juris diction in the District, within the meaning of the Code of Civil Procedure.  
8. His appellate jurisdiction. —Except  as provided in sections sixteen, seventeen and twenty -six, the 
District Court shall be the Court of Appeal from all decrees and  orders passed by the Subordinate Courts 
from which an appeal lies under any law for the time being in force.  
9. Control and inspec tion of Courts. —The District Judge shall have general control over all the 
Civil Courts and their establishments within the District, and it shall be his duty to inspect, or to cause one 
of his Assistants to in spect, the proceedings of all the Courts subordinate to him, and to give such 
directions with respect to matters not provided for by law as he may think necessary. The D istrict Judge 
shall also refer to the High Court all such matters as appear to him to require that a rule of that Court 
should be made thereon.  
                                                      
1. The second paragraph of s. 5 rep. by Act 12 of 1876,  s. 1 and Schedule , Part I  (w.e.f. 11 -4-1876).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMBAY CIVIL COURTS’ ACT, 1869.pdf - page 4]
4 10. Writs and orders.  Reports and returns .—The District Judge shall obey all writs, orders, or 
processes issued to him by the High Court, and shall make such returns or reports thereto under his 
signature and the  seal of th e Court  as the exigencies of the case require. He shall further furnish such 
reports and returns and copies of proceedings as may be called for  by the High Court or the Governor of 
Bombay in Council.  
11. Seal of District Judge. —The District Judge shall use a circular seal two inches in diameter, 
which shall bear thereon the. Royal Arms with the following inscription in English and the principal 
language of the District —“District Court of                    .” 
PART IV.—Joint Judges . 
12. Power to appoint Joint Judges. —The Governor of Bombay in Council may, with the previous 
sanction of the Governor General of India in Council, appoint in any District a Joint Judge  who shall be 
invested with co -extensive powers and a concurrent jurisdiction with the District Judge, except that he 
shall not keep a file of civil suits and shall transact such civil business only as he may receive from the 
District Judge, o r as may have been referred to the Joint Judge by order of the High Court.  
When the appointment of a Joint Judge shall have been sanctioned by the Governor General of India 
in Council, the Governor of Bombay in Council may, so long as such sanction continu es in force, appoint 
a successor to such Joint Judge in case his office becomes vacant, or transfer such Joint Judge from one 
District to another; and in such other District the Joint Judge so transferred shall have the same powers as 
he had in the former District.  
13. Enactments apply ing to District Judge to apply to Joint Judge. Joint Judge’s seal. —All 
Regulations and Acts now or hereafter in force and applying to a District Judge shall be deemed to apply 
also to the Joint Judge; and the seal of the Joint Judge shall be the same as is used by the District Ju
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMBAY CIVIL COURTS’ ACT, 1869.pdf - page 4]
 to the Joint Judge; and the seal of the Joint Judge shall be the same as is used by the District Judge.  
PART V.—Assistant Judges . 
14. Power to appoint Assistant Judges. —The Governor of Bombay in Council, under the general 
control of the Governor General of India in Council, may appoint one or mo re Assistants to the District 
Judge, and may suspend or remove from his appointment any Assistant so appointed.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
15. Situation of Assistant Judge’s Court. —An Assistant Judge shall ordinarily hold his Court at the 
same place as the District Judge, but he may hold his Court elsewhere within the District, whenever the 
District Judge shall, with the previous sanction of the High Court, direct him so to do.  
16. Original jurisdiction of Assistant Judge. —The District Judge may refer to any  Assistant Judge 
subordinate to him original suits of which  the subject -matter does not  amount to ten thousand rupees in 
amount or value, and miscellaneous applications not being of the nature of appeals. The Assistant Judge 
shall have jurisdiction to try such suits and to dispose of such applica tions. Where the Assistant Judge ’s 
decrees and orders in such cases are ap pealable, the appeal shall lie to the District Judge or to the High 
Court ac cording as the amount or value of the subject -matter does not exceed or exceeds five thousand 
rupees.  
The Assistant Judge shall, when directed by the District Judge so to do, also take evidence on 
applications for certificates under 2*** Act No. XX of 1864 ( for making better provi sion for the care of 
the persons and  property  of minors in  the Presidency of Bombay ), and shall forward it with his opinion 
thereon for the final orders of the District Judge.  
17. Appellate jurisdiction of Assistant Judge. —The Governor of Bombay in Council may, by 
notification in the Governm ent Gazette, empower any Assistant Judge to try  such appeals from the 
decrees and orders of the subordinate Courts as would lie 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMBAY CIVIL COURTS’ ACT, 1869.pdf - page 4]
tant Judge to try  such appeals from the 
decrees and orders of the subordinate Courts as would lie to the District Judge and as may be referred by 
him to the Assistant Judge.  
                                                      
1. The second  paragraph of s . 14 rep. by Act 12 of 1876,  s. 1 and  Schedule , Part I  (w.e.f. 11 -4-1876).  
2. Certain words repealed by Act 7 of 1889, s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 8 -3-1889).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMBAY CIVIL COURTS’ ACT, 1869.pdf - page 5]
5 Decrees and orders passed under this section by an A ssistant Judge shall  have the same force and 
shall be subject to the same rules as regards procedure and appeals as decrees and orders passed by the 
District Judge.  
18. Continuance of Assistant Judge’s appellate jurisdiction. —A person filling the office of  
Assistant Judge, on whom the power of  hearing appeals has once been conferred under section seventeen, 
shall continue to have this power so long and so often as he may fill the office  of Assistant Judge, without 
reference  to the District in which he may b e employed; provided that the Governor of Bombay in Council 
may, by notification in the Government Gazette, at any time withdraw such power.  
19. Power to invest As sistant Judge with powers of District Judge. —The Governor of Bombay in 
Council may, by notif ication in the Government Gazette, invest an Assistant Judge with all or any of the 
powers of a District Judge within a particular part of a District, and may, by like notification, from time to 
time determine and alter the limits of such Part.  
The jurisdi ction of an Assistant Judge so invested shall pro tanto  exclude the jurisdiction of the 
District Judge from within the said limits.  
Every Assistant Judge so invested shall ordinarily hold his Court at such place within the local limits 
of his jurisdiction as may be determined by the Governor of Bombay in Council, and may, with the 
previous sanction of the High Court, hold it at any other place within such limits.  
20. Assistant Judge to use seal of District Judge. —Every Assistant Judge shall use the seal of the 
District Judge to whom he is Assistant.  
PART VI.—Subordinate Judges . 
21. Number of Subordi nate Civil Courts. —There shall be in each District so many Civil Courts 
subordinate to the District Court as the Governor of Bombay in Council,  acting under the general control 
of the Governor General of India in Council, shall from time to time direct.  
22. Appointment
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMBAY CIVIL COURTS’ ACT, 1869.pdf - page 5]
trol 
of the Governor General of India in Council, shall from time to time direct.  
22. Appointment of Sub ordinate Judges. —The Judges of such subordinate Courts shall be 
appointed by the Governor of Bombay in Council, and shall be called Subordina te Judges.  
No person shall be appointed a Subordinate Judge unless he be a subject of the Queen who has 
practised five years as an Advocate of a High Court in India or as a Vakil in the High Court of Judicature 
in Bombay, or who has qualified for the dutie s of a Subordinate Judge according to such tests as may for 
the time being be prescribed by such High Court, or who has taken the degree of Bachelor of Laws in the 
University of Bombay.  
The tests so prescribed by the High Court shall be notified in the Gov ernment Gazette.  
1[22A. Power to fix local limits of jurisdiction of Subordinate Judges. —The Governor of Bombay 
in Council may, by notification in the Official Gazette, fix, and, by a like notification, from time to time 
alter, the local limits of the ordinary jurisdiction of the Subordinate Judges. ] 
23. Situation of Subordinate Courts. —The Subordinate Judges shall hold their Courts at such place 
or places as  the Governor of Bombay in Council may from  time to time appoint, within the local limits of 
their respective jurisdictions. Wherever more than one such place is appointed, the District Judge shall, 
subject to the control of the High Court, fix the days on which the Subordinate Judge shall hold his Court 
at each of such places, and the Subordinate Judge shall cause such days to be duly notified throughout the 
local limits of his jurisdiction.  
The same person may be the Judge of more than one Subordinate Court; and in such cases the District 
Judge shall, subject to the control of the High Court, presc ribe rules for regulating the time during which 
the Subordinate Judge shall sit in each Court.  
The Judge of any Subordinate Court may, with the previo us sanction of the High Court, be 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMBAY CIVIL COURTS’ ACT, 1869.pdf - page 5]
 Court.  
The Judge of any Subordinate Court may, with the previo us sanction of the High Court, be deputed 
by the District Judge to the Court of another Subordinate Judge for the purpose of assist ing him in the 
disposal of the  suits on his file.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 9 of 1880, s. 2 (w.e.f. 30 -4-1880). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMBAY CIVIL COURTS’ ACT, 1869.pdf - page 6]
6 24. Classes of Subordinate Judges. —The Subordinate Judges shall be of two classes.  
Jurisdiction of Subordinate Judge of first class. —The jurisdiction of a Subordinate Judge of the 
first class  extends to all  original suits and proceedings of a civil nature.  
Jurisdiction of Sub ordinate Judge of second class. —The jurisdiction of a Subordinate Judge of the 
second class extends to all original suits and proceedings of a civil nature wher ein the subject -matter does 
not exceed in amount or value five thousand rupees.  
25. Special jurisdiction of Subordinate Judge of first class. —A Subordinate Judge of the first 
class, in  addition to his ordinary juris diction, shall exercise a special jurisdiction in respect of such  suits 
and proceedings of a civil nature wherein the subject -matter exceeds five thousand rupees in amount or 
value as may arise within the local jurisdictions of the Courts in the District presided over by S ubordinate 
Judges  of the second class.  
In Districts to which more than one Subordinate Judge of the first class have been appointed, the 
District Judge, subject to the orders of the High Court, shall assign to each the local limits within which 
his said special juris diction is to be exercised.  
26. Appeals from his decision. —In all s uits decided by a Subordinate J udge 1*** of which the 
amount or value of the subject -matter exceeds five thousand rupees, the appeal from his decision shall be 
direct to the High Court.  
27. Appe llate jurisdiction of Subordinate Judge of first class. —The Governor of Bombay in 
Council may invest any Subordinate Judge of the first class with power to hear appeals from  such decrees 
and orders of Subordinate Courts as may be referred to him by the Jud ge of the District.  
Decrees and orders so passed in appeal by a Subordinate Judge of the first class shal l have the same  
force as if passed by a District Judge.  
The Governor of Bombay in Council may, whenever he thinks fit, with draw 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMBAY CIVIL COURTS’ ACT, 1869.pdf - page 6]
sed by a District Judge.  
The Governor of Bombay in Council may, whenever he thinks fit, with draw such jurisdiction from  
any Subordinate Judge so invested.  
28. Power to invest Subordinate Judges with small cause powers. —The Governor of Bombay in 
Council may invest, within such local  limits as he shall  from time to time appoint, any Subordinate  Judge 
of the first class with the jurisdiction of a Judge of a  Court of Small Causes, for the trial of suits 
cognizable by such Courts up to the amount of five hundred rupees, and any Subordinate Judge of the 
second class with the same jurisdiction up to the amount of fifty rupees.  
The Governor of Bombay in Council may, whenever he thinks fit, with draw such jurisdiction from 
any Subordinate Judge so invested.  
29. Seal of Subordinate Judge. —Each Subordinate Judge shall use a seal one inch and a half in 
diameter, bearing the Royal C rown with the following inscrip tion in English and the principal language of 
the District —“Subordinate Judge of      .” 
30. [First Subordinate Judges of first class ].—Rep. by the Obsolete Enactments Act , 1876                   
(12 of 1876), s. 1 and Schedule , Part I (w.e.f.  11-4-1876).   
31. [Pending proceedings ].—Rep. by s. 1 and Schedule , Part  I, ibid. (w.e.f.  11-4-1876).  
32. Reference of Gov ernment suits. —2[No Subordinate Judge  or Court of Small Causes shall 
receive or register a suit in which  the Government or any officer of Government in his official capacity is 
a party, but in every such case such Judge or Court  shall refer the plaintiff  to the District Judge, in whose 
Court alone  (subject to the provisions of section nineteen)  such suit shall be in stituted. ] 
                                                      
1. The words “of the fir st class in the exercise of his ordinary and special original jurisdiction” omitted by Act 28 of 1930,             
s. 2 (w.e.f. 25 -7-1930).  
2. Subs. by Act 10 of 1876, s. 15, for certain words (w.e.f. 28 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMBAY CIVIL COURTS’ ACT, 1869.pdf - page 6]
       
s. 2 (w.e.f. 25 -7-1930).  
2. Subs. by Act 10 of 1876, s. 15, for certain words (w.e.f. 28 -3-1876).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMBAY CIVIL COURTS’ ACT, 1869.pdf - page 7]
7 1[Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to any suit merely because — 
(a) a municipal corporation constituted under Bombay Act No. VI of 1873, or any other 
enactment for the time being in force, is a party to such suit and  an officer of Government is in his 
official capacity a member of such corporation, or  
(b) an officer of a Court appointed under the Code of Civil Procedure, section 456, last paragraph, 
2*** a party to such suit. ] 
Removal or suspension.  
33. Commission of  enquiry into alleged misconduct. —Whenever the High Co urt is of opinion that 
there are good grounds for making a formal and public enquiry into the truth of any  imputation of 
misconduct by any Subordinate Judge, the  High Court may appoint a Commissioner or  Commissioners 
for the purpose of holding such an enquiry, and on the receipt of his or their report may order that the 
Subordinate Judge be removed or suspended from office, or reduced to a lower class.  
The provisions of Act No. XXXVII  of 1850 (for regula ting enquiries into the behaviour of public 
servants) shall apply to enquiries under this section, the powers  conferred by that Act on the Government  
being exercised by the High Court.  
34. Suspension of Sub ordinate Judges by High Court or Dis trict Judge. —The High Court may 
suspend any Subordinate Judge from office pending the result of an enquiry into his behaviour under this 
section . 
Any District Judge may, whenever he sees urgent necessity for so doing, suspend from office any 
Subordinate Judge under hi s control. But whenever the  District Judge suspends any such Subordinate 
Judge, he shall forthwith re port the case for the orders of the High Court.  
Saving of power of Government to suspend or dismiss. —Nothing in this section or in section 
thirty -three shall be held to interfere  with the right of Government to suspend, or remove from  office, any 
Subordinate Judge at their discretion.  
PART VII.—Temporary vacancies . 
35
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMBAY CIVIL COURTS’ ACT, 1869.pdf - page 7]
move from  office, any 
Subordinate Judge at their discretion.  
PART VII.—Temporary vacancies . 
35. Temporary vacancy of office of District Judge. —In the event of the death of the District Judge 
or of his being pre vented from performing his duties by illness or other casualty, or of his absence from 
his District on leave, the first in rank of the Assistant Judges in the District, or in the absence  from the 
District of an Assistant Judge the first in rank of the Subordinate Judges, shall assume charge of the 
District Court without interruption to his or dinary jurisdiction, and while so in charge shall perform the 
duties of a District judge with respect t o the filing of suits and app eals, receiving pleadings, execu tion of 
processes, return of writs and the like, and shall be designated Assistant Judge or Subordinate Judge, as 
the case may be, in charge of the District, and shall continue in such charge until the office of District 
Judge may be resumed or assumed by an officer duly appointed thereto.  
36. Delegation of powers of District Judge. —Any District Judge leaving the Sadr  station and 
proceeding on duty to any place within his District, may delegate to an Assistant  Judge, or in t he absence 
of an Assistant Judge to a Subor dinate Judge at the Sadr station, the power of performing such of the 
duties enumerated in section thirty -five as may be emergent; and such officer shall be designated 
Assistant or Subordinate Judge, as the case may be, in charge of the Sadr station.  
37. Temporary vacancy of office of Subordinate Judge. —In the event of the death, suspension or 
temporary absence of any Subordinate Judge, the District Judge may empower the  Judge of any 
Subordinate Co urt of the same District to per form the duties of the Judge of the vacated Subordinate 
Court, either at the place of such Court or of his own Court; but in every such case the Registers and 
Records of the two Courts shall be kept distinct . 
                       
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMBAY CIVIL COURTS’ ACT, 1869.pdf - page 7]
 case the Registers and 
Records of the two Courts shall be kept distinct . 
                                                      
1. Added by Act 15 of 1880, s. 3 (w.e.f. 3 -11-1880).  
2. Certain words rep . by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and the First Schedule , Part I  (w.e.f. 21 -3-1891).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMBAY CIVIL COURTS’ ACT, 1869.pdf - page 8]
8 PART VIII. —Ministerial Officers . 
38. Appointment, et c., of ministerial officers. —All ministerial officers of the Civil Courts in each 
District shall be  appointed, and may be fined, suspended or dismissed by the  District Judge, subject to 
such rules as the High Court may  from time to time  prescribe : 
Provided that the Judge of every Subordinate Court may, subject to the like rules, appoint the 
ministerial officers of such Court, whose salaries do not exceed rupees ten per mens em, and may  by order 
find, suspend or dismiss any ministerial off icer of such Court who is guilty of any misconduct or neglect 
in the performance of the duties of his office.  Every such order shall be subject to appeal to the District 
Judge; and the roles for the time being applicable to appeals to the Court of Session from orders of the 
Criminal Courts subordinate thereto, shall apply to all appeals under this section.  
Nothing in this section shall exempt the offender from any penal or other consequences to which h e 
may be liable under any other  law in force for the tim e being.  
39. Duties of ministerial officers. —The duties of the said ministerial officers shall be regulated by  
such rules as the High Court may from time to time  prescribe.  
40. Power to appoint Clerks of the Courts. —The Governor of Bombay in Council may, u nder the 
general control  of the Governor General of In dia in Council, appoint to any Civil Court under this Act a 
Clerk of the Court who, in addi tion to such duties as may from time to time be prescribed by the High 
Court, may receive and register plaints , and shall refer such as he may consider should be refused for the 
orders of the Judge of the Court, and may sign all processes, and authenticate copies of papers.  
PART IX.—Miscellaneous . 
41. Rules for keeping proceedings. —The proceedings of each Civil Court shall be kept and 
recorded according to such rules as the High Court may from time to  time prescribe. The High Court s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMBAY CIVIL COURTS’ ACT, 1869.pdf - page 8]
ecorded according to such rules as the High Court may from time to  time prescribe. The High Court shall 
also lay down rules under which copies of papers may be granted.  
42. Fees for process. —The High Court shall from time to time, with the sanction of the Governor of 
Bombay in Council, prescribe and regulate the  fees to be taken for any process issued by any Court the 
constitution of which is declared by this Act, or by any officer of such Court.  
Tables of the fees so prescribed sha ll be published in the Government  Gazette.  
43. Sittings of Courts. —The District and Subordinate Courts shall sit from day to day, except on 
Sundays, New Year's Day, Good Friday, Christmas Day,  and Her Majesty ’s Birth Day, and such other 
days as may be sanc tioned for each or every District by the High Court.  
Vacation .—The High Court may also permit the Civil Courts under its control to adjourn for a period 
or periods not exceeding in the whole six  weeks in each year.  
[SCHEDULE ].—Rep. by the Obsolete enactmen ts Act , 1870 (14 of 1870), s. 1 and Schedule , Part II 
(w.e.f . 5-4-1870).  
 
__________
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMBAY REVENUE JURISDICTION ACT, 1876.pdf - page 1]
1  THE BOMBAY REVENUE JURISDICTION ACT, 18 76 
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
Preamble.  
SECTIONS . 
1. Short title.  
Commencement.  
Extent.  
2. [Repealed .]. 
3. Interpretation -clause.  
Land.  
Land -revenue . 
Revenue officer.  
4. Bar of certain suits.  
Proviso.  
5. Saving of certain suits.  
6. Bar of certain suits against Revenue o fficers. 
7. Punishment or prosecution of Revenue officers not a bar  to civil remedies.  
8. [Repealed .]. 
9. [Repealed .]. 
10. [Repealed. ]. 
11. Suits  not to be  entertained unless plaintiff has exhausted  right of appeal.  
12. Power of State Government to  refer questions for decision of  High Court . 
13. Power of Civil Judge to refer  questions  of jurisdiction to  High Court.  
14. Composition of Bench.   
15. [Repealed .]. 
16. Privileges of Government in suits in which it is concerned.  
17. [Repealed .]. 
THE SCHE DULE . [Repealed .]. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.  
 
 
 
 
* Subject to verification and confirmation by the Department.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMBAY REVENUE JURISDICTION ACT, 1876.pdf - page 2]
2 THE BOMBAY REVENUE JURISDICTION ACT, 1876  
ACT NO. 10 OF 1876  
[28th March , 1876.]  
An Act to limit the jurisdiction of the Civil Courts throughout the Bombay Presidency in matters 
relating to the Land -revenue, and for other pur poses.  
Preamble :—WHEREAS  in certain parts of the Presidency of Bombay, the jurisdiction of the Civil 
Courts in matters connected with the land -revenue is more ex tensive than it is in the rest of the said 
Presidency;  
And whereas it is expedient that the jurisdiction of all the Civil Courts in the said Presidency should 
be limited in manner hereinafter appearing ; 
And whereas it is also expedient to amend the Bombay Civil Courts Act, section thirty -two, and to 
revive certain provisions of the thirteenth section of Regulation 17 of 1827 of the Bombay Code, which 
was repealed by th e Land Improvement Act, 1871  (26 of 1 871), 1***; 
It is hereby enacted as follows :— 
1. Short  title.—This Act may be called “The Bombay Revenue Jurisdiction Act, 1876 ”: 
Commencem ent.—So much of section four as relates to claims to set aside, on the ground of 
irregularity, mistake or any other ground except fraud, sales for arrears of land -revenue, shall come into 
force on such day as the Governor General in Council directs in that behalf by  notification in the Gazette 
of India . The rest of this  Act shall come into force on the passing thereof :  
Extent .—And it shall extend to all 2[the 3[State of Maharashtra]] , but not so as to affect —  
(a) any suit regarding the assessment of revenue on land situate in 4[the City of Bombay ], or the 
collection of such revenue;  
(b) any of the provisions of Bombay Acts 5 of 1862 and 6 of 1862, or of  5[Act 21 of 18 81] or of 
Act 23 of 1871;  
6*   *   *   *           * 
2. Repeal of enactments. —Rep. by Repealing and Amending Act , 1891 (12 of 1891). 
3. Interpretation -clause. —In this Act, unless there be something repug nant in the subject or 
context, —  
Land .—“Land ” includes the sit
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMBAY REVENUE JURISDICTION ACT, 1876.pdf - page 2]
unless there be something repug nant in the subject or 
context, —  
Land .—“Land ” includes the sites of villages, towns and cities: it also includes trees, growing crops 
and grass, fruit upon, and juice in, trees, rights -of-way, ferries, fisheries, and all other benefits to arise out 
of land, and things attached to the earth, or perman ently fastened to things attached to the earth : 
Land -Revenue .—“Land -revenue ” means all sums and payments, in money or in kind, received or 
claimable by or on behalf 7[of the 8[Government ]] from any person on account of any land                                   
held 9[by 10[State] Government ] under the provisions of any law for the time being in force : 
                                                      
* Subject to verification and confirmation by the Department.  
1. Rep. by Act 4 of 1894, the First Schedule, Part 3 (w.e.f. 23 -2-1894).  
2. Subs. by the A.O.  1950, for “all the territories under the Government of the Governor of Bombay in Council”.  
3. Subs. by the A.O.  1960, for “State of Bombay”.  
4. Subs. by , s. 9 of the Greater Bombay Laws and the Bombay High Court (Declaration of Limits) Act, 1945 (Bom.                                      
Act 17 of 1945), Schedule E. r ead with Bom. Act 52 of 1947, s. 2 proviso , for “the Collectorate of Bombay” .  
5. Rep. by A ct 12 of 1891, the Second Schedule Part 1.  
6. Rep. by Act 16 of 1895, the First Schedule (w.e.f. 10 -10-1895).  
7. Subs. by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council , for “of the Crown”.  
8. Subs. by A.O.  1950, for “Crown”.   
9. Subs. by A.O.  in Council , for “by the Provincial Government”.  
10. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950, for “Provincial”.  
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMBAY REVENUE JURISDICTION ACT, 1876.pdf - page 3]
3 Revenue -officer .—“Revenue officer ” means any officer employed in or about the business of the 
land-revenue, or of the surveys, assessment, accounts or records connected therewith.  
4. Bar of certain suits. —Subject to the exceptions hereinafter appearing, no Civil Court shall 
exercise jurisd iction as to any of the following matters :— 
(a) 1[claims  against  the 2[Government ] relating to any property appertaining to the office of any 
hereditary  officer appointed  or recognized under Bombay Act  No. 3 of 1874, or any other law for the 
time being in force, or of any other village -officer or servant, or  
claims to perform the duties of any such officer or servant, or in respect of any injury caused by 
exclu sion from such office or service, or  
suits to se t aside or avoid any order under the same Act or any oth er law relating to the same 
subject for the time being in force passed 3[by the 4[State] Government ] or any officer duly authori zed 
in that behalf, or  
claims against Government relating to lands held under treaty, or to lands granted or held as 
saranjam, or on other political tenure, or to lands declared by Government or any officer duly 
authori zed in that behalf to be held for service;  
(b) objections —  
to the amount or incidence of any assessment of land-revenue authori zed 3[by the 4[State]  
Government ], or 
to the mode of assessment, or to the principle on which such assessment is fixed, or  
to the validity or effect of the notification of sur vey or settlement, or of any notification 
determining the period of settlement;  
(c) claims connected with or arising out of any proceedings for the realization of land -revenue or 
the rendering of assistance 3[by the 4[State] Government ] or any officer duly authorized in that behalf 
to superior holders or occupant s for the recovery of their dues f rom inferior holders or tenants ; 
claims to set aside o n account of irregularity, mis take, or any other ground except fraud, sa les
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMBAY REVENUE JURISDICTION ACT, 1876.pdf - page 3]

claims to set aside o n account of irregularity, mis take, or any other ground except fraud, sa les for 
arrears of land -revenue ; 
(d) claims against 2[Government ]—  
(1) to be entered in the revenue survey or set tlement records or village papers as liable for the 
land-revenue, or as superior holder, inferior holder, occupant or tenant, or  
(2) to have any entry made in any record of a re venue survey or settlement, or  
(3) to have any such entr y either omitted or amended;  
(e) the distribution of land or allotment of laud -revenue on partition of any estate under Bombay 
Act 4 of 1868, or any other law for the time being in force;  
(f) 1[claims against 2[Government ]]—  
to hold land wholly or partially free from payment of land -revenue, or  
to receive payments charged on or payable out of the land -revenue, or  
to set aside any cess or rate authorized 3[by the 4[State] Govern ment ] under the provisions of 
any law for the time being in force, or  
respectin g, the occupation of waste or vacant land belonging 5[to the 2[Government ]]; 
                                                      
1. Subs. by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council, for “claims against the Crown”.  
2. Subs. by the  A.O. 1950, for “Crown”.  
        3. Subs. by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council, for “by the Provincial Government” .  
4. Subs. by the A . O. 1950, for “Provincial” .  
5. Subs. by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council  for “to the Crown” . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMBAY REVENUE JURISDICTION ACT, 1876.pdf - page 4]
4 (g) claims regarding boundaries fixed under Bom bay Act No. 1 of 1865, or any other law for the 
time being in force, or to set aside any order passed by a competent officer  under any such law with 
regard to boundary -marks:  
Proviso .—Provided that if any person claim to hold land wholly or partially exempt from 
payment of land -revenue under —  
(h) any enactment for the time being in force expressly creating an exemption not before existing 
in favour of an individual or of any class of persons, or expressly confirming such an exemption on 
the ground of its being shown in a public record, or of its ha ving existed for a spe cified term of    
years, or  
(i) an instrument or sanad given by or by order of the 1[ 2[State] Government]  under Bombay Act 
No. 2 of 1863, section one, clause first, or Bom bay Act No. 7 of 18 63, section two, clause first, or  
(j) any o ther written grant by the British Gov ernment expressly creating or confirming such 
exemp tion, or  
(k) a judgment by a Court of law, or an adjudica tion duly passed by a competent officer under 
Bombay  Regulation 17 of 1827, chapter X, or under Act  No. 11 of 1852, which declares the 
particular pro perty in dispute to be exempt;  
such claim shall be cognizable in the Civil Courts.  
Illustrations to (h). 
(1). It is enacted that, in the event of the proprietary right in lands, the property of Government, being 
transferred to individuals, they shall be permitted to hold the lands for ever at the assessment at which they are 
transferred. The proprietary right in cert ain lands is transferred to A at an assessment of Rs. 100. An exemption from 
higher assessment not before existing is expressly created in favour of A by enactment, and he may seek relief in the 
Civil Court against over -assessment.  
(2). It is enacted that when a specific limit to assessment has been established and preserved, the assessment 
shall not exceed such specific limit. A is t he owner of land worth Rs. 100 for ass
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMBAY REVENUE JURISDICTION ACT, 1876.pdf - page 4]
 the assessment 
shall not exceed such specific limit. A is t he owner of land worth Rs. 100 for assessment. He claims to be assessed 
at Rs. 50 only on the strength of a course of dealing  with him and his predecessors under which his land has not 
been more highly assessed. There is no exemption not before existing created by enactment, and A ’s claim is not 
cognizable in a Civil Court.  
(3). It is enacted that land -revenue shall not be levia ble from any land held and entered in the land -registers as 
exempt. A claims to hold certain land as exempt on the ground that it has been so held by him, and is so entered in 
the land -register. This is an exemption expressly confirmed by enactment on the ground of its being shown in a 
public record, and A ’s claim is cognizable in a Civil Court.  
(4). It is enacted that the Collector shall confirm existing exemptions of all la nds shown in certain maps to be 
exempt. A claims exemption alleging that his land i s shown in the maps to be exempt. A's claim is cognizable in a 
Civil Court.  
(5). It is enacted that assessment shall be fixed with refer ence to certain considerations, and not with reference 
to others. This is not an enactment creating an exemption in fav our of any individual or class, and no objection to an 
assessment under such an enactment is cognizable in a Civil Court.  
5. Saving of certain suits. —Nothing in section four shall be held to prevent the Civil Courts from 
entertaining the following suits: — 
(a) suits 3[against  the 4[Government ]] to contest the amount claimed, or paid under protest, or 
recovered, as land -revenue on the ground that such amount is in excess of the amount authori zed in 
that behalf 5[by the 2[State]  Government ], or that such amoun t had previous to such claim, payment, 
or recovery been satisfied, in whole or in part, or that the plaintiff, or the person whom he represents, 
is not the person liable for such amount;  
                                             
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMBAY REVENUE JURISDICTION ACT, 1876.pdf - page 4]
presents, 
is not the person liable for such amount;  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the Adaptation of Indian Laws order in Council, for “Provincial Government” .  
2. Subs. by A.O. , 1950 , for “Provincial”  
3. Subs. by  the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council , for “against the Crown” . 
4. Subs. by A.O.,  1950 , for “Crown” .  
5. Subs. by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council , for “by the Provincial Government” .  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMBAY REVENUE JURISDICTION ACT, 1876.pdf - page 5]
5 (b) suits between private parties for the purpose of  establishing any private right, although it may 
be affected by any entry in any record of a revenue sur vey or settlement or in any village papers ; 
(c) suits between superior holders or occupants and inferior holders or tenants regarding the dues 
claim ed or recovered from the latter ; 
  and nothing in section four, clause ( g) shall be held to prevent the Civil Courts from entertaining 
suits, other than suits 1[against the 2[Government ]], for posses sion of any land being a whole survey 
number or a recognize d share of a survey number.  
3[and nothing in section four shall be held to prevent the Civil Courts in the Districts mentioned 
in the second schedule hereto annexed from exercising such jurisdiction as, according to the terms of 
any law in force on the twe nty-eighth day of March 1876, they could have exercised over claims 
1[against the 2[Government ]]— 
(a) relating to any property appertaining to the office of any hereditary officer appointed or 
recognized under Bombay Act No. 3 of 1874, or any other law for  the time being in force, or of any 
other village -officer or servant ; 
(b) to hold land wholly or partially free from payment of land -revenue ; 
(c) to receive payments charged on, or payable out of, the land -revenue.]  
6. Bar of certain suits against Revenue  officers .—Revenue officers shall not be liable to be sued  for 
damages in any Civil Court for any act bona fide done, or ordered to b e done, by them as such in 
pursuance of the provisions of any law for the time being in force.  
If any Revenue officer absconds or does not attend when called on by his official superior, and if the 
Collector of the District proceeds against him or his sure ties for public money, papers or property 
according to the provisions of any law for the time being in force, such C ollector shall not be liable to pay 
damages or costs in any suit brought against him by such officer or sureties, al
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMBAY REVENUE JURISDICTION ACT, 1876.pdf - page 5]
t be liable to pay 
damages or costs in any suit brought against him by such officer or sureties, although it appears that a part 
only, or no part whatever, of the sum demanded was due from the officer so absconding or  failing to 
attend, or  that he  was not in possession of the papers or property de manded of him.  
7. Punishment or prosecu tion of Reve nue officers not a bar to civil reme dies.—Nothing in any law 
for the time being in force which authori zes the punishment departmentally of any  Revenue officer for 
any offence or breach of duty, or which sanctions his prosecution criminally for such offence or breach, 
shall be held to bar any remedy  which may be had in the Civil Court against such officer.  
8. [Officers to an swer in suits against them for acts done by order of superior authority .]—Rep. by 
Bombay Revenue Jurisdiction Act , 1880 ( Bom. Act  15 of 1880), s. 2. 
9. [Appeals from proceedings of Revenue officers .]—Rep. by, s.  2, ibid. 
10. [Power to Local Government to call for re cord.]—Rep. by, s.  2, ibid.  
11. Suits not to be entertained unless plaintiff has exhausted right of appeal. —No Civil Court 
shall entertain any suit 1[against  the 2[Government ]] on account of any act or omission of any                           
Revenue -officer unless the plaintiff first proves that, previously to bringing his suit, he has presented all 
such appeals allowed by the law for the time being in force, as within the period of limitation allowed for 
bringing such suit, it was possible to  present.  
12. Power of 4[State] Government to refer questions for the decision of the High Court. —If in 
the trial or investigation of any suit, claim or objection, which, but for the passing of this Act, might have 
been tried or investigated by a Civil Cou rt, there arises any question on which  5*** the 6[ 4[State ] 
Govern ment] desires to have the decision of the High Court, 5*** the 6[ 4[State] Government]  7*** may 
cause a statement of the question to
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMBAY REVENUE JURISDICTION ACT, 1876.pdf - page 5]
 of the High Court, 5*** the 6[ 4[State] Government]  7*** may 
cause a statement of the question to be prepared, and may refer such question for the decision  of the High 
Court   8***. 
                                                      
1. Subs. by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council  for “against the Crown”.  
2. Subs. by A . O. 1950 , for “Crown” . 
3. Added by Act 16 of 1877, s. 1 (w.e.f. 9-8-1877).  
4. Subs. by A. O. 1950 , for “Provincial”  
5. The words “the Governor General in Council or”  omitted by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council . 
6. Subs. by ibid., for “Provincial Government” . 
7. The words “as the case may be” were omitted by ibid. 
8. The words “of Judicature at Bombay” were omitted by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956.   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMBAY REVENUE JURISDICTION ACT, 1876.pdf - page 6]
6 The said High Court shall fix an early day for the hearing of the question referred, and cause notice of 
such day to be placed in the Court -house.  
The parties to the case may appear and be heard in the High Court in person or by t heir advocates or 
pleaders.  
The High Court, when it has heard and considered the case, shall send a copy of its decision, with the 
reasons therefor, under the seal of the Court, to the Government by which the reference was made, and 
subject to any appeal w hich may be presented to 1[the Supreme Court] , the case shall be disposed of con -
formably to such decision.  
If the High Court considers that any such state ment is imperfectly framed, the High Court may re turn 
it for amendment.  
The costs (if any) consequent on any such refer ence shall be dealt with as the High Court in each case 
directs.  
13. Power of Civil Judge to refer questions of jurisdiction to High Court. —If in any suit 
instituted, or in any appeal pre sented, in a Civil Court, the Judge dou bts whether he is precluded by this 
Act from taking cognizance of the suit  or appeal, he may refer the matter to the High Court.  
The High Court may order the Judge making the reference either to proceed with the case or to return 
the plaint.  
The order of 1[the Supreme Court ] on any such reference shall be subject to appeal to Her Majesty in 
Council, and save as aforesaid, shall be final.  
14. Composition of Bench. —Every reference under section twelve or sec tion thirteen shall be heard 
by a Bench consisting of such number of Judges not less than three, as the Chief Justice from time to time 
directs.  
15. [Amendment of section  32 of Bombay Civil Courts Act ].—Rep. by the Repealing and Amending 
Act, 1876, s. 2 and the Schedule  (w.e.f . 26-2-1938).  
16. Privileges of 2[Government ] 3*** in suits in which it is concerned .—Whenever any suit is 
brought in any District Court 4[against  the 2[Government ]] 3*** 
or against any Revenue officer, 5[and the 2[G
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMBAY REVENUE JURISDICTION ACT, 1876.pdf - page 6]
ny District Court 4[against  the 2[Government ]] 3*** 
or against any Revenue officer, 5[and the 2[Government ] 3*** undertakes ] the defence thereof,   
it shall be lawful 6[for the  7[State]  Government ], by certificate signed by a Secretary thereto, to 
require — 
(a) that such suit shall be tried by the District Judge himself, and shall not be transferred for trial to 
an Assistant Judge; and  
(b) that the trial of any such suit shall have precedence over the trial of any other suit or other civil 
proceeding then pending in such Court;  
and the Court shall give effect to every such requirement.  
The privilege conferred 8[on Government ] by the clause ( b) of thi s section shall, mutatis mutandis , 
apply to any appeal or special appeal against an y decree in any such suit as is described in this section.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950, for “Her Majesty in Council”.  
2. Subs. by ibid., for “Crown”.  
3. The words “or the Federal Railway Authority” were omitted by the Indian Independence (Adaptation of Central Acts and 
Ordinances) Order, 1948.  
4. Subs. by  A. O.  in Council,  for “against the Crown or the Federal Railway Authority” . 
5. Subs. by ibid., for “and the Crown or the Federal Railway Authority undertakes” . 
6. Subs. by ibid., for “for the Provincial Government”.  
7. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950, for “Provincial”.  
8. Subs. by ibid., for “on the Provincial Government” .  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMBAY REVENUE JURISDICTION ACT, 1876.pdf - page 7]
7 17. [Revival of Bombay Regulation 17 of 1827 , section 13. ]—Rep. by Bombay Revenue Jurisdiction 
Act, 1880  (Bom. Act 15 of 1880 ) but the repeal does not operate in any scheduled district unless and until 
the Bombay Land -revenue Code (Bom. 5 of 1879) has been extended to such District.  
[Operation of same Regula tion in sites of villages and towns .]—Rep. by Bombay Revenue 
Jurisdiction Act , 1880 (Bom. Act 15 of 1880 ), s. 2. 
[Recovery of certain adv ances made by Local Government. ]—Rep. by ibid. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMBAY REVENUE JURISDICTION ACT, 1876.pdf - page 8]
8     SCHEDULE . Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act , 1891 (12 of 1891).    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOMBAY REVENUE JURISDICTION ACT, 1876.pdf - page 9]
9 1[THE SECOND SCHEDULE.  
The District of Ahmedabad.  
The District of Kaira, exclusive of the PanchMahals.  
The District of Broach.  
The District of Surat, exclusive of the lapsed State of Mandvi, as described in the schedule annexed to 
2Act 10  of 1848.  
The District of Tanna.  
The District of Colaba, exclusive of the lapsed State of Colaba mentioned in 2Act 8 of 1853.  
The District of Ratnagiri.  
The District of Kanara.]  
 
 
__________  
                                                      
1. Added by Act 16 of 1877, s. 2 (w.e.f. 9 -8-1877).  
2. Act 10 of 1848 and 8 of 1853 were repealed by the repealing and Amending Act, 1891 (12 of 1891).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BONDED LABOUR SYSTEM (ABOLITION) ACT, 1976.pdf - page 1]
1 THE BONDED LABOUR SYSTEM (ABOLITION) ACT, 1976  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Act to have overriding effect.  
CHAPTER II  
ABOLITION OF BONDED LABOUR SYSTEM  
4. Abolition of bonded labour system.  
5. Agreement, custom, etc., to be void.  
CHAPTER III  
EXTINGUISHMENT OF LIABILITY TO REPAY BONDED DEBT  
6. Liability to repay bonded debt to stand extinguished.  
7. Property of bonded labourer to be freed from mortgage, etc.  
8. Freed bonded labourer not to be evicted from homestead, etc.  
9. Creditor not to accept payment against extinguished debt.  
CHAPTER IV  
IMPLEMENTING AUTHORITIES  
10. Authorit ies who may be specified for implementing the provisions of this Act.  
11. Duty of District Magistrate and other officers to ensure credit.  
12. Duty of District Magistrate and officers authorised by him.  
CHAPTER V  
VIGILANCE  COMMITTEES  
13. Vigilance Committe es. 
14. Functions of Vigilance Committees.  
15. Burden of proof.  
CHAPTER VI  
OFFENCES AND PROCEDURE FOR TRIAL  
16. Punishment for enforcement of bonded labour.  
17. Punishment for advancement of bonded debt.  
18. Punishment for extracting bonded labour under the bonded labour system.  
19. Punishment for omission or failure to restore possession o f property to bonded labourers.  
20. Abetment to be an offence.  
21. Offences to be tried by Executive Magistrates.  
22. Cognizance of offences.  
23. Offences by companies.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
24. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
25. Jurisdiction of civil courts barred.  
26. Power to make rules.  
27. Repeal and saving.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BONDED LABOUR SYSTEM (ABOLITION) ACT, 1976.pdf - page 2]
2 THE BONDED LABO UR SYSTEM (ABOLITION) ACT, 1976  
ACT NO. 19 OF 1976  
[9th February , 1976.]  
An Act to provide for the abolition of bonded labour system with a view to preventing the 
economic and physical exploitation of the weaker sections of the people and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Bonded Labour System 
(Abolition) Act, 1976.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 25th day of October, 1975.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “advance”  means an advance, whether in cash or in kind, or partly in cash or partly in kind, 
made by one person (hereinafter referred to as the creditor) to another person (hereinafter referred to 
as the debtor);  
(b) “agreement ” means an agreement (whether written or oral, or partly written and partly oral) 
between a debtor and cre ditor, and includes an agreement providing for forced labour, the existence 
of which is presumed under any social custom prevailing in  the concerned locality.  
Explanation .—The existence of  an agreement between the debtor and creditor is ordinarily 
presumed, under the social custom, in relation to the following f orms of forced labour, namely: — 
Adiyamar, Baramasia, Basahya, Bethu, Bhagela, Cherumar, Garru -Galu, Hali, Hari, Harwai, 
Holya, Jana, Jeetha, Kamiya, Khundit -Mundit, Kuthia, Lakhari, Munjhi, Mat, Munish system, 
Nit-Majoor, Paleru, Padiyal, Pannayilal, Sagri, Sanji,Sanjawa t, Sewak, Sewakia, Seri, Vetti;  
(c) “ascendant ” or “ descendant ”, in relation to a person belonging to a matriarc hal society, means 
the person who corresponds to such expression in accordance with the law of succe ssion in force in 
such society;  
(d) “bonded debt ” means an advance obtai
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BONDED LABOUR SYSTEM (ABOLITION) ACT, 1976.pdf - page 2]
e with the law of succe ssion in force in 
such society;  
(d) “bonded debt ” means an advance obtained, or presumed to have been obtained, by a bonded 
labourer under, or in pursuance of, the bonded labour system;  
(e) “bonded labour ” means any labour or service rendered under the bonded labour system;  
(f) “bonded labourer ” means a labourer who incurs, or has, or is presumed to have, incurred, a 
bonded debt;  
(g) “bonded labour system”  means the system of forced, or partly forced, labour under which a 
debtor enters, or has, or is presumed to have, entered, into an agreement with t he creditor to the effect 
that,— 
(i) in consideration of an advance obtained by him or by any of his lineal ascendants or 
descendants (whether or not such advance is evidenced by any document) and in consideration of 
the interest, if any, due on such advance, or  
(ii) in pursuance of any customary or social obligation, or  
(iii) in pursuance of an obligation devol ving on him by succession, or  
(iv) for any economic consideration received by him or by any of his lineal ascendants or 
descendants, or  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BONDED LABOUR SYSTEM (ABOLITION) ACT, 1976.pdf - page 3]
3 (v) by reason of his birth in any particular caste or community,  
he would— 
(1) render, by himself or through any member of his family, or any person dependent on him, 
labour or service to the creditor, or for the benefit of the creditor, for a specified period or for an 
unspecified period, either without wages or for nominal wages, or  
(2) forfeit the freedom of employment o r other means of livelihood for a specified period o r 
for an unspecified period, or  
(3) forfeit the right to move freely throug hout the territory of India, or  
(4) forfeit the right to appropriate or sell at market value any of his property or product of hi s 
labour or the labour of a member of his family or any person dependent on him,  
and includes the system of forced, or partly forced, labour under which a surety for a debtor enters, or 
has, or is presumed to have, entered, into an agreement with the creditor to the effect that in the event 
of the failure of the debtor to repay the deb t, he would render the bonded labour on behalf of the 
debtor . 
1[Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that any system of forced, or partly 
forced labour under which any workman being contract labour as defined in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) 
of section 2 of the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970 (37 of 1970), or an inter -State 
migrant workman as defined in clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the Inter -State Migrant 
Workmen (Regulation of Employment and Co nditions of Service) Act, 1979 (30 of 1979), is required to 
render labour or service in circumstances of the natu re mentioned in sub -clause ( 1) of this clause or is 
subjected to all or any of the disabilities referred to in sub -clauses ( 2) to ( 4), is “bonded labour system ” 
within the meaning of this clause ;] 
(h) “family ”, in relation to a person, includes the ascendant and descendant of such person;  
(i) “nominal wages ”, in relation to any labour, m eans a wa
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BONDED LABOUR SYSTEM (ABOLITION) ACT, 1976.pdf - page 3]
endant and descendant of such person;  
(i) “nominal wages ”, in relation to any labour, m eans a wage which is less than, — 
(a) the minimum wages fixed by the Government, in relation to the same or similar labour, 
under any law for the time being in force, and  
(b) where no such minimum wage has been fixed in relation to any form of labour, the wages 
that are normally paid,  for the same or similar la bour, to the labourers working in the same 
locality;  
3. Act to have overriding effect. —The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any enactment other than this Act, or in any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any enactment other than this Act.  
CHAPTER II  
ABOLITION OF BONDED LABOUR SYSTEM  
4. Abo lition of bonded labour system. —(1) On the commencement of this Act, the bonded labour 
system shall stand abolished and every bonded labourer shall, on such commencement, stand freed and 
discharged from any obligati on to render any bonded labour.  
(2) After the commenceme nt of this Act, no person shall — 
(a) make any advance under, or in pursuance of, the bonded labour system, or  
(b) compel any person to  render any bonded labour or other form of forced labour . 
                                                           
1. Explanation  added by Act 73 of 1985, s. 2 (w.e.f. 24 -12-1985).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BONDED LABOUR SYSTEM (ABOLITION) ACT, 1976.pdf - page 4]
4 5. Agreement, custom, etc., to be void. —On the commencement of this Act, any custom or tradition 
or any contract, agreement or other instrument (whether entered into or executed before or after the 
commencement of this Act), by virtue of which any person, or any member of the family or dependant of 
such person, is required to do any work or render any service as a bonded labourer, shall be void and 
inoperative.  
CHAPTER III  
EXTINGUISHMENT OF LIABILITY  TO REPAY BONDED DEBT  
6. Liability to repay bon ded debt to stand extinguished. —(1) On the commencement of this Act, 
every obligation of a bonded labourer to repay any bonded debt, or such part of any bonded debt as 
remains unsatisfied immediately before such commencement, shall be deemed to have been extinguished.  
(2) After the commencement of this Act, no suit or other proceeding shall lie in any civil court or 
before any other authority for the recovery of any bonded debt or any part thereof.  
(3) Every decree or order for the recovery of bonded debt, passed before the commencement of this 
Act and not fully satisfied before such commencement, shall be deemed, on such commencement, to have 
been fully satisfied.  
(4) Every attachment made before the commence ment of this Act, for the recovery of any bonded 
debt, shall, on such commencement, stand vacated; and, where, in pursuance of such attachment, any 
movable property of the bonded labourer was seized and removed from his custody and kept in the 
custody of a ny court or other authority pending sale thereof, such movable property shall be restored, as 
soon as may be practicable after such commencement, to the possession of the bonded labourer.  
(5) Where, before the commencement of this Act, possession of any pr operty belonging to a bonded 
labourer or a member of his family or other dependant was forcibly taken over by any creditor for the 
recovery of any bonded debt, such property shall be restored, as soon as may be practicable after s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BONDED LABOUR SYSTEM (ABOLITION) ACT, 1976.pdf - page 4]

recovery of any bonded debt, such property shall be restored, as soon as may be practicable after such 
commencement, to the p ossession of the person from whom it was seized.  
(6) If restoration of the possession of any property referred to in sub -section ( 4) or sub -section ( 5) is 
not made within thirty days from the commencement of this Act, the aggrieved person may, within such 
time as may be prescribed, apply to the prescribed authority for the restoration of the possession of such 
property and the prescribed authority may, after giving the creditor a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard, direct the creditor to restore to the a pplicant the possession of the concerned property within such 
time as may be specifi ed in the order.  
(7) An order made by any prescribed authority, under sub -section ( 6), shall be deemed to be an order 
made by a civil court and may be executed by the court  of the lowest pecuniary jurisdiction within the 
local limits of whose jurisdiction the creditor voluntarily resides or carries on busines s or personally 
works for gain.  
(8) For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared that, where any attached property was sold 
before the commencement of this Act, in execution of a decree or order for the recovery of a bonded debt, 
such sale shall not be affected by any provision of this Act:  
Provided that the bonded labourer, or an agent authorised by him in th is behalf, may, at any time 
within five years from such commencement, apply to have the sale set aside on his depositing in court, for 
payment to the decree -holder, the a mount specified in the proclama tion of sale, for the recovery of which 
the sale was or dered, less any amount, as well as mesne profits, which may, since the date of such 
proclamation of sale, have been received by the decree -holder.  
(9) Where any suit or proceeding, for the enforcement of any obligation under the bonded labour 
system, inclu ding a suit or proceeding for the recovery o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BONDED LABOUR SYSTEM (ABOLITION) ACT, 1976.pdf - page 4]
f any obligation under the bonded labour 
system, inclu ding a suit or proceeding for the recovery of any advance made to a bonded labourer, is 
pending at the commencement of this Act, such suit or other proceeding shall, on such commencement, 
stand dismissed.  
(10) On the commencement of this Act, every bonded labourer who has been detained in civil prison, 
whether before or after judgment, shall be released from detention forthwith.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BONDED LABOUR SYSTEM (ABOLITION) ACT, 1976.pdf - page 5]
5 7. Property of bonded labourer t o be freed from mortgage, etc. —(1) All property vested in a 
bonded labourer which was, immediately  before the commencement of this Act under any mortgage, 
charge, lien or other incumbrances in connection with any bonded debt shall, in so far as it is relatable to 
the bonded debt, stand freed and discharged from such mortgage, charge, lien or other incu mbrances, and 
where any such property was, immediately before the commmencement of this Act, in the possession of 
the mortgagee or the holder of the charge, lien or incumbrance, such property shall (except where it was 
subject to any other charge), on such  commencement, be restored to the possession of the bonded 
labourer.  
(2) If any delay is made in restoring any property, referred to in sub -section ( 1), to the possession of 
the bonded labourer, such labourer shall be entitled, on and from the date of such  commencement, to 
recover from the mortgagee or holder of the lien, charge or incumbrance, such mesne profits as may be 
determined by the civil court of the lowest pecuniary jurisdiction within the local limits of whose 
jurisdictio n such property is situat ed. 
8. Freed bonded labourer not to be evicted from homestead, etc. —(1) No person who has been 
freed and discharged under this Act from any obligation to render any bonded labour, shall be evicted 
from any homestead or other residential premises which he w as occupying immediately before the 
commencement of this Act as part of the consi deration for the bonded labour.  
(2) If, after the commencement of this Act, any such person is evicted by the creditor from any 
homestead or other residential premises, referr ed to in sub -section ( 1), the Executive Magistrate in charge 
of the Sub -Division within which such homestead or residential premises is situated shall, as early as 
practicable, restore the bonded labourer to the possession of such homestead or other reside ntial premises.  
9. Creditor not to
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BONDED LABOUR SYSTEM (ABOLITION) ACT, 1976.pdf - page 5]
ed labourer to the possession of such homestead or other reside ntial premises.  
9. Creditor not to accept pay ment against extinguished debt. —(1) No creditor shall accept any 
payment against any bonded debt which has been extinguished or deemed to have been extinguished or 
fully satisfied by virtue  of the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall be punishable with imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to  three years and also with fine.  
(3) The court, convicting any person under sub -section ( 2) may, i n addition to the penalties which  
may be imposed under that sub -section, direct the person to deposit, in court, the amount accepted in 
contravention of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), within such period as may be specified in the order for 
being refund ed to the bonded labourer.  
CHAPTER IV  
IMPLEMENTING AUTHORITIES  
10. Authorities who may be specified for implement ing the provisions of this Act. —The State 
Government may confer such powers and impose such duties on a District Magistrate as may be 
necessary  to ensure that the provisions of this Act are properly carried out and the District Magistrate may 
specify the officer, subordinate to him, who shall exercise all or any of the powers, and perform all or any 
of the duties, so conferred or imposed and the local limits within which such powers or duties shall be 
carried out by the officer so specified.  
11. Duty of District Magistrate and o ther officers to ensure credit. —The District Magistrate 
authorised by the State Government under section 10 and the offic er specified by the District Magistrate 
under that section shall, as far as practicable, try to promote the welfare of the freed bonded labourer by 
securing and protecting the economic interests of such bonded labourer so that he may not have any 
occasion or reason to contract any further bonded debt.  
12. Duty of District Magistrate and officers auth orised by him. —It
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BONDED LABOUR SYSTEM (ABOLITION) ACT, 1976.pdf - page 5]
ract any further bonded debt.  
12. Duty of District Magistrate and officers auth orised by him. —It shall be the duty of every 
District Magistrate and every officer specified by him under section 10 to inquire whether, after the 
commencement of this Act, any bonded labour system or any other form of forced labour is being 
enforced by, or on behalf of, any person resident within the local limits of his jurisdiction and if, as a 
result of such inquiry, any person is found to be enorcing the bond ed labour system or any other system 
of forced labour, he shall forthwith take such action as may be necessary to eradicate the enforcement of 
such forced labour.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BONDED LABOUR SYSTEM (ABOLITION) ACT, 1976.pdf - page 6]
6 CHAPTER V  
VIGILANCE  COMMITTEES  
13. Vigilance Committees. —(1) Every State Government shall, by  notification in the Official 
Gazette, constitute such number of Vigilance Committees in each district and each Sub -Division as it may 
think fit.  
(2) Each Vigilance Committee, constituted for a district, shall consist of the following members, 
namely:— 
(a) the District Magistrate, or a person nominated by him, who shall be the Chairman;  
(b) three persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes and residing in the 
district, to be nominated by the District Magistrate;  
(c) two social workers, resident in the district, to be nominated by the District Magistrate;  
(d) not more than three persons to represent the official or non -official agencies in the district 
connected with rural development, to be nominated by the State Government;  
(e) one pers on to represent the financial and credit institutions in the district, to be nominated by 
the District Magistrate.  
(3) Each Vigilance Committee, constituted for a Sub -Division, shall consist of the following 
members, namely: — 
(a) the Sub -Divisional Magistrate, or a person nominated by him, who shall be the Chairman;  
(b) three persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes and residing in the               
Sub-Division, to be nominated by  the Sub -Divisional Magistrat e; 
(c) two social workers, resident in the Sub -Division, to be nominated by  the Sub -Divisional 
Magistrate;  
(d) not more than three persons to represent the official or non -official agencies in the             
Sub-Division connected with rural development t o be nomina ted by the District Magistrate;  
(e) one person to represent the financial and credit institutions in the Sub -Division, to be 
nominated by  the Sub -Divisional Magistrate;  
(f) one officer specified under section 10 and functioning in the Sub -Divisi on. 
(4) Each Vigilance Committee shall regulate its own procedure and secretarial
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BONDED LABOUR SYSTEM (ABOLITION) ACT, 1976.pdf - page 6]
n the Sub -Divisi on. 
(4) Each Vigilance Committee shall regulate its own procedure and secretarial assistance, as may be 
necessary, shall be provided by — 
(a) the District Magistrate, in the case of a Vigilance Committe e constituted for the district;  
(b) the Sub -Divisional Magistrate, in the case of a Vigilance Committee constituted for the                  
Sub-Division.  
(5) No proceeding of a Vigilance Committee shall be invalid merely by reason of any defect in the 
constitution, or in the proceedings, of the Vigilance Committee.  
14. Fun ctions of Vigilance Committees. —(1) The functions of each Vigilance Committee shall 
be,— 
(a) to advise the District Magistrate or any officer authorised by him as to the efforts made, and 
action taken, to ensure that the provisions of this Act or of any rule made there under are properly 
implemented;  
(b) to provide for the economic and social rehabili tation of the freed bonded labourers;  
(c) to co -ordinate the f unctions of rural banks and co -operative societies with a view to canalising 
adequate credit to the freed bonded labourer;  
(d) to keep an eye on the number of offences of which cognizance  has been taken under this Act;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BONDED LABOUR SYSTEM (ABOLITION) ACT, 1976.pdf - page 7]
7 (e) to make a survey as to whether there is any offence of which cognizance ou ght to be taken under 
this Act;  
(f) to defend any suit instituted against a freed bonded labourer or a member of his family or any 
other person depend ant on him for the recovery of the whole or part of any bonded debt or any other debt 
which is claimed by such person to be bond ed debt.  
(2) A Vigilance Committee may authorise one of its members to defend a suit against a freed bonded 
labourer and the member so authorised shall be deemed, for the purpose of such suit, to be the authorised 
agent of the freed bonded labourer.  
15. Bu rden of proof. —Whenever any debt is claimed by a bonded labourer, or a Vigilance 
Committee, to be a bonded debt, the burden of proof that such debt is not a bonded debt shal l lie on the 
creditor.  
CHAPTER VI  
OFFENCES AND PROCEDURE FOR TRIAL  
16. Punishment for enforcement of bonded labour. —Whoever, after the commencement of this 
Act, compels any person to render any bonded labour shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to three years and also with fine which may extend to two thousa nd rupees.  
17. Punishment for advancement of bonded debt. —Whoever advances, after the commencement 
of this Act, any bonded debt shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three 
years and also with fine which may extend to two thou sand rupees.  
18. Punishment for extracting bonded labour under the bonded labour system. —Whoever 
enforces, after the commencement of this Act, any custom, tradition, contract, agreement or other 
instrument, by virtue of which any person or any member of th e family of such person or any dependant 
of such person is required to render any service under the bonded labour system , shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and also with fine which may extend to two 
thousand r upees; and, out of the fine, if recovered, payment shall be m
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BONDED LABOUR SYSTEM (ABOLITION) ACT, 1976.pdf - page 7]
ne which may extend to two 
thousand r upees; and, out of the fine, if recovered, payment shall be made to the bonded labourer at the 
rate of rupees five for each day for which the bonded labour was extracted from him.  
19. Punishment for omission or failure to restore possession o f property to bonded                
labourers. —Whoever, being required by this Act to restore any property to the possession of any bonded 
labourer, omits or fails to do so, within a period of thirty days from the commenc ement of this Act, shall 
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both; and, out of the fine, if recovered, payment shall be made to 
the bonded labourer at the rate of rupees five for each day during which possession of the property was 
not restored to him.  
20. Abetment to be an offence. —Whoever abets any offence punishable under this Act shall, 
whether or not the offence abetted is committed, be punishable with the same punishment as is provided 
for the offence which has been abetted.  
Explanation ,—For the purpose of this Act, “abetment ” has the meaning assigned to  it in the Indian 
Penal Code (45  of 1860).  
21. Offences to be tried by Execut ive Magistrates. —(1) The State Government may confer, on                
an Executive Magistrate, the powers of a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or of the second class                      
for the trial of offences under this Act; and, on such conferment of powers, the Executive Magistate,                 
on whom the powers are so conferred, shall be deemed, for the purposes of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974), to be a Judicial Magistrate of the first class, or of the second  class, as the 
case may be.  
(2) An offence under this Act may be tri ed summarily by a Magistrate.  
22. Cognizance of offences. —Every offence under this Act shall be cognizable and bailable.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BONDED LABOUR SYSTEM (ABOLITION) ACT, 1976.pdf - page 7]
f offences. —Every offence under this Act shall be cognizable and bailable.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BONDED LABOUR SYSTEM (ABOLITION) ACT, 1976.pdf - page 8]
8 23. Offences by companies. —(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accord ingly.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on  the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanatio n.—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ” , in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
24. Protection o f action taken in good faith. —No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against any State Government or any officer of the State Government or any member of the Vigilance 
Committee for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be don e under this Act.  
25. Jurisdiction of civil courts barred. —No civil court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any 
matter to which any provision of this Act applies and no injunction shall be granted by any civil court in 
respect of anything which is done  or intended to be done by or under this Act.  
26. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the foregoing power, such rules may provide fo
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BONDED LABOUR SYSTEM (ABOLITION) ACT, 1976.pdf - page 8]
is Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any 
of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the authority to which application for the restoration of posses sion of property referred to in 
sub-section ( 4), or sub -section ( 5), of section 6 is to be submitt ed in pursuance of s ub-section ( 6) of 
that section;  
(b) the time within which application for restoration of possession of property is to be made, 
under sub -section ( 6) of section 6, to the prescribed authority;  
(c) steps to be taken by Vigilance Committee s under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 14, to 
ensure the implementation of the provisions of this Act or of any rule made thereunder;  
(d) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall  thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule.  
27. Repeal and saving. —(1) The Bonded Labour System (Abolition) Ordinance, 1975 ( 17 of 1975) 
is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Ordinance (including 
any notification published, direction or nomination made, power confe rred, duty imposed or officer 
specified) shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BONDED LABOUR SYSTEM (ABOLITION) ACT, 1976.pdf - page 8]
l be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOUNDARY-MARKS, BOMBAY 1846.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE BOUNDARY -MARKS, BOMBAY  1846 
ACT NO. III OF 1846   
Passed by the Hon’ble the President of the Council of India in Council on the 7th January 
1846, with the assent of the Right Hon’ble the Governor General of India.  
An Act for the establishment and maintenance of field boundary marks in the Presidency of 
Bombay.  
WHEREAS  it is desirable, with a view to the better definition and security of landed property, the 
prevention of encroachments and disputes, and the identification of lands assessed to, or exempted from, 
the public revenue, that provision should be made for the establishment and maintenance of permanent 
marks to distinguish the b oundaries of fields:  
I. It is hereby enacted, that it shall be lawful, within the territories subject to the Presidency of 
Bombay, for such Revenue Officers as the Governor in Council may entrust  with that authority to require 
that marks be erected and maintained by the Owners or Occupants on the boundaries of fields, of such 
materials, and in such number as may appear to such Officers sufficient  for permanently distinguishing 
the limits of those fields.  
II. And it  is hereby enacted, that the requisition shall be served on the persons owning or occupying 
each field according to the form A. annexed to this Act, and in the event of these persons not being found 
in the Village, that the said requisiti on shall be posted at the Village Chowree or other conspicuous place 
in the Village, which shall be held to be a sufficient service.  
III. And  it is hereby enacted, that in default of the Owners or Occupants of the fields complying with 
the requisition, th e said Revenue Officers shall give directions for the erection and repair of such field 
boundary marks, the cost of which shall be equitably apportioned on the fields which they serve to 
distinguish, and shall be charged to the persons possessing a right o f ownership or occupancy in such 
fields, or if there are no such persons forthcoming, to the
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOUNDARY-MARKS, BOMBAY 1846.pdf - page 1]
ight o f ownership or occupancy in such 
fields, or if there are no such persons forthcoming, to the revenues of the Village in which the fields are 
situated.  
IV. And it is hereby enacted, that no person being out of possession and claiming a right of ownership 
or occupancy in fields, the cost of erecting or maintaining whose boundary marks has been charged to the 
revenues of the Village, in consequence of his neglecting to defray the same, shall have his claim allowed 
until he makes good all sums so charged.  
V. And it is hereby enacted, that any person who may be convicted of wilfully erasing, removing, or 
injuring field boundary marks, shall be laible to a fine not  exceeding Fifty Rupees for each mark so 
erased, removed, or injured, one half of which fine may b e awarded on conviction to the informer, and the 
other half shall be chargeable with the cost of restoring the mark.  
VI. And it is hereby enacted, that authority for the assessment and realization of sums due under the 
provisions of this Act, whether as pr ovide for the erection and maintenance of field boundary marks, and 
shall be exercised by them in conformity with the rules prescribed for the assessment and realization of 
Revenue demands in general, and that the proceedings of those Officers in all such matters shall be 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BOUNDARY-MARKS, BOMBAY 1846.pdf - page 2]
2 
 recorded in writing, and shall be subject to appeal to the Revenue Authorities to whom they are 
subordinate.  
______  
FORM A.  
Whereas you are the Owner (Occupa nt as the case may be) of the field  
                                 In the Village of                                     you are hereby required to fix boundary 
marks to the said field (by ridging or raising mounds of earth at the angles, or in such other mode as may 
be determined) or to r epair its present boundary, within            days from this date, in default of which the 
same will be done by the Government Officers, and the cost recovered from you under Act III. of 1846.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BROACH AND KAIRA INCUMBERED ESTATES ACT, 1877.pdf - page 1]
 1 
 THE BROACH AND KAIRA INCUMBERED ESTATES ACT, 18 77 
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
PREAMBLE . 
I.—PRELIMINARY.  
SECTIONS.  
1. Short title.  
 Commencement.  
2. Act No. XV of 1871 repealed.  
3. Interpretation -clause.  
 “Thakur.”  
“Heir.”  
“Commissioner.”  
________  
II.—OF THE APPLICATION AND PRELIMINARY  INQUIRY.  
4. Application for benefit of Act.  
5. Order to enquire.  
6. Verified statement to be submitted.  
False averments in statement.  
7. Report of enquiry and proceedings thereon.  
________  
 
III.—OF THE ORDER OF MANAGEMENT.  
8. “Order of management ” to what it extends.  
Commencement of management.  
9. Effect of order of management.  
 Stay of pending proceedings , &c. 
 Bar of fresh proceedings.  
 The debtor incompetent — 
 to contract debt s, 
 to encumber or alienate property,  
 to grant receipts for rent.  
10. Manager to have powers of owner and to  receive rents and  profi ts: 
 to have powers of Collector for their recovery.  
11. Manager to pay therefrom — 
      costs  of management and repairs ,  
      Government revenue , &c.,  
      rent due to superior holder,  
      allowance for maintenance and expenses of debtor and  family,  
      cost of improvements, &c.  
    Residue  how disposed of.  
 
________  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BROACH AND KAIRA INCUMBERED ESTATES ACT, 1877.pdf - page 2]
 2 
  
IV.—PROOF OF DEBTS  AND SCHEME  FOR LIQUIDATION . 
SECTIONS.  
12. Notice to claimants against debtor.  
Copies of notice to be exhibited.  
13. Claim to contain full particulars.  
Documents to be given up.  
Entries in books.  
Power to exclude documents not produced with claim.  
14. Claim not duly notified to be barred.  
Admission of claims within further period of six months.  
15. Determination of debts and liabilities.  
16. Power to rank debts and to fix interest.  
17. Scheme for liquidation.  
Provisions of scheme.  
18. Proceedings of Commissioner on submission of scheme.  
19. Power to relinquish management.  
________  
V. O F THE PROCEEDINGS SUBSEQUENT TO SANCTION OF THE LIQUIDATION -SCHEME.  
20. Effects of sanctioning scheme.  
21. Power to remove mortgagee in possession.  
22. Po wer to inquire into consideration given for leases.  
23. Power to lease.  
24. Power to raise money by mortgage or sale.  
25. Manager’s receipt a discharge.  
26. Termination of management.  
Restoration of owner.  
27. Death of debtor during management.  
28. Mortgag es, &c., made by restore d Thakur valid only for his life.  
 
__________  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BROACH AND KAIRA INCUMBERED ESTATES ACT, 1877.pdf - page 3]
 3 
 VI.—OF APPEAL AND REVISION.  
SECTIONS.  
29. Appeal.  
30. Power to call for proceedings and pass order thereon.  
__________  
VII. M ISCELLANEOUS.  
31. Power to make rules.  
32. Power to appoint new manager.  
33. Managers and their agents to be public servants.  
34. Investigation, a judicial proceeding.  
35. Power to summon witnesses and compel production of documents.  
36. Bar of suits.  
37. Saving of jurisdiction of Courts in Broach and Kaira in resp ect of certain suits.  
38. Exemption of certain Thakurs from certain provisions of Act.  
39. Amendment of Bombay Act VI of 1862.  
40. Taluqdari Settlement -officer to be —  
deemed an officer under Bombay Act VI of 1862, section 1 ; 
Assistant to certain Collector s. 
41. Acts of Taluqdari Settlement officer valid.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BROACH AND KAIRA INCUMBERED ESTATES ACT, 1877.pdf - page 4]
 4 
  
THE BROACH AND KAIRA INCUMBERED ESTATES ACT, 18 77 
 
ACT N O. XIV OF 1877.  
_______  
 
PASSED  BY THE GOVERNOR  GENERAL  OF INDIA IN COUNCIL . 
 
(Received the assent of the Governor General on the 28th June 1877.) 
______  
 
An Act to relieve from Incumbrances the estates  of Thakurs in Broach and Kaira.  
 
Preamble. —WHEREAS  many T hakurs in the districts of Broach and Kaira are in debt, and their                         
immoveable  property is subject to mortgages, charges and  liens; an d whereas it is expedient to provide for 
their relief in manner hereinafter appearing; It is hereby enacted as follows: — 
 
I.—PRELIMINARY.  
 
1. Short title. —This Act may be called  “The Broach and Kaira Incumbered Estates Act, 1877: ”  
Commencement. —And it shall come into force on the passing thereof.  
2. Act No. XV of 1871 repealed. —Act No. XV of 1871 (to relie ve from  incumbrances the estates  of 
Thakurs in Broach) is repealed : but all app lications and appo intments and rules made, all notices published, 
and all other things duly done , under the said Act, shall be deemed to have been  respectively made, 
published and done under this Act.   
3. Interpretation -clause.  —In this Act — 
“Thakur”. —“Thakur ” means also taluqdar, Jag irdar and kasbat i, and such other classes of holders of 
estates as  the Local  Government may, with the previous sanction  of the Governor General in Council, 
declare to be  Thaku rs for the p urposes of this Act: 
“Heir” .—means the person for the time being entitled as heir to a Thakur:  
“Commissioner” .—“Commissioner ” means the Revenue Commissioner of the Northern Di vision of 
the Presidency of Bom bay. 
II.—OF THE APPLICATION AND PRELIMINARY INQUIRY . 
4. Application for benefit of Act. —At any time within twelve months after the passing of this Act, 
any Thakur,  
or any person who would be sole heir or one of the heirs to such Thakur if he then died intestate,  
may apply, in writing, to the Commissioner, stati
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BROACH AND KAIRA INCUMBERED ESTATES ACT, 1877.pdf - page 4]
 heirs to such Thakur if he then died intestate,  
may apply, in writing, to the Commissioner, stating that such Thakur is subject to debts or liabilities, 
other tha n debts due, or liabilities incurred, to Government, or that his immoveable property is charged with 
debts or liabilities other than as aforesaid, and requesting that the provisions of this Act be applied to his 
case.  
When any Thakur or other person entitled to make an application under this section is a minor , or of 
unsound mind, or an idiot, such application may be made on his behalf by the guardian or other legal curator 
of his person, or by the legally constituted administrator or manager of his estate.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BROACH AND KAIRA INCUMBERED ESTATES ACT, 1877.pdf - page 5]
 5 
 5. Order to enquire. —When any such application is made by or on behalf of a Thakur, or the person 
who would be his sole heir if he then died, the Commissioner shall direct an enquiry to be made by such 
officer as he thinks fit into the nature and amount of such debts and liabilities and the sufficiency of the 
debtor’s property, whether moveable or immoveable, to discharge the same.  
When such an application is made in any other case, it shall  be in the discretion of the Commissioner, 
subject to any general rules which may from time to time be made by the Governor of Bombay in Council 
in this behalf, either to reject such application or to direct an enquiry to be made as aforesaid.  
6. Verified statement to be submitted. —When an enquiry has been directed under section 5, the 
applicant shall, within a period to be fixed by the Commissioner, submit to the officer appointed to make 
such enquiry a statement duly verified by the said applicant, or by some other competent person, in the 
manner required by law for the verification of plaints, and containing, so far as may be practicable, such 
details as to the debts and liabilities, and as to the sufficiency of the debtor’s property, whether moveable 
or immoveable, to meet the same, as the Commissioner, or the said officer, subject to his control, may 
require.  
False averments in statement. —If any such statement contains any averment which the person 
making the verification knows or believes to be false, o r does not know or believe to be true, such person 
shall be deemed to have intentionally given false evidence within the meaning of the Indian Penal Code.  
7. Report  of enquiry and proceedings thereon. —The officer so appointed, after making enquiry, 
shall s ubmit a report of his proceedings to the Commissioner.  
On receipt of such report, the Commissioner  may— 
(a) direct a further enquiry, or  
(b) dismiss the application, or  
(c) by order published in the Bombay Government  Gazette, direc
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BROACH AND KAIRA INCUMBERED ESTATES ACT, 1877.pdf - page 5]
  
(b) dismiss the application, or  
(c) by order published in the Bombay Government  Gazette, direct that the immoveable property of 
the debtor shall be managed, and that his debts shall be  liquidated, in the manner hereinafter provided, 
by a manager.   
The Taluqdari Settlement -officer for the time being  shall, unless the Local Government in any case 
otherwise  directs, be suc h manager.  
_______  
III.—OF THE ORDER OF MANAGEMENT.  
8. “Order of management” to what it extends. —Such order ( hereinafte r called “the order of  
management ”) shall extend to a ll immovea ble property of or to which the debtor is on the date of its  
publication possessed or entitled in his own right, or which he is entitled to redeem, or which may be  
acquired by or devolve on him during the continuance  of the management, and to a ll debts and liabilities to  
which he is subject, or which are charged on the  whole or  any part of his immoveable property on the  said 
date.  
Commencement of management. —The management shall be deemed to commence  from the date on 
which the order is published.  
9. Effect of order of management. —On the publication of the order of management the  following 
consequences shall ensue:  
Stay of pending proceedings, &c. —First, all proceedings then pending in any Civil Court in British 
India in respect to the debts and liabilities  mentioned in section 8 shall be stayed; and the operation of all 
processes, executions and attachments then in force, for or in respect of such debts  and liabilities shall be 
suspe nded; 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BROACH AND KAIRA INCUMBERED ESTATES ACT, 1877.pdf - page 6]
 6 
 Bar of fresh proceedings .—Secondly,  so long as the management continues, no fresh proceedings, 
processes, executions or attachments shall be instituted in or issued by any Civil Court in British India in 
respect of such debts and , liabiliti es; 
The debtor incompetent .—Thirdly,  so long as the management continues,  the debtor shall be 
incompetent — 
to contract debts, —(a) to enter into any contract involving him in  pecuniary liability, or  
to encumber or alienate property, —(b) to mortgage, charge, lease or alienate the property  under 
management or any part thereof, or  
to grant receipts for rent, —(c) to gra nt valid receipts for the rents and profits  arising or accruing 
therefrom:   
Provided that nothing contained in this clause  shall be deemed to preclude the manager from letting,  
and the debtor from taking, the whole or any part of  such property on such terms, consistent with this Act,  
as may be agreed upon between the parties;  
Fourthly,  so long as the management continues,  no person other than the manager shall be competent  
to mortgage, charge, lease  or alienate su ch property  or any part thereof.  
10. Manager to have powers of owner and to receive rents and profits:  —The ma nager shall, during 
the management  of the property, have all powers which the owner  thereof might, as such, have legally 
exercised,  and shall receive and recover all rents and profits due i n respect of the property under 
management,   
to have powers of Collector for their recovery. —and for the purpose of recovering such rents and  
profits shall have, in addition to any powers possesse d by a Thakur, all the p owers possessed by a Collector, 
under  the law for the time being in force, for securing and recovering land -revenue due to Government:  
Provided that  he shall not, before the liquidation scheme hereinafter mentioned has been sanctioned,  demise 
the property under management, or any part thereof, for any term exceeding two years, to 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BROACH AND KAIRA INCUMBERED ESTATES ACT, 1877.pdf - page 6]
,  demise 
the property under management, or any part thereof, for any term exceeding two years, to take  effect in 
possession . 
11. Manager to pay there from —From the sums r eceived or recovered under section 10, the manager 
shall pay — 
Costs of management and repairs. —First,  Costs of management and repairs,  the costs of the 
management, including the costs of necessary repairs;   
Government revenue, &c., —Secondly  Government revenue, &c.,  the Government revenue and all 
debts and liabilities for the time being due or incurred to Government in respect of the property under 
management;   
Rent due to superior holder, —Thirdly,  the rent (if any) due to any superior holder in respect of the 
said property;  
Allowance for maintenance and expenses of debtor and family .—Fourthly  such periodical 
allowance as the Commissioner may from time to time fix for the ma intenance and other necessary expenses  
of the and o f such members of h is family as the Com missioner directs;  
Cost of improvements, &c. —Fifthly,  the cost of such improvements of the said property as he thinks 
necessary, and as are approved by the Comm issioner .  
Residue how disposed of .—The residue shall be retained by the manager for the liquidation, in manner  
hereafter provided, of the debts and liabilities mentioned in section 8 other than  those so due or incurred to 
Government . 
______  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BROACH AND KAIRA INCUMBERED ESTATES ACT, 1877.pdf - page 7]
 7 
  
IV.—PROOF  OF DEBTS AND SCHEME FOR LIQUIDATION.  
 
12. Notice to claimants against debtor. —On the publication of the order of  management, the manager 
shall publish in the Bombay  Government Gazette  a notice in English and Gujarathi calling upon all persons 
having claims against the  debtor or  the property under management, to notify  the same in writing to such 
manager within six  from the date of the publi cation.  
Copies of  notice to be  exhibited. —He shall also cause copies of such notice to be exhibited at the 
Mamlatdars ’ kacha hris in the  district in  which the said property lies, and at such other places  as he thinks 
fit.  
13. Claim to contain full particulars. —Every such claimant shall,  along with his  claim, present full 
particulars thereof . 
Documents to be given up. —Every document  on which the claimant founds his  claim, or on which he 
relies in support thereof, shall  be delivered to the manager along with the claim.   
Entries in books. —If the document be an entry in any book, the  claimant shall produce the book to 
the manager together with a copy of the entry which he relies.  The manager shall mark the book for the 
purpose of  identification, and, after examining and comparing  the copy with the original, shall return the 
book to  the claimant.  
Power to exclude documents not produ ced with claim. —If any document in the possession or under 
the control of the claimant is not delivered or produced  by hi m to the manager along with the claim, the  
manager may refuse to receive such document in  evidence on the claimant ’s behalf at the inve stigation  of 
the case.  
14. Claim not duly notified to be barred. —Every such claim (other than claims of the  Government) 
not notified to the manager within the  time and in the manner required by such notice shall , except as 
provided in section 19, clause (d), be deemed  for a ll purposes and on all occasions, whether during the 
continuance of the management or after wa
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BROACH AND KAIRA INCUMBERED ESTATES ACT, 1877.pdf - page 7]
or a ll purposes and on all occasions, whether during the 
continuance of the management or after wards, to have been duly discharged:  
Admission of claims within further period of six months. —Provided that, when proof is made to the 
manager  that the claimant was unable to comply with the visions of se ction 12, the manager may receive  
such claim within the further period of six months fro m the expiration of the original period of six months.  
15. Determination of debts and liabilities. —The manager shall inquire into the history and merits of 
every claim received under sect ions 12 and 14, and shall, in accordance with the rules to  be made under 
this Act, determine the amount of  debts and liabilities (if any) justly due to the several cla imants.  
16. Power to rank debts and to fix interest. —If such amount cannot be paid at once, the manager 
shall then proceed to rank such debts and liabilities according to the order in which they shall be paid, and 
to fix the interest (if any) to be paid  thereon, respectively, from the date of the final decision thereon to the 
date of the payment and discharge  thereof . 
17. Scheme for liquidation. —When the total amount of the debts and liabilities (including those due 
and incurred to Government) has been fi nally determined, the manager shall  prepare and submit to the 
Commissioner a schedule of  such debts and liabilities, and a scheme (hereinafter  called the                            
liquidation  scheme) shewing the mode in  which it is proposed to pay and dis charge the same,  whether from 
the income of the property under management,  or with the aid of funds raised under the  powers hereinafter 
conferred, or partly in one of such  ways and partly in the other . 
Provisions of scheme .—Every such scheme shall further provide for the  continuance of the payments 
to be made by the man ager  under section 11, and may provide for the improvement  of the property under 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BROACH AND KAIRA INCUMBERED ESTATES ACT, 1877.pdf - page 7]
n 11, and may provide for the improvement  of the property under 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BROACH AND KAIRA INCUMBERED ESTATES ACT, 1877.pdf - page 8]
 8 
 management either  from the said income or with the aid of the funds  raised as aforesaid, or partly in one of 
such ways and  partly in the other.  
18. Proceedings of Commissioner on submission of scheme. —The Commissioner may — 
(a) as often as he thinks fit send back such scheme  to the manager for revision, and direct him to 
make such further inquiry as may be requisite for the proper preparation of the scheme, or  
(b) sanction any liquidation -scheme, or any revised  liquidation -scheme, submitted to him, either as 
it stands, or subject to such modifications as he may  deem expedient . 
19. Power to relinquish management. —At any time before he has sanctioned a liqui dation -scheme 
under se ction 18, the Commissioner  may, by an order pub lished in the Bombay Government Gazette , direct 
that on a date fixed by such order the management shall be relinquished.  
On the date so fixed — 
(a) the management shall terminate;  
(b) the owner of the property under management  shall be restored to the possession thereof, subject 
to any leases made under section 10;  
(c) any residue of the rents and profits of the said  property, retained under the last clause of                  
section  11, shall be paid to him; and  
(d) the proceedings, processes, executions and  attachments stayed and suspended under sectio n 9, 
and the debts and liabilities barred by section 14, shall  revive. 
In calculating the periods of limitation applicable  to suits to recover and enforce debts and liabilities 
revived  under this section, the time during which the management has continued shall be excluded.  
_______  
V.—OF THE PROCEEDINGS SUBSEQUENT TO SANCTION  
OF THE LIQUIDATION -SCHEME . 
20. Effects of sanctioning scheme. —When the  Commissioner sanctions the liquidation -scheme, he 
shall notify the fact of such sanction  at such places and in such manner as the Local  Government may from 
time to time by rule direct;  and thereupon — 
1st, all proceedings, processes, 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BROACH AND KAIRA INCUMBERED ESTATES ACT, 1877.pdf - page 8]
overnment may from 
time to time by rule direct;  and thereupon — 
1st, all proceedings, processes, executions and attachments  stayed or suspended under                                
section 9 shall  be for  ever barred, and   
2nd, every debt or liability due or owing to any  person whi ch was proveable before the manager 
shall  be exting uished, and such person shall be ent itled to receive under the liquidation -scheme the 
amount (if any) finally awarded to him under Part IV of t his Act in respect of such debt or liability.  
21. Power to remove mortgagee in possession. —If the property under management or any  part thereof 
be in the possession of a mortgagee or conditional vendee, the manager, at any time after the                      
liquidation -scheme has been sanctioned as aforesaid, may, by an  order in writing, require such 
incumbrancer to deliver up possession of the same to him at the end of the then current revenue year.  
If such incumbrancer refuse or neglect to obe y such order , the manager may, without resorting to a  
Civil Court, enter upon the property and summarily  evict therefrom the said incumbrancer and any other  
person obstructing or resisting on his behalf.  
Nothing in this section shall be held to affect the  right of any  incumbrancer to receive, under the 
liquidation -scheme, the amount (if any) awarded to him  under Part IV of this Act.  
22. Power to inquire into consideration given for leases. —If the property under management or any 
part thereof be in the possession of any  person claim ing to hold under a lease dated within the three years 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BROACH AND KAIRA INCUMBERED ESTATES ACT, 1877.pdf - page 9]
 9 
 immediately preceding the commencement  of the management, the manager may inquire into the 
sufficiency  of the consideration for which the lease was  given; and if such consideration appear to him 
insufficient,  may by order, with the consent of the  Commissioner, at any time after the  liquidation -scheme  
has been sanctioned as aforesaid, either set  aside the lease or require the person so in possession  to pay such 
consideration for the said lea se as the  manager thinks fit, and in default of such payment,  the lease shall be 
cancelled.  
23. Power to lease. —Subject to the rules made under section  31, the manager, after the                          
liquidation -scheme has been  sanctioned as aforesaid,  shall have power to demise  all or any part of the 
property under management  for any term of years not exceeding twenty years  absolute, to take effect in 
possession, in consideration  of the payment to him of any fine, or without fine,  and reserving such re nts, 
and under such conditions,  as may be agreed upon.  
24. Power to raise money by mortgage or sale. —At any time after the liquidation -scheme has been  
sanctioned as aforesaid, the manager, with the previous assent of the  Commissioner, shall have power to 
raise any money which may be required for carrying out such scheme — 
(a) by mortgaging the whole or any part of the  property under management for a term not exceeding  
twenty ye ars from the  publicat ion of the or der of management; or  
(b) by charging the whole or any part of such property; or  
(c) by selling, by public auction or by private contract, and upon such terms as the manager thinks 
fit, such portion of the said property as may a ppear expedient.    
25. Manager’s receipt a discharge. —The manager ’s receipt  for any moneys, rents  or profits raised or 
recei ved by him under this Act,  shall discharge the person paying the same therefrom  and from being 
concerned to see to the application  thereof.  
26. Termin
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BROACH AND KAIRA INCUMBERED ESTATES ACT, 1877.pdf - page 9]
aying the same therefrom  and from being 
concerned to see to the application  thereof.  
26. Termination of management .—When the debts and liabilities mentioned in  the                            
liquidation -scheme have been paid and discharged  as therein provided, or in such other manner as the  
Commissioner thinks fit, the manager shall publish in  the Bombay Government Gazette a notice fixing a  
date for the termination of the management.  
Restoration of owner. —On the date so fixed the management shall terminate,  and the owner shall be 
restored to th e possession  and enjoyment of the property under m anage ment, or  of such pa rt thereof as has 
not been sold by the manager under the power conferred by section 24, but  subject to the leases and 
mortgages (if any) gr anted and made by the manager under the powers conferred  by sections 10, 23 and 24 . 
27. Death of debtor during management. —If the debtor dies after the publication of the  order of 
management and before the management has  been terminated in either of the modes hereinbefore  
provided— 
1st, the management shall continue and proceed  in all respects as if such debtor were still living;   
2ndly, any person succee ding to the whole or any portion of the property under management shall,  
while s uch management  continues, be subject in respect of such property to the disabilities imposed by 
clauses ( b) and ( c) of section 9; and  
3rdly, no Civil C ourt in British India shall, during  the continuance of the management, issue any 
attachment  or other process against any portion of the property  under management, for or in respect of any  
debt or liability incurred by any such person whether  before or after his said succession.  
28. Mortgages, &c., made by restored Thakur valid only his life. —When a Thakur has been restored 
unde r section  26 to the possession of any prope rty, no mortgage,  charge, lease or alienation of such property, 
or of any part thereof, made by such Thak
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BROACH AND KAIRA INCUMBERED ESTATES ACT, 1877.pdf - page 9]
 mortgage,  charge, lease or alienation of such property, 
or of any part thereof, made by such Thakur, shall be  valid as to any time beyond his natural life.  
_______  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BROACH AND KAIRA INCUMBERED ESTATES ACT, 1877.pdf - page 10]
 10 
  
VI.—OF APPEAL AND REVISION.  
29. Appeal. —An appeal against any decision or order under sections 14, 15, 16 and 22 or imposing a 
fine or imprisonment  in exer cise of the powers c onferred by section  35, shall lie to the Commissioner, if 
prefe rred within six weeks from the date of such decision or  order . 
There shall be no appeal against the decision of  the Commissioner on such appeal.  
30. Power to call for proceedings and pass order thereon. —The Commissioner may, of his own 
motion or  on the application of any person concerned, call for the proceed ings in any case under th is Act, 
and pass such order thereon, consistent with the provisions of t his Act, as he thinks fit.  
________  
VII.—MISCELLANEOUS.  
31. Power to make rules. —The Local Government may, from time to time, make rules consistent with 
this Act — 
(a) to regulate the security to be required from  subordinate officers under this Act;  
(b) to regulate the procedure in all cases under  this Act;  
(c) for the guidance of officers enquiring into and  deter mining on claims under Part IV of this Act; 
and in particular as to the allowance of int erest (if any) on each of the principal debts and liabilities so  
determined, from the date on which i t was incurred  down to the date of the determination, and on the  
aggregate amount of such debts and liabilities  from the date of the determination down to the date of 
payment, and as to the order of paying debts and liabilities ; 
(d) for investing any moneys received or raised  by the manager under this Act in any Government  
securities of British India, and for the sale of such  securities, and  
(e) generally to carry out the provisions of this  Act.  
Such rules shall be published in the Bomba y Government Gazette , and when so published shall  have 
the force of law.  
32. Power to appoint new manager. —The Local Government may suspend or re move any manager, 
and may appoint any officer in  the stead of any manager appointed 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BROACH AND KAIRA INCUMBERED ESTATES ACT, 1877.pdf - page 10]
suspend or re move any manager, 
and may appoint any officer in  the stead of any manager appointed under this Act;  and thereupon the 
management then vested under  this Act in the former ma nager shall become vested  in the new manager.  
Every such new manager shall have the same  powers as if he had been originally appointed.  
33. Managers and their agents to be public servants .—Every manager  appointed under thi s Act and 
every agent of such manager sha ll be deem ed a  public servant within the meaning of the Indian Penal Code.  
34. Investigation, a judicial proceeding. —Every investigation conducted  by the  mana ger with 
reference to any claim preferred before him under this Act, or to any matter connected with any such claim, 
shall be taken to be a judicial proceeding within the mea ning of the Indian Penal  Code . 
35. Power to summon witnesses and compel production of documents. —For the purposes of this 
Act, the manager and any  officer making an enquiry under section 5 may summon and enforce the 
attendance of witnesses and compel them to give evidence, and compel the production of documents, by 
the same means and, as far as possible, in the same m anner, as is provided in  the case of a Civil Court by 
the Code of Civil Procedure.   
36. Bar of suits. —No suit or other proceeding shall be maintained against any person in respect of 
anything done  by him bona  fide pursuant to this Act .  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BROACH AND KAIRA INCUMBERED ESTATES ACT, 1877.pdf - page 11]
 11 
 37. Saving of jurisdiction of Courts in Broach and Kaira in re spect of certain suits. —Nothing in 
this Act precludes the Courts in Broach and Ka ira having jurisdiction in suits relat ing to the succe ssion to 
any immoveable property brought under the operation of this Act from entertaining and  disposing of such 
suits; but to all such suits the manager of such property shall be made a party.  
38. Exemption of certain Thakurs from certain provisions of Act. —Nothing in section 9 shall be 
deemed to render any of the following Thakurs, namely , the Thakur of Ahmod, the Thakur of Sarod, the 
Thakur of K erwara, the Thakur of Dehej, and the Thakur of Janiadra incompetent to enter into contracts 
involving him in pecuniary liability, nor shall anything in  section 28 apply to any of the said Thakurs:  
Provided that, if any such Thakur has, since  the scheme for the settlement of his debts and liabilities  
was approved under section 11 of the said Act No. XV  of 1871, enter into any contract involving him in  
pecuniary liability exce eding the average annual income  derived during the previous five years from his  
immoveable property after deducting therefrom the  land-tax and other dues  of Government, the Local  
Government may, by notification in the Bombay  Government G azette, declare tha t the exemption made  by 
the former part of this section shall  cease in his  case, and thereupon such exemption  shall cease accordingly.  
39. Amendment of Bombay Act VI of 1862. —And whereas doubts have been raised as to  the validity 
of Bombay Act No. VI of 1862 (for the  amelio ration of the condition o f Taluqda rs in the  Ahmedabad  
Collect orate, and  for their relief from debt) so far as it purports to affect the High Court of  Judicatu re at 
Bombay, for the pur pose of precluding  such doubts, it is hereby further enacted that the said  Act, so far as 
it purports to affect the sai d High Court , shall be de emed to be and to h ave bee n valid.  
40. Ta
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BROACH AND KAIRA INCUMBERED ESTATES ACT, 1877.pdf - page 11]
 purports to affect the sai d High Court , shall be de emed to be and to h ave bee n valid.  
40. Taluqdari Settlement -officer to be .—The said Taluqdar i Settlement -officer for  the time being 
shall, unless the Local Government in  any case otherwise directs, be — 
(a) deemed an officer under Bombay Act VI of 1862, section 1; —deemed to be  an officer  
appointed under section  1 of the said Bombay Act No. VI of 1862, to  manage all estates with respect 
to which a declaration  is or has been made and publish ed under the said section ;— 
(b) Assistant to certain Collectors. —an Assistant to the respective Collectors of Ahmedabad,  
Kaira and Broach.  
41. Acts of Taluqdari Settlement -officer valid. —Nothing heretof ore done by any Taluqdari  
Settlement -officer shall be deemed to be or to have  been invalid by reason only of his not having been  duly 
appointed,   
(a) under section 1 of the said Bombay Act No.  VI of 1862, to manage any estates with respect to  
which a declaration has been made under the said  section, or  
(b), to be a manager under the said Act No. XV  of 1871, or  
(c), to be an Assistant to the respective Collectors  of Ahmedabad, Kaira and Broach.   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 1]
  1 
 THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF 
EMPLOYMENT AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) ACT, 1996  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application . 
2. Definitions . 
 
CHAPTER II  
THE ADVISORY COMMITTEES AND EXPERT COMMITTEES  
3. Central Advisory Committee . 
4. State Advisory Committee . 
5. Expert committees . 
 
CHAPTER III  
REGISTRATION OF ESTABLISHMENTS  
6. Appointment of registe ring officers.  
7. Registration of establishments . 
8. Revocation of registration in certain cases.  
9. Appeal . 
10. Effect of non -registration.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
REGISTRATION OF BUILDING WORKERS AS BENEFICIARIES  
11. Beneficiaries of the Fund . 
12. Registration o f building workers as beneficiaries . 
13. Identity cards.  
14. Cessation as a benefici ary. 
15. Register of beneficiaries . 
16. Contribution of building wo rkers . 
17. Effect of non -payment of contribution . 
 
CHAPTER V  
BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS ’ WELFARE BOARDS  
18. Constitution of State Welfare Boards . 
19. Secretary and other officers of Boards . 
20. Meetings of Board s. 
21. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of the Boards . 
22. Functions of the Boards . 
23. Grants and loans by the Central Gove rnment . 
24. Building and Other Construction Workers’  Welfare Fund and its application . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 2]
  2 
 SECTIONS  
25. Budget.  
26. Annual report . 
27. Accounts and audit . 
 
CHAPTER VI  
HOURS OF WORK, WELFARE MEASURES AND OTHER CONDITIONS OF SERVICE OF BUILDING WORKERS  
28. Fixing hours for normal working day, etc . 
29. Wages f or overtime work . 
30. Maintenance of registers and records . 
31. Prohibition of employment of certain persons in certain building or other construction  work . 
32. Drinking water . 
33. Latrines and urinals . 
34. Accommodation . 
35. Creches.  
36. First-aid 
37. Canteens,  etc. 
 
CHAPTER VII  
SAFETY AND HEALTH MEASURES  
38. Safety Committee and safety o fficers . 
39. Notice of certain accidents.  
40. Power of appropriate Government to make rules for the safety and health of building worker s. 
41. Framing of  model rules for safety measures . 
 
CHAPTER VIII  
INSPECTING STAFF  
42. Appointment of Director -General, Chief Inspector and Inspectors . 
43. Powers of Inspectors . 
 
CHAPTER IX  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS  
44. Responsibility of employers . 
45. Responsibi lity for payment of wages and compensation . 
46. Notice of commencement of building or other construction work . 
 
CHAPTER X  
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE  
47. Penalty for contravention of provisions regarding safety measures . 
48. Penalty for failure to give notice of the commencement of the building or other constructio n 
work . 
49. Penalty for obstructions . 
50. Penalty for other offences . 
51. Appeal . 
52. Recovery of penalty . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 3]
  3 
 SECTIONS  
53. Offences by  companies . 
54. Cognizance of offences . 
55. Limitation of prosecutions . 
 
CHAPTER XI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
56. Delegation of powers . 
57. Returns . 
58. Application of Act 8 of 1923  to building workers . 
59. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
60. Power of Central Government to give directions . 
61. Power to remove difficulties . 
62. Power to make rules . 
63. Saving of certain laws . 
64. Repeal and saving . 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 4]
  4 
 THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF 
EMPLOYMENT AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) ACT, 1996  
ACT NO. 27 OF 1996  
[19th August,  1996.] 
An Act to regulate the employment and conditions of service of building and other construction 
workers and to provide for their safety, health and welfare measure s and for other matter s 
connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -seven th Year of the Republic of India as fo llows:— 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, exten t, commencement and application .—(1) This Act may be called the Building 
and Other Construction Wo rkers (Regulation of Employment a nd Conditions of Service) Act, 1996.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st  day of March, 1996.  
(4) It applies to every establishment which employs, or had employed on any day of the preceding 
twelve months, ten or more building workers in any building or other construction work.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, the building workers employed in different relays 
in a day either by the employer or the contractor shall be taken into account in computing the number o f 
building workers employed in the establishment.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appropriate Government ” means,— 
(i) in relation to an establishment (which employs building workers either directly or through 
a contractor) in respect of which the appropriate Government under the Industrial Disputes Act, 
1947 (14 of 1947), is the Central Government, the Central Government;  
(ii) in relation to any such establishment, being a public sector undertaking, as the Central 
Government may by notification specify which employs building workers either directly or 
through a contractor, the Central Government ; 
Explanation. —For the purposes of sub -clause ( ii), “public sector undertaking ” means any 
corporation
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 4]
anation. —For the purposes of sub -clause ( ii), “public sector undertaking ” means any 
corporation established b y or under any Central, State or P rovincial Act or a Government 
company as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) which is owned, 
controlled or managed by the Central Government;  
(iii) in relation to any other establishment which emp loys building workers either directly or 
through a contractor, the Government of the State in which that other establishment is situate;  
(b) “beneficiary ” means a building worker registered under section 12;  
(c) “Board ” means a Building  and Other Construction Workers’  Welfare Board constituted under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 18;  
(d) ”building or other construction work ” means the construction, alteration, repairs, maintenance 
or demoli tion, of or, in relation to, buildings, streets, roa ds, railways, tramways, airfields, irrigation, 
drainage, embankment and navigation works, flood control works (including storm water drainage 
works), generation, transmission and distribution of power, water works (including channels for 
distribution of wa ter), oil and gas installations, electric lines, wireless, radio , television, telephone, 
telegraph and overseas communication s, dams, canals, reservoirs, watercourses, tunnels, bridges, 
viaducts, aqu educts, pipelines, towers, cooling towers, transmission t owers and such other work as 
may be specified in this behalf by the appropriate Government, by notification but does not include 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 5]
  5 
 any building or other construction work to which the provisions of the Factories Act, 1948               
(63 of 1948), or the Mi nes Act, 1952 (35 of 1952), apply;  
(e) “building worker ” means a person who is employed to do any skilled, semi -skilled or 
unskilled , manual, supervisory, technical or clerical work for hire or reward, whether the terms of 
employment be expressed or implied, in connection with any building or other construction work but 
does not include any such person — 
(i) who is employed mainly in a m anagerial  or administrative capacity; or  
(ii) who, being employed in a supervisory capacity, draws wages exceeding one thousand six 
hundred rupees per mensem or exercises, either by the nature of the duties attached to the office 
or by reason of the powers  vested in him, functions mainly of a managerial nature;  
(f) “Chief Inspector ” means the Chief Inspector of Inspection of Building and Construction 
appointed under sub -section ( 2) of section 42;  
(g)  “contractor ” means a person who undertakes to produce a given result for any establishment, 
other than a mere supply of goods or articles of manufacture, by the employment of building workers 
or who supplies building workers for any work of the establishment; and incl udes a sub -contractor;  
(h) “Director -General ” means the Director -General of Inspection appointed under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 42;  
(i) “employer ”, in relation to an establishment, means t he owner thereof, and includes, — 
(i) in relation to a building or other construction work carried on by or under the authority of 
any department of the Government, directly without any contractor, the authority specified in this 
behalf, or where no authority is specified, the head of the department;  
(ii) in relation to a  building or other construction work carried on by or on behalf of a local 
authority or other establishment, directly without any contractor, the chief executive officer of 
that authority 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 5]
ther establishment, directly without any contractor, the chief executive officer of 
that authority or establishment;  
(iii) in relation to a building or other construction work carried on by or th rough a contractor, 
or by the employment of building workers supplied by a contractor, the contractor;  
(j)  “establishment ” means any establishment belonging to, or under the control of, Government, 
any body corporate o r firm, an individual or association or other body of individuals which or who 
employs building workers in any building or other construction work; and includes an establishment 
belonging to a contractor, but does not include an individual who employs such  workers in any 
building or construction work in relation to his own residence the total cost of such construction not 
being more than rupees ten lakhs;  
(k) “Fund ” means the Building and Other Construction Workers’  Welfare Fund of a Board 
constituted under  sub-section ( 1) of section 24;  
(l) “notification ” means a notification pub lished in the Official Gazette;  
(m) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act by the Central Government or, as 
the case may be, the State Government;  
(n) “wages ” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( vi) of section 2 of the 
Payment of Wages Act, 1936 (4 of 1936).  
(2) Any reference in this Act to any law which is not in force in any area shall, in relation to that area, 
be construed as a referenc e to the corresponding law, if any, in force in that area.  
CHAPTER II  
THE ADVISORY COMMITTEES AND EXPERT COMMITTEES  
3. Central Advisory Committee .—(1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, constitute 
a Committee to be called the Central Building and Other Construction Workers’  Advisory Committee 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 6]
  6 
 (hereinafter referred to as the Central Advisory Committee) to advise the Central Government on s uch 
matters arising out of the administration of this Act as may be referred to it.  
(2) The Central Advi sory Committee shall consist of — 
(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government;  
(b) three  Members of Parliament of whom two shall be elected by the House of the People a nd 
one by the Council of States —members;  
(c) the Director -General—member,  ex officio ; 
(d) such number of other members, not exceeding thirteen but not less  than nine, as the Ce ntral 
Government may nominate to represent the employers, building workers, associations of architects, 
engineers, accident insurance institutions and any other interests which, in the opinion of the Central 
Government, ought to be represented on the Centr al Advisory Committee.  
(3) The number of persons to be appointed as members from each of the categories specified in  
clause ( d) of sub -section ( 2), the term of office and other conditions of service of , the procedure to be 
followed in the discharge of the ir functions by, and the manner of filling vacancies among, the members 
of the Central Advisory Committee shall be such as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the members nominated to represent the building workers shall not be less than the 
number of members  nominated to represent the employers.  
(4) It is hereby declared that the office of member of the Central Advisory Committee shall not 
disqualify its holder for being chosen as, or for being, a Member of either House of Parliament.  
4. State Advisory Commit tee.—(1) The State Government shall constitute a committee to be called 
the State Building and Other Construction Workers’  Advisory Committee (hereinafter referred to as the 
State Advisory Committee) to advise the State Government on such matters arising o ut of the 
administration of this Act as may be referred to it.  
(2) The State Advi sory Committee shall
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 6]
 the 
administration of this Act as may be referred to it.  
(2) The State Advi sory Committee shall consist of — 
(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the State Government;  
(b) two members of the State Legislature to be elected fro m the State Legislature —members;  
(c) a member to be nominated by the Central Government;  
(d) the Chief Inspector —member , ex officio ; 
(e) such number of other members, not exceeding eleven, but not less than seven , as the State 
Government may nominate to represent the employers, building workers, associations of architects, 
engineers, accident insurance institutions and any other interests which, in the opinion of the State 
Government, ought to be represented on the  State Advisory Committee.  
(3) The number of persons to be appointed as members from each of the categories specified in  
clause ( e) of sub -section ( 2), the term of office and other conditions of service of , the procedure to be 
followed in the discharge of  their functions by, and the manner of filling vacancies among, the members 
of State Advisory Committee shall be such as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the number of members nominated to represent the building workers shall not be less 
than the number of  members nominated to represent the employers.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 4 of 27 of 1996 .—In se ction 4 of the Building and Other Construction 
Workers (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1996 (27 of 1996), in its  application 
to the State of Maharashtra, in sub -section ( 2), for clause ( b), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 7]
  7 
 “(b) two members of the State Legislature, of whom one shall be nominated by the Speaker of the 
State Legislative Assembly fro m amongst the members of the State Legislative Assembly and  one by the 
Chairman of the State Legislative Council form amongst the members of the State Legislative Council.. 
members;”.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act 4 of 2016, s. 5].  
5. Expert committees .—(1) The appropriate Government may constitute one or more expert 
committees consisting of persons specially qualified in building or other construction work for advising 
that Government for making rules under this Act.  
(2) The members of the expert committee shall  be paid such fees and allowances for attending the 
meetings of the committee as may be prescribed:  
Provided that no fee or allowances shall be payable to a member who is an officer of Government or 
of any body corporate established by or under any law for  the time being in force.  
CHAPTER III  
REGISTRATION OF ESTABLISHMENTS  
6. Appointment of registering officers .—The appropriate Government may, by order no tified in the 
Official Gazette, — 
(a) appoint such persons , being Gazetted  Officers of Government, as it thinks fit, to be the 
registering officers for the purposes of this Act; and  
(b) define the limits within which a registering officer shall exercise the powers conferred on him 
by or under this Act.  
7. Registration of establi shments .—(1) Every e mployer shall, — 
(a) in relation to an establishment to which this Act applies on its commencement, within a period 
of sixty days from such commencement; and  
(b) in relation to any other establishment to which this Act may be applicable at any time after 
such commencement, within a period of sixty days from the date on which this Act becomes 
applicable to such establishment,  
make an application to the registering off icer for the registration of such establishment:  
Provided that the registering officer may entertain any such application after 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 7]
uch establishment:  
Provided that the registering officer may entertain any such application after the expiry of the periods 
aforesaid, if he is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from making the 
application within such period.  
(2) Every application under sub -section ( 1) shall be in such form and shall contain such particular s 
and shall be accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed.  
(3) After the receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1), the registering officer shall register the 
establishment and issue a certificate of registration to the employer thereof in such form and within such 
time and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed.  
(4) Where, after the registration of an establishme nt under this section, any change occurs in the 
ownership or management or other prescribed particulars in respect of such establishment, the particulars 
regarding such change shall be intimated by the employer to the registering officer within thirty days  of 
such change in such form as may be prescribed.  
8. Revocation of registration in certain cases .—If the registering officer is satisfied, either on a 
reference made to him in this behalf or otherwise, that the registration of any establishment has been 
obtained by misrepresentation or suppression of any material fact or that the provisions of this Act are not 
being complied with in relation to any work carried on by such establishment, or that for any other reason 
the registration has become useless or in effective and, therefore, requires to be revoked, he may, after 
giving an opportunity to the employer of the establishment to be heard, revoke the registration.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 8]
  8 
 9. Appeal .—(1) Any person aggrieved by an order made under section 8 may, within thirty days fr om 
the date on which the order is communicated to him, prefer an appeal to the appellate officer who shall be 
a person nominated in this behalf by the appropriate Government:  
Provided that the appellate officer may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty 
days if he is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time.  
(2) On receipt of an appeal under sub -section ( 1), the appellate officer shall, after giving the appellant 
an opportunity  of being heard, confirm, modify or reverse the order of revocation as expeditiously as 
possible.  
10. Effect of non -registration .—No employer of an establishment to  which this Act applies shall, — 
(a) in the case of an establishment required to be registere d under section 7, but which has not 
been registered under that section;  
(b) in the case of an establishment the registration in respect of which  has been revoked under 
section 8 and no appeal has been preferred against such order of revocation under secti on 9 within the 
period prescribed for the preferring of such appeal or where an appeal has been so preferred, such 
appeal has been dismissed,  
employ building workers in the establishment after the expiry of the period referred to in clause ( a) or 
clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 7, or after the revocation of registration under section 8 or after the 
expiry of the period for preferring an appeal under section 9 or after the dismissal of the appeal, as the 
case may be.  
CHAPTER IV  
REGISTRATION OF BUILD ING WORKERS AS BENEFICIARIES  
11. Beneficiaries of the Fund .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, every building worker 
registered as a beneficiary under this Act shall be entitled to the benefits provided by the Board from its 
Fund under this Act.  
12. Re gistration of building workers as beneficiaries .—(1) E
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 8]
oard from its 
Fund under this Act.  
12. Re gistration of building workers as beneficiaries .—(1) Every building worker who has 
completed eighteen years of age, but has not completed sixty years of age, and who has been engaged in 
any building or other construction work for not less than ninety days during the preceding twelve months 
shall be eligible for registration as a beneficiary under this Act.  
(2) An application for registration shall be made in such form, as may be prescribed, to the officer 
authorise d by the Board in this behalf.  
(3) Every application under sub -section ( 2) shall be accompanied by such documents together with 
such fee not exceeding fifty rupees as may be prescribed.  
(4) If the officer authorise d by the Board under sub -section ( 2) is satisfied that the applicant has 
complied w ith the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, he shall register the name of the 
building worker as a beneficiary under this Act:  
Provided that an application for registration shall not be rejected without giving the applicant an 
opportunity  of being heard.  
(5) Any person aggrieved by the decision under sub -section ( 4) may, within thirty days from the date 
of such decision, prefer an appeal to the Secretary of the Board or any other officer specified by the Board 
in this behalf and the decisi on of the Secretary or such other officer on such appeal shall be final:  
Provided that the Secretary or any other officer specified by the Board in this behalf may entertain the 
appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty days if he is satisfied t hat the building worker was 
prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time.  
(6) The Secretary of the Board shall cause to maintain such registers as may be prescribed.  
13. Identity cards .—(1) The Board shall give to every beneficiary an identity card with his 
photograph duly affixed thereon and with enough space for entering the details of the building or other 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 8]
ograph duly affixed thereon and with enough space for entering the details of the building or other 
construction work done by him.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 9]
  9 
 (2) Every employer shall enter in the identity card the details of the building or other construct ion 
work done by the beneficiary and authenticate the same and return it to the beneficiary.  
(3) A beneficiary who has been issued an identity card under this Act shall produce the same 
whenever demanded by any officer of Government or the Board, any inspe ctor or any other authority for 
inspection.  
14. Cessation as a beneficiary .—(1) A building worker who has been registered as a beneficiary 
under this Act shall cease to be as such when he attains the age of sixty years or when he is not engaged 
in building  or other construction work for not less than ninety days in a year:  
Provided that in computing the period of ninety days under this sub -section, there shall be excluded 
any period of absence from the building or other construction work due to any personal  injury caused to 
the building worker by accident arising out of and in the course of his employment.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), if a person had been a beneficiary for at 
least three years continuously immediately before att aining the age of sixty years, he shall be eligible to 
get such benefits as may be  prescribed.  
Explanation .—For computing the period of three years as a beneficiary with a Board under this    sub-
section, there shall be added any period for which a person had been a beneficiary with any other Board 
immediately before his registration.  
15. Register of beneficiaries .—Every employer shall maintain a register in such form as may be 
prescribed showing the details of employment of beneficiaries employed in the bu ilding or other 
construction work undertaken by him and the same may be inspected without any prior notice by the 
Secretary of the Board or any other officer duly authorise d by the Board in this behalf.  
16. Contribution of building workers .—(1) A building worker who has been registered as a 
beneficiary under this A
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 9]
n of building workers .—(1) A building worker who has been registered as a 
beneficiary under this Act shall, until he attains the age of sixty years, contribute to the Fund at such rate 
per mensem, as may be specified by the State Government, by notification in the Official Gazette and 
differen t rates of contribution may be specified for different classes of building workers:  
Provided that the Board may, if satisfied that a beneficiary is unable to pay his contribution due to any 
financial hardship, waive the payment of contribution for a period  not exceeding three months at a time.  
(2) A beneficiary may authorise  his employer to deduct his contribution from his monthly wages and 
to remit the same, within fifteen days fro m such deduction, to the Board.  
17. Effect of non -payment of contribution .—When a beneficiary has not paid his contribution 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 16 for a continuous period of not less than one year, he shall cease to be a 
beneficiary:  
Provided that if the Secretary of the Board is satisfied that the non -payment of con tribution was for a 
reasonable ground and that the building worker is willing to deposit the arrears, he may allow the building 
worker to deposit the contribution in arrears and on such deposit being made, the registration of building 
worker shall stand re stored.  
CHAPTER V  
BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS ’ WELFARE BOARDS  
18. Constitution of State Welfare Boards .—(1) Every State Government shall, with effect from 
such date as it may, by notification, appoint, constitute a Board to be known as the  …… (name of the 
State) Building and Other Construction Workers’  Welfare Board to exercise the powers conferred on, and 
perform the functions assigned to, it under this Act.  
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual success ion and a 
common seal and shall by the said name sue and be sued.  
(3) The Board shall consist of a chairperson, a person t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 9]
d shall by the said name sue and be sued.  
(3) The Board shall consist of a chairperson, a person to be nominated by the Central Government 
and such number of other members, not exceeding fifteen, as may be appointed to it by the Sta te 
Government:  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 10]
  10 
 Provided that the Board shall include an equal number of members representing the State 
Government, the employers and the building workers and that at least one membe r of the Board shall be a 
woman.  
(4) The terms and conditions of appointment and the salaries and other allowances payable to the 
chairperson and the other members of the Board, and the manner of filling of casual vacancies of the 
members of the Board, shall be such as may be prescribed.  
19. Secretary and other officers  of Boards .—(1) The Board shall appoint a Secretary and such other 
officers and employees as it considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act.  
(2) The secretary of the Board shall be its chief executive officer.  
(3) The te rms a nd conditions of appointment and  the salary  and allowances payable to the Secretary 
and the other officers and employees of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.  
20. Meetings of Board s.—(1) The Board shall meet at such time and place and obser ve such rules of 
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum at such meetings) 
as may be prescribed.  
(2) The chairperson or, if for any reason he is unable to attend a meeting of the Board, any member 
nominated by the chairperson in this behalf and in the absence of such nomination, any other member 
elected by the members present from amongst themselves at the meeting, shall preside at the meeting.  
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Board s hall be decided by a majority of 
votes of the members present and voting, and in the event of equality of votes, the chairperson, or in his 
absence, the person presiding, shall have a second or a casting vote.  
21. Vacancies,  etc. , not to invalidate proceedings of the Boards .—No act or proceedings of a 
Board shall  be invalid merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board; or  
(b) any defect i
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 10]
son of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the Board; or  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board not affecting the merits of the case.  
22. Functions of the Boards .—(1) The Board m ay— 
(a) provide immediate assistance to a beneficiary in case of accident;  
(b) make  payment of pension to the beneficiaries who have completed the age of sixty years;  
(c) sanction loans and advances to a beneficiary for construction of a house not exceeding such 
amount and on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed;  
(d) pay such a mount in connection with premia   for Group Insurance Scheme of the beneficiaries 
as it may deem fit;  
(e) give such financial assistance for the education of children of the beneficiaries as may be 
prescribed;  
(f) meet such medical expenses for treatment of  major ailments of a beneficiary or, such 
dependant, as may be prescribed;  
(g) make payment of maternity benefit to the female beneficiaries; and  
(h) make provision and improvement of such other welfare measures and facilities as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) The  Board may grant loan or subsidy to a local authority or an employer in aid of any scheme 
approved by the State Government for the purpose connected with the welfare of building workers in any 
establishment . 
(3) The Board may pay annually grants -in-aid to a local authority or to an employer who provides to 
the satisfaction of the Board welfare measures and facilities of the standard specified by the Board for the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 11]
  11 
 benefit of the building workers and the members of' their family, so, however, that the amount payable as 
grants -in-aid to any local authori ty or employer shall not exceed — 
(a) the amount spent in providing welfare measures and facilities as determined by the State 
Government or any person specified by it in this behalf, or  
(b) such amount as may be prescribed,  
whichever is less:  
Provided that no grant -in-aid shall be payable in respect of any such welfare measures and facilities 
where the amount spent thereon determined as aforesaid is less than the a mount prescribed in this behalf.  
23. Grants and loans by the Central Government .—The Central Government may, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to a Board grants and loans of such sums of 
money as the Go vernment may consider necessary.  
24. Building and  Other Construction Workers’  Welfare Fund and its application .—(1) There 
shall be constituted by a Board a fund  to be called the Building and O ther Construction Workers’  Welfare  
 
Fund and there shall be credited thereto — 
(a) any grants and loans made to the Board by the Centr al Government under section 23;  
(b) all contributions made by the beneficiaries;  
(c) all sums received by the Board from such other sources as may be de cided by the Central 
Government.  
(2) The Fu nd shall be a pplied for meeting — 
(a) expenses of the Board in the discharge of its functions under section 22; and  
(b) salaries, allowances and other remuneration of the members, officers and other employees of 
the Board;  
(c) expenses on objects and for purposes author ised by this Act.  
(3) No Board shall, in any financial year, incur expenses towards salaries, allowances and other 
remuneration to its members, officers and other employees and for meeting the other administrative 
expenses exceeding five per  cent. of its total expenses during that financial year.  
25 Budget .—The Board shall prepare, in such for
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 11]
of its total expenses during that financial year.  
25 Budget .—The Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time each financial year, as may be 
prescribed, its budget for the next financial year, showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of the 
Board  and forward the same to the State Government and the Central Gov ernment.  
26. Annual report .—The Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time each financial year as 
may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the previous financial 
year, and submit a copy thereof to the State Government and the Central Government.  
27. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Board shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such f orm as may be prescribed in consultation with the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any other person appointed by him in 
connection with the auditing of the accounts of the Board under this Act shall have the same rights and 
privileges and the authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of 
India has in connection with the auditing of the Government accounts and , in particular shall have the 
right to demand the p roduction of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers 
and to inspect any of the offices of the Board under this Act.  
(3) The accounts of the Board shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India 
annually and any e xpenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Board to the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 12]
  12 
 (4) The Board shall furnish to the State Government before such date as may be prescribed its audited 
copy of accounts together  with the auditor's report.  
(5) The State Government shall cause the annual report and auditor's report to be laid, as soon as may 
be after they are received, before the State Legislature.  
CHAPTER VI  
HOURS OF WORK, WELFARE MEASURES AND OTHER CONDITIONS OF SERVICE OF BUILDING WORKERS  
28. Fixing hours for normal working day, etc .—(1) The approp riate Government may, by rules, — 
(a) fix the number of hours of work which shall constitute  a normal working day for a building 
worker, inclusive of one or more specified intervals;  
(b) provide for a day of rest in every period of seven days which shall be allowed to all building 
workers and for the payment of remuneration in respect of such days of rest;  
(c) provide for payment of work on a day of rest at a rate not less than the overtime rate specified 
in section 29.  
(2) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall, in relation to the following classes of building workers, 
apply only to such extent, a nd subject to such conditions, as may be prescrib ed, namely: — 
(a) persons engaged on urgent work, or in any emergency which could not have been foreseen or 
prevented;  
(b) persons engaged in a work in the nature of preparatory or complementary work which mu st 
necessarily be carried on outside the normal hours of work laid down in the rules;  
(c) persons engaged in any work which for technical reasons has to be c ompleted before the day 
is over;  
(d) persons engaged in a work which could not be carried on except  at times dependant on the 
irregular action of natural forces.  
29. Wages for overtime work .—(1) Where any building worker is required to work on any day in 
excess of the number of hours constituting a normal working day , he shall be entitled to wages at th e rate 
of twice his ordinary rate of wages.  
(2) For the purposes of this section, “ordinary rat
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 12]
h e rate 
of twice his ordinary rate of wages.  
(2) For the purposes of this section, “ordinary rates of wages ” means the basic wages plus such 
allowances as the worker is for the time being entitled to but does not include any bonus.  
30. Maintenance of registers and records .—(1) Every employer shall maintain such registers and 
records giving such particulars of building workers employed by him, the work performed by them, the 
number of hours of work which shall constitute a normal working day for them, a day of rest in every 
period of seven days which shall be allowed to them, the wages paid to them, the receipts given by them 
and such other particulars in such form as my be prescribed.  
(2) Every employer shall keep exhibited, in such manner as may be pre scribed, in the place where 
such workers may be employed, notices in the prescribed form containing the prescribed particulars.  
(3) The appropriate Government may, by rules, provide for the issue of wage books or wage slips to 
building workers employed in an establishment and prescribe the manner in which entries shall be made 
and authenticated in such wage books or wage slips by the employer or his agent.  
31. Prohibition of employment of certain persons in certain building or other construction 
work .—No pe rson about whom the employer knows or has reason to believe that he is a deaf or he has a 
defective vision or he has a tendency to giddiness shall be  required or allowed to work in any such 
operation of building or other construction work which is likely t o involve a risk of any accident either to 
the building worker himself or to any other person.  
32. Drinking water .—(1) The employer shall make in every place where building or other 
construction work is in progress, effective arrangements to provide and ma intain at suitable points 
conveniently situated for all persons employed therein, a sufficient supply of wholesome drinking water.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 12]
rein, a sufficient supply of wholesome drinking water.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 13]
  13 
 (2) All such points shall be legibl y marked “Drinking Water ” in a language understood by a majority 
of the person s employed in such place and no such point shall be situated within six metres of any 
washing place, urinal or latrine.  
33. Latrines and urinals .—In every place where building or other construction work is carried on, 
the employer shall provide sufficient l atrine and urinal accommodation of such types as may be 
prescribed and they shall be so conveniently situated as may be accessible to the building workers at all 
times while they are in such place:  
Provided that it shall not be necessary to provide separat e urinals in any place where less than fifty 
persons are employed or where the latrines are connected to a water -borne sewage system.  
34. Accommodation .—(1) The employer shall provide, free of charges and within the work site or as 
near to it as may be pos sible , temporary living accommodation to all building workers employed by him 
for such period as the building or other construction work is in progress.  
(2) The temporary accommodation provided under sub -section ( 1) shall have separate cooking place , 
bathi ng, washing and lavatory facilities . 
(3) As soon as may be, after the building or other construction work is over, the employer shall, at his 
own cost, cause removal or demolition of the temporary structures erected by him for the purpose of 
providing livi ng accommodation , cooking place or other facilities to the building workers as required 
under sub -section ( 1) and restore the ground in good level and clean condition.  
(4) In case an employer is given an y land by a Municipal Board or  any other local authority for the 
purposes of providing temporary accommodation for the building workers under this section, he shall , as 
soon as may be after the construction work is over, return the possession of such land in the same 
condition in which he received the same.  
35. Creches .—(1) In every place wher
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 13]
h land in the same 
condition in which he received the same.  
35. Creches .—(1) In every place wherein , more than  fifty female building workers are ordinarily 
employed, there shall be provided and maintained a suitable room or rooms for the use of children under 
the age of six years of such female workers.  
(2) Such rooms shall — 
(a) provide adequate accommodation;  
(b) be adequately lighted and ventilated;  
(c) be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition;  
(d) be under the charge of women trained in the care of children and infants.  
36. First -aid.—Every employer shall provide in all the places where building or other construction 
work is carried on such first -aid facilities as may be prescribed.  
37. Canteens,  etc.—The appropriate Government may , by rules , require the employer — 
(a) to provide and maintain in every place wherein not less than two hundred and fifty building 
workers are ordinarily employed, a canteen for the use of the workers;  
(b) to provide such other welfare measures for the benefit of building workers as may be 
prescr ibed.  
CHAPTER VII  
SAFETY AND HEALTH MEASURES  
38. Safety Committee and safety officers .—(1) In every establishment wherein five hundred or 
more building workers are ordinarily employed, the employer shall constitute a Safety Committee 
consisting of such number of representatives of the employer and the building workers as may be 
prescribed by the State Government:  
Provided that the number of persons representing the workers, shall, in no case, be less than the 
persons representing the employer.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 14]
  14 
 (2) In eve ry establishment referred to in sub -section ( 1), the employer shall also appoint a safety 
officer who shall possess such qualifications and perform such duties as may be prescribed.  
39. Notice of certain accidents .—(1) Where in any establishment an acciden t occurs which causes 
death or which causes any bodily injury by reason of which the person injured is prevented from working 
for a period of forty -eight hours or more immediately following the accident, or which is of such a nature 
as may be prescribed, t he employer shall give notice thereof to such authority, in such form and within 
such time as may be prescribed.  
(2) On receipt of a notice under sub -section ( 1) the authority referred to in that sub -section may make 
such investigation or inquiry as it con siders necessary.  
(3) Where a notice given under sub -section ( 1) relates to an accident causing death of five or more 
persons, the authority shall make an inquiry into such accident within one month of the receipt of the 
notice.  
40. Power of appropriate Go vernment to make  rules for the safety and health of building 
workers .—(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification, make rules regarding the measures to 
be taken for the safety and health of building workers in the course of their employment and the  
equipment and appliances necessary to be provided to them for ensuring their safety, health and 
protection, during such employment.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following mat ters, namely: — 
(a) the safe means of access to, and the safety of, any working place, including the provision of 
suitable and sufficient scaffolding at various stages when work cannot be safely done from the ground 
or from any part of a b uilding or from a ladder or such other means of support;  
(b) the precautions to be taken in connection with the demolition of the whole or any
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 14]
 of support;  
(b) the precautions to be taken in connection with the demolition of the whole or any substantial 
part of a building or other structure under the supervision of a competent person and the avoidance of 
danger from collapse of any building or other structure while removing any part of the framed 
building or other structure by shoring or otherwise;  
(c) the handling or use of explosive under the control of competent persons so that there is no 
exposure t o the risk of injury from explosion or from flying material;  
(d) the erection , installation, use and maintenance of transporting equipment, such as 
locomotives, trucks, wagons and other vehicles and trailers and appointment of competent persons to 
drive or  operate such equipment;  
(e) the erection, installation, use and maintenance of hoists, lifting appliances and lifting gear 
including periodical testing and examination and heat treatment , where necessary, precautions to be 
taken while raising or lowering loads, restrictions on carriage of persons and appointment of 
competent persons on hoists or other lifting appliances;  
(f) the adequate and suitable lighting of every workplace and approach thereto, of every place 
where raising or lowering operations with the use of hoists, lifting appliances or lifting gears are in 
progress and of all openings dangerous to building workers employed;  
(g) the precautions to be taken to prevent inhalation of dust, fumes , gases or vapours during any 
grinding, cleaning,  sprayin g or manipulation of an y material and steps to be taken to secure and 
maintain adequate ventilation of eve ry working place or confined spa ce; 
(h) the measures to be taken during stacking or unstacking, stowing or unstowing  of materials or 
goods or handling in connection therewith;  
(i) the safeguarding of machinery including the fencing of every fly -wheel and every moving part 
of a prime mover and every part of transmission or other machinery, unless it is in such
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 14]
oving part 
of a prime mover and every part of transmission or other machinery, unless it is in such a position  or 
of such construction as to be safe to every worker working on  any of the operations an d as if it were 
securely fenced;  
(j) the safe handling and use of plant, including tools and equipment operated by compressed air ; 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 15]
  15 
 (k) the precaution s to be taken in case of fire;  
(l) the limits of weight to be lifted or moved by workers;  
(m) the safe transport of workers to or from any workplace by water and provision of means for 
rescue from drowning;  
(n) the steps to be taken to prevent danger to wor kers from live electric wires or apparatus 
including electrical machinery and tools and from overhead wires;  
(o) the keeping of safety nets, safety sheets and safety belts where the special nature or the 
circumstances of work render them necessary for the safety of the workers;  
(p) the standards to be complied with regard to scaffolding, ladders and stairs, lifting appliances , 
ropes, chains and accessories, earth moving equipment s and floating operational equipments;  
(q) the precautions to be taken with reg ard to pile driving, concrete work, work with hot asphalt, 
tar or other similar things, insulation work, demolition operations, excavation, underground 
construction and handling materials;  
(r) the safety policy, that is to say, a policy relating to steps t o be taken to ensure the safety and 
health of the building workers, the administrative arrangements therefor and the matters connected 
therewith, to be framed by the employers and contractors for the operations to be carried on in a 
building or other const ruction work;  
(s) the information to be furnished to the Bureau of Indian Standard s established under the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 (63 of 1986), regarding the use of any article or process 
covered under that Act in a buil ding or other construction work;  
(t) the provision and maintenance of medical facilities for building workers;  
(u) any other matter concerning the safety and health of workers working in any of the operations 
being carried on in a building or other construction work.  
41. Framing of model rules for safety measures .—The Central Government may, after considering 
the recommendation of the expert committee constituted
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 15]
he Central Government may, after considering 
the recommendation of the expert committee constituted under section 5, fra me model rules in respect of 
all or any of the matters specified in section 40 and where any such model rules have been framed in 
respect of any such matter, the appropriate Government shall , while making any rules in respect of that 
matter under section 40, so far as is practicable, conform to such model rules.  
CHAPTER VIII  
INSPECTING STAFF  
42. Appointment of Director -General, Chief Inspector and Inspectors .—(1) The Central 
Government may, by notification, appoint a Gazetted Officer of that  Government to be the Director -
General of Inspection who shall be responsible for laying down the standards of inspection and shall also 
exercise the powers of an Inspector throughout India in relation to all the establishments for which the 
Central Govern ment is the appropriate Government.  
(2) The State Government may, by notification, appoint a Gazetted Officer of that Government to be 
the Chief Inspector of Inspection of Building and Construction who shall be responsible for effectively 
carrying out the provisions of this Act in the State and shall also exercise the powers of an Inspector 
under this Act throughout the State in relation to establishments for which the State Government is the 
appropriate Government.  
(3) The appropriate Government may, by no tification, appoint such number of its officers as it thinks 
fit to be Inspectors for the purposes of this Act and may assign to them such local limits as it may think 
fit. 
(4) Every Inspector appointed under this section shall be  subject to the control of  the Director -General 
or the Chief Inspector, as the case may be, and shall exercise his powers and perform his functions under 
this Act subject to general control and supervision of the Director -General or the Chief Inspector.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 15]
ector.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 16]
  16 
 (5) The Director -General , the Chief Inspector and every Inspector shall be deemed to be public 
servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
43. Powers of Inspectors .—(1) Subject to any rules made in this behalf, an Inspector may, within the 
local limits for which he is appointed, — 
(a) enter, at all reasonable hours, with such assistants (if any) being persons in the service of the 
Government or any local or other public authority as he thinks fit, any premises or place where 
building or other const ruction work is carried on, for the purpose of examining any register or record 
or notices required to be kept or exhibited by or under this Act, and require the production thereof for 
inspection;  
(b) examine any person whom he finds in any such premises o r place and who, he has reasonable 
cause to believe, is a building worker employed therein;  
(c) require any person giving out building or other construction work to any building worker, to 
give any information, which is in his power to give with respect to  the names and addresses of the 
persons to, for and whom the building or other construction work is given out or received, and with 
respect to the payments to be made for the building or other construction work;  
(d) seize or take copies of such register, r ecord of wages or notices or portions thereof as he may 
consider relevant in respect of an offence under this Act which he has reason to believe has been 
committed by the employer; and  
(e) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed.  
(2) For the purpos es of this section, the Director -General or the Chief Inspector, as the case may be, 
may employ experts or agencies having such qualifications and experience and on such terms and 
conditions as may be prescribed.  
(3) Any person required to produce any document or to give any information required by an Inspector 
under sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to be legally bound to do so within t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 16]
uired by an Inspector 
under sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to be legally bound to do so within the meaning of section 175 and 
section 176 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
(4) The provisions of the Code of Crimi nal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), shall, so far as may be, apply 
to such search or seizure under sub -section ( 1) as they apply to any search or seizure made under the 
authority of a warrant issued under section 94 of the said Code.  
CHAPTER IX  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS  
44. Responsibility of employers .—An employer shall be responsible for providing constant and 
adequate supervision of any building or other construction work in his establishment as to ensure 
compliance with the provisions of this Act relating to  safety and for taking all practical steps necessary to 
prevent accidents.  
45. Responsibility for payment of wages and compensation .—(1) An employer shall be responsible 
for payment of wages to each building worker employed by him and such wages shall be p aid on or 
before such date as may be prescribed.  
(2) In case the contractor fails to make payment of compensation in respect of a building worker 
employed by him, where he is liable to make such payment when due, or makes short payment thereof, 
then, in th e case of death or disablement of the building worker, the employer shall be liable to make 
payment of that compensation in full or the unpaid balance due in accordance with the provisions of the 
Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923 (8 of 1923), and recover th e amount so paid from the contractor 
either by deduction from any amount payable to the contractor under any contract or as a debt payable by 
the contractor.  
46. Notice of commencement of building or other construction work .—(1) An employer shall, at 
least thirty days before the commencement of any building or other construction work, send or cause to be 
sent to the Inspector having jurisdiction in the area where the proposed building or other construction 
work
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 16]
he Inspector having jurisdiction in the area where the proposed building or other construction 
work is to be execut ed, a written notice containing — 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 17]
  17 
 (a) the name and situation of the place where the building or other construction work is proposed 
to be carried on;  
(b) the name and address of the person who is undertaking the buil ding or other construction 
work;  
(c) the address to which communications relating to the building or other construction work may 
be sent;  
(d) the nature of the work involved and the facilities, including any plant and machinery, 
provided;  
(e) the arrangements for the storage of explosives, if an y, to be used in the building or other 
construction work;  
(f) the number of workers likely to be employed during the various stages of building or other 
construction work;  
(g) the name and designation of the person who will be in overall charge of the buil ding or other 
construction work at the site;  
(h) the approximate duration of the work;  
(i) such other matters as may be prescribed.  
(2) Where any change occurs in any of the particulars furnished under sub -section ( 1), the employer 
shall intimate the chang e to the Inspector within two days of such change.  
(3) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) shall apply in case of such class of building or other 
construction work as the appropriate Government may by notification specify to be emergent works.  
CHAPTER X  
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE  
47. Penalty for contravention of provisions regarding safety measures. —(1) Whoever contravenes 
the provisions of any rules made under section 40 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to three months, or wi th fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or with both, and in 
the case of a continuing contravention, with an additional fine which may extend to one hundred rupees 
for every day during which such contravention continues after conviction for the fi rst such contravention.  
(2) If any person who has been convicted of any offence punishable under sub -section ( 1) is again 
guilty of an offence involving a contravention or failure 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 17]
ishable under sub -section ( 1) is again 
guilty of an offence involving a contravention or failure of compliance of the same provision, he shall be 
punishable on a subsequent conviction with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or 
with fine which shall not be less than five hundred rupees but which may extend to two thousand rupees 
or with both:  
Provided that for the purposes of this sub -section, no cognizance  shall be taken of any conviction 
made more than two years before the commission of the offence for which the person is subsequently 
being convicted:  
Provided further that the authority imposing the penalty, if it is satisfied that there are exceptional 
circumstances warranting such a course may, after recording its reasons in writing, impose a fine of less 
than five hundred rupees.  
48. Penalty for failure to give notice of the commencement of the building or other construction 
work .—Where an employer fails  to give notice of the commencement of the building or other 
construction work under section 46, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or with both.  
49. P enalty for obstructions .—(1) Whoever obstructs an Inspector in the discharge of his duties 
under this Act or refuses or wil fully neglects to afford the Inspector any reasonable facility for making 
any inspection, examination, inquiry or investigation authorise d by or under this Act in relation to an 
establishment shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or 
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 18]
  18 
 (2) Whoever wilfully refuses to produce o n the demand of an Inspector any register or other 
document kept in pursuance of this Act or prevents or attempts to prevent or does anything which he has 
reason to believe is likely to prevent any person from appearing before, or being examined by , an 
Inspector acting in pursuance of his duties under this Act shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with 
both.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Jammu and Kashmir and  Ladakh  (UTs).— 
Insertion of new section —After section 49, insert - 
49A. Compounding of offences .—(1) Any offence punishable under sections 47, 48 and 49 may, 
either before or after the institution of the prosecution, on an application by the alleged offender, be 
compounded by payment of compounding amount not more than fifty thousand by such officer or 
authority as the appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this 
behalf:  
Provided that the appropriate Government may, by notif ication in the Official Gazette, amend the said 
specified compounding amount:  
Provided further that the offences of the same nature committed by the same offender for more than 
three occasions shall not be compoundable:  
Provided also that such offences sha ll be compounded only after the alleged offender has acted to the 
satisfaction of such officer or authority that such offence is  not continued any further:  
(2) Where an offence has been compounded under sub -section ( 1), no further proceedings shall be 
taken against the offender in respect of such offence and the offender, if in custody, shall be released or 
discharged.  
[Vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification 
No. S.O.  3774(E), dated (23 -10-2020)  and Vide Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation 
(Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification No.
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 18]
tory of Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation 
(Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification No. S.O.  3465(E), dated (5 -10-2020).]  
50. Penalty for other offences .—(1) Whoever contravenes any other provision of this Act or any 
rules made thereunder or who fails to comply with any provision of this Act or any rules made thereunder 
shall, where no express penalty is elsewhere provided for such contravention or failure, be punishable 
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees for every such contravention or failure, as the case 
may be, and in the case of a continuing contravention or failure, as the case may be , with an additional 
fine which may extend to one hundred rupees for every day during which such contravention or failure 
continues after the conviction for the first such contravention or failure.  
(2) A penalty under sub -section ( 1) may be imposed — 
(a) by the Director -General where the contravention or failure relates to a matter to which the 
appropriate Government is the Central Government; and  
(b) by the Chief Inspector where the contravention or failure relates to a matter to which the 
appropriate Gover nment is the State Government.  
(3) No penalty shall be imposed unless the person concern ed is given a notice in writing — 
(a) informing him of the grounds on which it is proposed to impose a penalty ; and 
(b) giving him a reasonable opportunity of making a representation in writing within such 
reasonable time as may be specified in the notice against the imposition of penalty mentioned therein, 
and, if he so desires, of being heard in the matter.  
(4) Without prejudice to any other provision contained in this  Act, the Director -General and the Chief 
Inspector shall have all the powers of a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), 
while exercising any powers under this section, in respect of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning a nd enforcing the attendance of witnesses;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 18]
 following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning a nd enforcing the attendance of witnesses;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 19]
  19 
 (b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;  
(c) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office;  
(d) receiving evidence on affidavits; and  
(e) issuing commissions for the e xamination of witnesses or documents.  
(5) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prevent the person concerned from being 
prosecuted under any other provision of this Act or any other law for any offence made punishable by this 
Act or by th at other law, as the case may be, or for being liable under this Act or any such law to any 
other or higher penalty or punishment than is provided for such offence by this section:  
Provided that no person shall be punished twice for the same offence.  
51. A ppeal .—(1) Any person aggrieved by the imposition of any penalty under section 50 may p refer 
an appeal — 
(a) where the penalty has been imposed by the Director -General, to the Central Government;  
(b) where  the penalty has been imposed by the Chief Inspector, to the State Government,  
within a period of three months from the date of communication to such person of the imposition of such 
penalty:  
Provided that the Central Government or the State Government, as  the case may be, may, if it is 
satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring an appeal within the 
aforesaid period of three months, allow such appeal to be preferred within a further period of three 
months.  
(2) The appella te authority may, after giving the appellant an opportunity of being heard, if he so 
desires, and after making such further inquiry, if any, as it may consider necessary, pass such order as it 
thinks fit confirming, modifying or reversing the order appeale d against or may send back the case with 
such directions as it may think fit for a fresh decision.  
52. Recovery of penalty .—Where any penalty imposed on any perso n under section 50 is not paid, — 
(i) the Director -General or, as the case may be, t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 19]
 on any perso n under section 50 is not paid, — 
(i) the Director -General or, as the case may be, the Chief Inspector may deduct the amount so 
payable from any money owing to such person which may be under his control; or  
(ii) the Director -General or, as the case may be, the Chief Inspector may recover the amount so 
payable by detaining or selling the goods belo nging to such person which are under his control; or  
(iii) if the amount cannot be recovered from such person in the manner provided in clause ( i) or 
clause ( ii), the Director -General or, as the case may be, the Chief Inspector may prepare a certificate 
signed by him specifying the amount due from such person and send it to the Collector of the district 
in which such person owns any property or resides or carries o n his business and the said Collector, 
on receipt of such certificate shall proceed to recover from such person t he amount specified 
thereunder as if it were an arrear of land revenue.  
53. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been  committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had ex ercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the c onsent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 19]
lect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 20]
  20 
 Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) ”company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) ”director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
54. Cognizance of offences .—(1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under  this 
Act except on a complaint — 
(a) made by, or with the previous sanction in writing of, the Director -General or the Chief 
Inspector; or  
(b) made  by an office -bearer of a voluntary organisation registered under the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860); or  
(c) made by an office -bearer of any concerned trade union registered under the Trade Unions Act , 
1926 (16 of 1926).  
(2) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class 
shall try any offence punishable under this Act.  
55. Limitation of prosecutions .—No court shall take congizance of an offence punishable under this 
Act unless the com plaint thereof is made within three months from the date on which the alleged 
commission of the offence came to the knowledge of the Director -General, the Chief Inspector, an            
office -bearer of a voluntary organisation or, as the case may be, an o ffice-bearer of any concerned trade 
union.  
CHAPTER XI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
56. Delegation of powers .—A Board may, by general or special order, delegate to the Chairperson or 
any other member or to the Secretary or any other officer or employee of the Board, subject to such 
conditions and limitations, if any, as may be specified in the order, such of its powers and duties under 
this Act as it may deem necessary.  
57. Returns .—Every Board shall furnish from time to time to the Central Government and to the State  
Government such returns as they may require.  
58. Application of Act 8 of 1923 to building workers .—The provisions of the Workmen's 
Compensation Act, 1923, shall so far as may be, apply to building workers as 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 20]
ions of the Workmen's 
Compensation Act, 1923, shall so far as may be, apply to building workers as if the employment to which 
this Act applies had  been included in the Second Schedule to that Act.  
59. Protection of action taken in good faith .—(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance 
of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder.  
(2) No prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Government, any Board or 
Committees constituted under this Act or any member of such Board or any officer or employee of the 
Government or th e Board or any other person authorise d by the Government or any Board or committee, 
for any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be 
done in pursuance of this Act or any rule or order made or issued the reunder.  
60. Power of Central Government to give directions .—The Central Government may give 
directions to the Government of any State or to a Board as to the carrying into execution in that State of 
any of the provisions of this Act.  
61. Power to remove d ifficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of two years from the date of 
commencement of this Act.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 21]
  21 
 (2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
62. Power to make rules .—(1) The appropriate Government may, after consultation with the expert 
committee, by notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudic e to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the number of persons to be appointed as members representing various interests on the 
Central Advisory Committee and the State Advisor y Committees, the term of their office and other 
conditions of service, the procedure to be followed in the discharge of their functions and the manner 
of filling vacancies under sub -section ( 3) of section 3 or, as the case may be, under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 4;  
(b) the fees and allowances that may be paid to the members of the expert committee for 
attending its meetings under sub -section ( 2) of section 5;  
(c) the form of application for the registration of an establishment, the levy of fees therefor and 
the particulars it may contain under sub -section ( 2) of section 7;  
(d) the form of certificate of registration, the time within which and the conditions subject to  
which such certificate may be issued under sub -section ( 3) of section 7;  
(e) the form in which the change in ownership or management or other particulars shall be 
intimated to the registering officer under sub -section ( 4) of section 7;  
(f) the form in whi ch an application for registration as a beneficiary shall be made under          
sub-section ( 2) of section 12;  
(g) the document and the fee which shall accompany the application under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 12;  
(h) the registers which the Secretary of  the Board shall cause to be maintained under                 
sub-section ( 6) of section 12;  
(i) the benefits which may be given under sub -sectio
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 21]
            
sub-section ( 6) of section 12;  
(i) the benefits which may be given under sub -section ( 2) of section 14;  
(j) the form in which register of beneficiaries shall  be maintained under section 15;  
(k) the terms and conditions of appointment, the salaries and other allowances payable to, and the 
manner of filling of casual vacancies of, the Chairperson and other members of the Board under    
sub-section ( 4) of section 18;  
(l) the terms and conditions o f service and the salaries and allowances payable to the Secretary 
and the other officers and employees of the Board under sub -section ( 3) of section 19;  
(m) the time and place of the meeting of the Board and the rules of procedure to be followed at 
such m eeting under sub -section ( 1) of section 20 including quorum necessary for the transaction of 
business;  
(n) the amount payable as house building loans or advances, the terms and conditions of such 
payment under clause ( c), educational assistance under claus e (e), medical expenses payable and the 
persons who shall be the dependent of the beneficiaries under clause ( f), and the other welfare 
measures for which provision may be made under clause ( h), of sub -section ( 1) of section 22;  
(o) the limits of grants -in-aid payable to the local authorities and employers under clause ( b) of 
sub-section ( 3) of section 22;  
(p) the form in which and the time within which the budget of the Board shall be prepared and 
forwarded to Government under section 25;  
(q) the form in w hich and the time within which the annual report of the Board shall be submitted 
to the State Government and the Central Government under section 26;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 22]
  22 
 (r) the form of annual statement of accounts under sub -section ( 1), and the date before which the 
audited copy of the accounts together with the auditor's report shall be furnished under sub -section ( 4) 
of section 27:  
(s) the matters required to be provided under sub -section ( 1) of section 28 and the extent up to 
which, and the conditions subject to which, the  provisions of that sub -section shall apply to the 
building workers under sub -section ( 2) of that section;  
(t) the registers and records that shall be maintained by the employer and the form in which such 
registers and records shall be maintained and the p articulars to be included therein under sub -section 
(1) of section 30;  
(u) the form and manner in which a notice shall be exhibited and the particulars it may contain 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 30;  
(v) the issue of wage books or wage slips to buildin g workers and the manner in which entries are 
to be made and authenticated in wage books or wage slips under sub -section ( 3) of section 30;  
(w) the types of latrines and urinals required to be provided under section 33;  
(x) the first -aid facilities which a re to be provided under section 36;  
(y) the canteen facilities which are to be provided under clause ( a) of section 37;  
(z) the welfare measures which are to be provided under clause ( b) of section 37;  
(za) the number of representatives of the employer and  the building workers under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 38 and the qualifications of safety officers and the duties to be performed by them under 
sub-section ( 2) of that section;  
(zb) the form of a notice of accident, other matters to be provided in this behalf and the time 
within which such notice shall be given under sub -section ( 1) of section 39;  
(zc) the rules to be made for the safety and health of building workers under section 40;  
(zd) the powers that may be exercised by an Inspector under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 22]
 the powers that may be exercised by an Inspector under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 43 and the qualifications and experience which the experts or agencies employed under     
sub-section ( 2) of that section shall possess and the terms and conditions on which such experts or 
agencies may be employed;  
(ze) the date on or before which wages shall be paid to a building worker under section 45;  
(zf) the matters which are required to be prescribed under clause ( i) of sub -section ( 1) of     
section 46;  
(zg) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescr ibed.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, th e rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule.  
(4) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or, where such 
Legislature consists of one House, before that House.  
63. Saving of certain laws .—Nothing contained in this Act shall affect the operation of any 
corresponding law in a State providing welfare schemes which are more beneficial to the building and 
other construction workers than those provided for them by or under this A ct. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 23]
  23 
 64. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of 
Employment and Conditions of Service) Third Ordinance, 1996 (Ord. 25 of 1996), is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS’.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS’  
WELFARE CESS ACT, 1996  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Levy and collection of cess . 
4. Furnishing of returns . 
5. Assessment of cess . 
6. Power to exempt . 
7. Power of entry . 
8. Interest payable on delay in payment of cess . 
9. Penalty for non -payment of cess within the specified time . 
10. Recovery of amount due under the Act . 
11. Appeals . 
12. Penalty . 
13. Offences by companies . 
14. Power to make rules . 
15. Repeal and saving . 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS’.pdf - page 2]
2 
  
THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS’  
WELFARE CESS ACT, 1996  
ACT NO. 28 OF 1996  
[19th August , 1996 .]  
An A ct to provide for the levy and collection of a cess  on the cost of construction incurred by 
employers with a view to augmenting the resources of the Building  and Other Construction 
Workers’ Welfare Boards constitut ed under the Building and Other Construction Workers 
(Regulation of Employment and Conditions  of Service) Act, 1996.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -seventh Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Building and Other 
Construction W orkers’ Welfare Cess Act, 1996.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on  the 3rd day of November, 1995.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Board”  means a Building and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Board constituted by a 
State Government under sub -section ( 1) of section 18 of the Building and Other Construction 
Workers (Regulation of Employment and Co nditions of Service) Act, 1996  (27 of 1996) ; 
(b) “Fund”  means the Building and Other Construction Wor kers’ Welfa re Fund constituted by a 
Board;  
(c) “prescribed”  means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(d) words and expressions used herein but not defined and defined in the Building and Other 
Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1996  (27 of 1996)  
shall have the meanings respectivel y assigned to them in that Act.  
3. Levy and collection of cess .—(1) There shall be levied and collected a cess  for the purposes of the 
Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 
1996  (27 of 1996) , at such rate not exceeding two per cent. but not less than one per cent. of the cost of 
construction incurred by a n employer, as the Central Government may
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS’.pdf - page 2]
n one per cent. of the cost of 
construction incurred by a n employer, as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gaze tte, from time to time specify.  
(2) The cess levied under sub -section ( 1) shall be collected from every employer in such manner and 
at such time, including deduction at source i n relation to a building or other construction work of a 
Government or of a public sector undertaking or advance collection through a local authority where an 
approval of such building or other construction work by such local authority is required, as may be 
prescribed.  
(3) The proceeds of the cess collected under sub -section ( 2) shall be paid by the local authority or the 
State Government collecting the cess to the Board after deducting the cost of collection of such cess not 
exceeding one per  cent. of the  amount collected.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the cess leviable under 
this Act including payment of such cess  in advance may, subject to final assessment to be made, be 
collected at a uniform rate or rates as may be prescribed on the basis of the quantum of the building or 
other construction work involved.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS’.pdf - page 3]
3 
 STATE AMENDMENTS  
Utta r Pradesh  
Amendment of section 3 o f Act no. 28 of 1996 .—In section 3 of the Building and Other 
Construction Workers’ Welfare Cess Act, 1996, in sub -section (1) the following explanation shall be 
inserted at the end, namely: - 
“Explanation: -For the purpose of levy of cess under this sub -section cost of construction shall 
include all expenditure incurred by an employer in connection with the building or other construction 
work but shall not include - 
(a) cost of land;  
(b) any compensation paid or payable to a worker or his dependents under the Employees’s 
Compensation Act, 1923;  
(c) expenditure uncured on such plant, equipments installed or upgraded which are not part of 
construction activity;  
(d) machines such as MRI, CT Scan, Dialysis machine etc. used for treatment of patients in 
hospitals. ” 
[Vide the Uttar Pradesh Act 28 of 2018, s. 2]  
4. Furnishing of returns .—(1) Every employer shall furnish such return to such officer or authority, 
in such manner and at such time as may be prescribed.  
(2) If any person carrying on the building or other construction work, liable to pay the cess under 
section 3, fails  to furnish any return under sub -section ( 1), the officer or the authority shall give a notice 
requiring such person to furnish such return be fore such date as m ay be specified in the notice.  
5. Assess ment of cess .—(1) The officer or authority to whom or to which the return has been 
furnished under section 4 shall, after making or causing to be made such inquiry as he or it thinks fit and 
after satisfying himself or itself that the particulars stated in the return are correct, by order, assess the 
amount o f cess payable by the employer.  
(2) If the return has not been furnished to the officer or authority under sub -section ( 2) of section 4, 
he or it shall, after making or causing to be made such inquiry as he or it thinks fit, by order, assess the 
amount o f cess payable by the employer.  

<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS’.pdf - page 3]
ch inquiry as he or it thinks fit, by order, assess the 
amount o f cess payable by the employer.  
(3) An order of assessment made under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall specify the date within 
which the cess shall be paid by the employer.  
6. Power to exempt .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt any employer or class of employers in a State from the 
payment of cess payab le under this Act where such cess is already levied and payable under any 
correspondin g law in force in that State.  
7. Power of entry .—Any officer or authority of the State Government specially empowered in this  
behalf by that Government may — 
(a) with such assistance, if any, as he or it may think fit, enter at any reasonable time any place 
where he or it considers it necessary to enter for carrying out the purposes of this Act including 
verification of the correctness of any particulars furnished by an y employer under sect ion 4;  
(b) do within such place anything nece ssary for the proper discharge of his or  its duties under this 
Act; and  
(c) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed.  
8. Interest payable on delay in paym ent of cess .—If any employer  fails to pay any amount of cess 
payable under section 3 within the time specified in the order of assessment, such employer shall be liable 
to pay interest on the amount to be paid at the rate of two per cent. for every month or part of a month 
comprised in the period from the date on which such payment is due til l such amount is actually paid.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS’.pdf - page 4]
4 
 9. Penalty for non -payment of cess within the specified time .—If any amount of cess  payable by 
any employer under section 3 is not paid within the date specified in the order of assessment made under 
section 5, it shall be deemed to be in arrears and the authority prescribed in this behalf may, after making 
such inquiry as it deems fit, impose on such employer a penalty not exceeding the amount of cess:  
Provided that, before imposing any such penalty, such employer shall be given a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard and if after such hearing the said authority is satisfied that the def ault was for 
any good and sufficient reason, no penalty shall  be imposed under this section.  
10. Recove ry of amount due under the Act .—Any amount due under this Act (including any 
interest or penalty) from an employer may be recovered in the same manner as  an arrear of land revenue.  
11. Appeals .—(1) Any employer aggrieved by an order of assessment made under section 5 or by an 
order imposing penalty made under section 9 may, within such time as may be prescribed, appeal to such 
appellate authority in such f orm and in su ch manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) Every appeal preferred under sub -section ( 1) shall be accompanied by such fees as may be 
prescribed.  
(3) After the receipt of any appeal under sub -section ( 1), the appellate authority shall, after giving the  
appellant an opportunity of being heard in the matter, dispose of the appeal as expeditiously as possible.  
(4) Every order passed in appeal under this section shall be final and shall not be called i n question in 
any court of law.  
12. Penalty .—(1) Whoever , being under an obligation to furnish a return under this Act, furnishes 
any return knowing, or having reason to believe, the same to be false shall be punishable with 
imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one  thous and rupees, or 
with both.  
(2) Whoever, being liable to pay cess under 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS’.pdf - page 4]
h may extend to one  thous and rupees, or 
with both.  
(2) Whoever, being liable to pay cess under this Act, wilfully or intentionally evades or attempts to 
evade the payment of such cess shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six mont hs, 
or with fine, or with both.  
(3) No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this section save on a complaint 
made by or under the author ity of the Central Government.  
13. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, ev ery person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proce eded agai nst and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence t o prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, 
manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall 
also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished 
accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company”  means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director” , in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
14. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS’.pdf - page 4]
 carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS’.pdf - page 5]
5 
 (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any 
of the following matters, n amely: — 
(a) the manner in which and the time within which the cess shall be collected unde r  
sub-section ( 2) of section 3;  
(b) the rate or rates of advance cess leviable under sub -section ( 4) of section 3;  
(c) the particulars of the returns to be furnished , the officer or authority to whom or to which such 
returns shall be furnished and the manner and time of furnishing such returns unde r sub -section ( 1) of 
section 4;  
(d) the powers which may be exercised by the office r or authority under section 7;  
(e) the authority which may impose penalty under section 9;  
(f) the authority to which an  appeal may be filed under sub -section ( 1) of section 11 and the time 
within which and the form and manner in which such appeal may be filed;  
(g) the fees which shall accompany an appeal under sub -section ( 2) of section 11; and  
(h) any other matter which ha s to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of Parliamen t, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both H ouses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
15. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Building  and Other Construction Workers’  Welfare Cess Third 
Ordinance, 1996 (Ord. 2 6 of 1996), is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any acti
<|CHUNK|>
[THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS’.pdf - page 5]
(Ord. 2 6 of 1996), is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CALCUTTA LAND – REVENUE ACT, 1856.pdf - page 1]
 
THE CALCUTTA LAND – REVENUE ACT, 1856  
__________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_ 
__________  
 
 
SECTIONS . 
1. Regulations modified.  
2. Collection of Stamp Duty in Calcutta to be ordinarily in charge of the Collector . 
3. Collector may entrust any part of his duties to his Deputy . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CALCUTTA LAND – REVENUE ACT, 1856.pdf - page 2]
 
THE CALCUTTA LAND – REVENUE ACT,  1856  
 
ACT NO.  18 OF 1856  
 
 
PASSED  BY THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL  OF INDIA . 
 
(Received the assent of th e Governor General on the 23rd August , 1856.)  
 
AN ACT relating to the administration of the Public Revenues in the Town of Calcutta.  
 
Preamble : —WHEREAS  it is expedient that the Collect or of Calcutta should have charge  of the 
collection of the Stamp Duty within the town of  Calcutta, and that he should have power to employ any 
Deputy Collector subordinate to him, in the performance of any art of the duties of his office:  — It is enacted 
as follows: — 
 
I.   Regulations modified  : — Such part of Section VI, Regulation XII, 182 6 of the Bengal Code, and 
such part of Section VI of a Rule Ordinance and Regulation for the Town of Calcutta, made and passed on 
the 14th day of June 1827, as prescribe that  an Officer being a Civil Servant of the Honorable Company 
shall be specially appointed by the Governor General in Council to take charge of the collection of the 
Stamp Duty within  the City of Calcutta, are  declared su bject to the following modification.  
 
II. Collection of Stamp Duty in Calcutta to be ordinarily in charge of the Collector : — The 
collection of the Stamp Duty within the Town of Calcutta shall ordinarily, and unless the Lieutenant 
Governor of Bengal shall otherwise direct, be in the charge of the Collector of Calcutta.  
 
III.  Collector may entrust any part of his duties to his Deputy  : —  It shall be lawful for the Collector 
of Calcutta to employ any Deputy Collector subordinate to him, in the performance o f any part of the duties 
of  his office under  the said Regulation, or under Act XI of 1849, or Act  XXIII of 1850; and all Rules, 
Regulations, and Acts relating to the office of Deputy Collector, shall be of the same for ce within the Town 
of Calcutta as in other parts of the territories subject to the Presidency  of Fort William in Bengal.  
 
 
_______  
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CALCUTTA LAND – REVENUE ACT, 1856.pdf - page 2]
e territories subject to the Presidency  of Fort William in Bengal.  
 
 
_______  
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CATTLE-TRESPASS ACT, 1871.pdf - page 1]
 
1 
 R E A M B L E   PAGE  
113     THE CATTLE -TRESPASS ACT, 1871  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
PREAMBLE  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Title and extent.  
2. [Repealed. ]. 
3. Interpretation clause.  
CHAPTER II  
POUNDS AND POUND -KEEPERS  
4. Establishment of pounds.  
5. Control of pounds.  
Rates of charge for feeding impounded cattle.  
6. Appointment of pound -keepers. Pound -keepers may hold other offices. Pound -keepers to be 
public servants.  
DUTIES  OF POUND -KEEPERS  
7. To keep  registers and furnis h returns.  
8. To register seizures.  
9. To take charge of and feed cattle.  
CHAPTER III  
IMPOUNDING CATTLE  
10. Cattle damaging land.   
Police to aid seizures.  
11. Cattle damaging public roads, canals and embankments.  
12. Fines for cattle impounded.  
List of fines and charges for feeding.  
CHAPTER IV  
DELIVERY OR SALE OF CATTLE  
13. Procedure when owner claims the cattle and pays fines and charges.   
14. Procedure if cattle be not claimed within a week.  
15. Delivery to owner disputing legality of seizure but making deposit.  
16. Procedure when owner refuses or omits to pay the fines and expenses.   
Deduction of fines and expenses.   
Delivery of unsold cattle and balance of proceeds.  
Receipt.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CATTLE-TRESPASS ACT, 1871.pdf - page 2]
 
2 
 SECTIONS  
17. Disposal of fines, expenses a nd surplus proceeds of sale.   
18. [Repealed .].  
19. Officers and pound -keepers not to purchas e cattle at sales under Act.   
 Pound -keepers when not to release  impounded cattle.  
CHAPTER V  
COMPLAINTS  OF ILLEGAL  SEIZURE  OR DETENTION  
20. Power to make complaints.  
21. Procedure on complaint.   
22. Compensation for illegal seizure or detention.  
Release of cattle.   
23. Recovery of compensation.   
CHAPTER VI  
PENALTIES  
24. Penalty for forcibly opposing the seizure of cattle or rescuing the same.   
25. Recovery of penalty for mischief committed by causing cattle to trespass.   
26. Penalty for damage caused to land or crops or public roads by pigs.  
27. Penalty on pound -keepe r failing to perform duties.  
28. Application of fines recovered under section 25, 26 or 27.  
CHAPTER VII  
SUITS  FOR COMPENSATION  
29. Saving of right to sue for compensation.   
30. Set-off.  
CHAPTER VIII  
SUPPLEMENTAL  
31. Power for State Government to transfer certa in functions to local authority.  
 SCHEDULE. —[Repealed. ]. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CATTLE-TRESPASS ACT, 1871.pdf - page 3]
 
3 
 THE CATTLE -TRESPASS ACT, 1871  
ACT NO. 1 OF 18711 
[13th January , 1871.]  
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to Trespasses by Cattle . 
Preamble. —WHEREAS  it is expedient to consolidate and amend the law relating to trespasses by  
cattle; It is hereby enacted as follows : —  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
2[1. Title and extent. —(1) This Act may be called the Cattle -trespass Act, 1871; and  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except 3[the territories which, immediately before the 1st 
November, 1956, were comprised in Pa rt B States], and the presidenc y-towns and such local areas as the 
State Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, may from time to time exclude from its 
operation.  
4[*              *              *              *            *] 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 1 of Act 1 of 1871 .—In section 1 of the Cattle -trespass Act, 1871, in its 
application to the S tate I of Bombay (hereinafter referred to as the “principal Act”), to sub -section (2) the 
1871, following proviso shall be added, namely: — 
“provided that on the commencement of the Cattle -trespass (Bombay Extension and Amendment) 
Act, 1959 (Bom. XIII of 1959), it shall extend to those areas in which the Hyderabad, Cattle Trespass 
Act, or as the case may be the Cattle -trespass Act, 1871 (Hyd. Act V of 1837, 1 of 1871), as modified and 
applied to the Saurashtra area of the State of Bombay was in force immediately before such 
commencement.”   
[Vide Bombay Act XIII of 1959, s. 3]  
                                                      
1. This Act has been amended locally —  
in Ajmer by Ajmer Act 5 of 1954;  
in Assam by Assam Act 1 of 1936;  
in Bombay by Bombay Acts 9 of 1924, 4 of 1926, 5 of 1931 and 13 of 1959;  
in Madhya Pradesh by C. P. Acts 12 of 1935, 22 of 1937  and C. P. & B. Act 27 of 1948 and Madhya Pradesh Act 11 of 
1960;  
in Orissa by Orissa Acts 15 of 1948 and 23 of 1950;  
in Punjab by Punjab Acts 24 of 1952 a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CATTLE-TRESPASS ACT, 1871.pdf - page 3]

1960;  
in Orissa by Orissa Acts 15 of 1948 and 23 of 1950;  
in Punjab by Punjab Acts 24 of 1952 and 18 of 1959;  
in Sambalpur District by Oriss a Act 6 of 1939;  
in U.P. by U.P. Act 7 of 1954;  
in West Bengal by Bengal Act 5 of 1934 and rep. in pt. by Ben. Act 14 of 1947  and West Ben. Acts 7 of 1948 and 4 of 
1956;  
in Madras by Madras Act 20 of 1957;  
in Andhra Pradesh by Andhra Pradesh Act 3 0 of 196 1; 
in Himachal Pradesh by Himachal Pradesh Act 7 of 1974.  
 The Act has been extended to the whole of Madhya Pradesh by Madhya Pradesh Act 23 of 1958 (when notified), to the 
NEFA by Reg. 3 of 1960, s. 3 and Sch., subject to certain modifications (w.e.f. 1 -11-1960), extended to and brought into 
force in Dadra and Na gar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and the First Schedule  (w.e.f. 1 -7-1965) and to the whole of the 
Union territory of Lakshadweep by Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 and the Schedule  (w.e.f. 1 -10-1967).  
 The Act came into force in Pondicherry on 1 -10-1963 vide Reg. 7 of 1963, s. 3 and the First Schedule  
 The Act has been repealed in its application to Ballery District by Mysore Act 5 of 1955 and to Malabar District of Kerala by  
Kerala Act 26 of 1961.  
2. Subs. by Act 1 of 1891, s. 1, for section 1. 
3. Subs. by t he Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956, for “Part B States”.  
4. Sub-section (3) rep. by Act 10 of 1914, s. 3 and the Second Schedule . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CATTLE-TRESPASS ACT, 1871.pdf - page 4]
 
4 
 2. [Repeal of Acts.  References to repealed Acts .] Rep. by the Repeal ing Act , 1938 (1 of 1938).  
3. Interpretation clause. — In this Act, —  
“officer of police ” includes also village -watchman, and  
“cattle ” includes also elephants, camels, buffaloes, horses, mares, geldings, ponies, colts, fillies, 
mules, asses, pigs, rams, ewes, sheep, lambs, goats and kids , 1[and 
2“local authority ” means any body of persons for the time being invested by law with the contr ol 
and administration of any matters within a specified local area, and  
“local fund ” means any fund under the control or management of a local authority.]  
 
 
CHAPTER II  
POUNDS  AND POUND -KEEPERS  
4. Establishment of pounds. —Pounds shall be established at such  places as the Magistrate of the 
District, subject to the general control of the State Government, from time to time directs.  
The village by which every pound is to be used shall be determined by the Magistrate of the District.  
5. Control of pounds. Rates of charge for feeding impounded cattle. —The pounds shall be under 
the control of the Magistrate of the District; and he shall fix, and may from time to time alter, the rates of 
charge for f eeding and watering impounded cattle.  
3[6. Appointment of pound -keepers. Pound -keepers may hold other offices. Pound -keepers to be 
public servants. —The State Government shall appoint a pound -keeper for every pound.  
Any pound -keeper may hold simultaneously any other office under the Government.  
Every pound -keeper shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meanin g of the Indian Penal 
Code (45 o f 1860).]  
DUTIES  OF POUND -KEEPERS  
7. To keep registers and furnish returns. —Every pound -keeper shall keep such registers and 
furnish such returns as the State Government from time to time directs.  
8. To register seizures. —When cattle are brought to a pound, the pound -keeper shall enter in his 
register, —  
(a) the number and description of the animals,  
(b
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CATTLE-TRESPASS ACT, 1871.pdf - page 4]
 pound -keeper shall enter in his 
register, —  
(a) the number and description of the animals,  
(b) the day and hour on and at which they were so brought,  
(c) the name and residence of the seiz ure, and  
(d) the name and residence of the owner, if known,  
and shall give the seizer or his agent a copy of the entry.  
9. To take charge of and feed cattle. —The pound -keeper shall take charge of, feed and water the 
cattle until they are disposed of as hereinafter directed.  
CHAPTER III  
IMPOUNDING  CATTLE  
10. Cattle damaging land. —The cultivator or occupier of any land,  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 1891, s. 2.  
2. Cf. definition ins. 3 ( 28) of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), which applies  to all Act s passed after th e 14 January, 
1887. 
3. Subs. by the A.O.  1937, for s. 6.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CATTLE-TRESPASS ACT, 1871.pdf - page 5]
 
5 
 or any person who has advanced cash for the cultivation of the crop or produce on any land,  
or the vendee  or mortgagee of such crop or produce or any part thereof,  
may seize or cause to be seized any cattle trespassing on such land and doing damage thereto or to 
any crop or produce thereon, and 1[send them or cause them to be sent within twenty -four hours] to  the 
pound established for the village in which the land is situate.  
Police to aid seizures. —All officers of police shall, when required, aid in preventing ( a) resistance to 
such seizures, and ( b) rescues from persons making such seizures.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 10 of Act I of 1871 .—In the principal Act, in section 10, after the words and 
figures “the Bombay Village panchayat Act, 1933,” the words “or any corresponding law in force in any 
part of the State of Bombay” shall be inser ted. 
[Vide Bombay Act XIII of 1959, s. 4]  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of sections 10, 12 and 26 of, and insertion of new section 28A in Act I of 1871. —In 
the Cattle -trespass Act, 1871 — 
(1) in section 10, after the words “or any part thereof” the following shall be inserted, namely: — 
“or a watch and ward appointed by a panchayat established under the Bombay Village 
Panchayats Act, 1933, or any person authorised by the State Government in this behalf, either by 
name or by virtue of office.”  
[Vide Bombay Act XX XIV o f 1950, s. 2]  
211. Cattle damaging public roads, canals and embankments. —Persons in charge of public roads, 
pleasure -grounds, plantations, canals, drainage -works, embankments and the like and officers of police, 
may seize or cause to be seized any cattle d oing damage to such roads, grounds, plantations, canals, 
drainage -works, embankments and the like, or the sides or slopes of such roads, canals, drainage -works or 
embankments or found straying thereon,  
and shall 3[send them or cause them to be sent within twenty -four hours] to the nearest pound
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CATTLE-TRESPASS ACT, 1871.pdf - page 5]
on,  
and shall 3[send them or cause them to be sent within twenty -four hours] to the nearest pound.  
4[12. Fines for cattle impounded. —For every head of cattle impounded as aforesaid, the                    
pound -keepers shall levy a fine in accordance with the scale for the time being prescribed by the State 
Government in this behalf by notification in the Official Gazette. Different scales may be prescribed for 
different local areas.  
All fines so levied shall be sent to the Magistrate of the District through such  officer as the State 
Government may direct.  
List of fines and charges for feeding. —A list of the fines and of the rates of charge for feeding and 
watering cattle shall be posted in a conspicuous place on or near to every pound.]  
 
 
 
                                                      
1. Subs . by Act  1 of 1891, s. 3,  for “'take them or cause them to b e taken without unnecessary delay”.  
2. As to the application of s. 11 to forests, see the Indian Forest Act, 1927 ( 7 of 1927), s. 70; to railways see the Indian Railways 
Act, 1890 (9 of 1890), s. 125 ( 4). 
3. Subs. by Act 1 of 1891, s. 4, for  “take them  without unnecessary delay”.  
4. Subs. by Act 17 of 1921, s. 2, for s ection  12. See section  71 of  the Indian Forest Act, 1927 ( 7 of 1927) under which the State 
Government may fix a different scale of fines for cattle impounded under s. 70 of that Act.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CATTLE-TRESPASS ACT, 1871.pdf - page 6]
 
6 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Insertion of new sections 12A and 12B in Act I of 1871 .—In the principal act, after section 12, the 
following new sections shall be inserted, namely: — 
“12A. Security in respect of impounded cattle .—(1) In any local area to which he state 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, ap ply this section , every pound -keeper shall, 
before rel easing any impounded cattle, require the owner of the impounded cattle or his agent to make, in 
the form to be prescribed by the State Government, a declaration regarding the ownership of such cattle  
and to deposit by way of security such sum as the state Government may, by rules, prescribe , Different 
scales may be prescribed for different areas or different classes of cattle.  
(2) If any cattle belonging to such owner are impounded  within a period of s ix months from the date 
on which the security is deposited, and if the seizure is not adjudged illegal, the amount of deposit or a 
part thereof, as may be directed by the State Government by rules made in this behalf, shall stand 
forefeited to the State Go vernment. If cattle are not impounded as aforesaid, the amount  of security 
deposit shall, on an application may by or on behalf of the depositor, be refunded to him on the expiry of 
that period.  
(3) On every occasion on which the release of the cattle impo unded under this Act is claimed, the 
owner of the cattle shall deposit a fresh security.  
12B. Removal of cattle to specified places .—(1) If in any local area to which the State Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette apply this section, a M amlatdar, Tahsildar, Naib -Tahsildar or 
Mahalkari is satisfied — 
(i) that the grazing land set apart for the use of cattle of one or more village in the taluks, tahsils 
or mahal under his jurisdiction is insufficient for the cattle belonging to the permanent  residents of 
such  village or villages; or  
(ii) that the crops or grass standing on a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CATTLE-TRESPASS ACT, 1871.pdf - page 6]
 permanent  residents of 
such  village or villages; or  
(ii) that the crops or grass standing on any agricultural land or grazing land so set apart are likely 
to be damaged by cattle belonging to persons who are not residents of such village or villages and 
who own m ore than twenty head of cattle,  
he may — 
(a) in any  case referred to in clause (i) direct any such resident owner, by special or general order, 
to remove or cause to be removed all or any dry or useless cattle belonging to him to such place or 
places within  the State and within such period as may be specified in the order, and  
(b) in any case referred to in clause (ii) direct any such non -resident owner, by special or general 
order, to remove or cause to be removed all or any of his cattle to such place or places within the state 
and within such period as may be specified in the order.  
(2) If the owner of the cattle fails to remove the cattle as directed under sub -section (1), the 
Mamlatdar , Tahsildar, Naib -Tahsildar or Mahalkari, as the case may be, may dir ect a police officer not 
below the rank of a head constable to remove or cause to be removed such cattle to the place or places 
specified in the order.  
(3) If the Mamlatdar, Tahsildar, Naib -Tahsildar or Mahalkari is satisfied that the order issued by him 
under sub -section (1) is contravened by any owner or keeper of cattle, he may impose a fine not 
exceeding one thousand rupees. Any fine so imposed may, on failure of such owner or keeper to pay the 
same within the specified time, by recovered by sale of all  or any of the cattle ordered to be removed 
under sub -section (1).”  
[Vide Bombay Act XIII of 1959, s. 5]  
Maharashtra  
In section 12, — 
 (a) the words “head of” shall be deleted;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CATTLE-TRESPASS ACT, 1871.pdf - page 7]
 
7 
 (b) for the words “Different scales may be prescribed for different local area” the following 
shall be substituted, namely: — 
“Progressively increasing scales may be prescribed in respect of cattle belonging to or kept by 
the same person according to the number of cattle impounded at a time and the number  of times 
such cattle are impo unded and different scales may be prescribed for different local areas.”;  
[Vide Maharashtra Act XXXIV of 1950, s. 2]  
CHAPTER IV  
DELIVERY  OR SALE  OF CATTLE  
13. Procedure when owner claims the cattle and pays fines and charges. —If the owner of the 
impounded cattle or his agent appear and claim the cattle, the pound -keeper shall deliver them to him on 
payment of the fines and charges incurred in respect of such cattle.  
The owner or his agent, on taking back the cattle, shall sign a receipt for them in the regi ster kept by 
the pound -keeper.  
 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 13 of Act 1 of 1871. —In the principal Act, to the first paragraph of section 13, 
the following shall be added, namely: — 
“and on depositing the amount of security prescribed un der section 12A.”  
[Vide Bombay Act XIII of 1959, s. 6]  
14. Procedure if cattle be not claimed within a week. —If the cattle be not claimed within seven 
days from the date of their being impounded, the pound -keeper shall report the fact to the officer in 
charge of the nearest police -station, or to such other officer as the Magistrate of the District appoints in 
this behalf.  
Such officer shall thereupon stick up in a conspicuous part of his office a notice stating —  
(a) the number and description of the cat tle, 
(b) the place where they were seized,  
(c) the place where they are impounded,  
and shall cause proclamation of the same to be made by beat of drum in the village and at the                      
market -place nearest to the place of seizure.  
If the cattle  be not claimed within seven days from the date of the notice,
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CATTLE-TRESPASS ACT, 1871.pdf - page 7]
the place of seizure.  
If the cattle  be not claimed within seven days from the date of the notice, they shall be sold  by public  
auction by the said officer, o r an officer of his establishment deputed for that purpose , at such place and 
time and subject to such conditions as the Magistrate of  the District by general or special order from time 
to time direct s: 
Provided that, if any such cattle are, in the opinion of the Magistrate of the District, not likely to fetch 
a fair price if sold as aforesaid, they may be disposed of in such manner as h e thinks fit.  
15. Delivery to owner disputing legality of seizure but making  deposit. — If the owner or his  agent 
appear and refuse to pay the said fines and expenses, on the ground that the seizure was illegal and that 
the owner is about to make a complain t under  section 20, then , upon  deposit of the fines and charges 
incurred in respect of the cattle, the cattle shall be delivered to him.  
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CATTLE-TRESPASS ACT, 1871.pdf - page 8]
 
8 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 15 of Act 1 of 1871 .—In the principal Act, section 15 shall be renumbered as 
sub-section (1) of that section, and after sub -section ( 1) as so renumbered, the following new sub -section 
shall be inserted, namely: — 
“(2) If on any complaint referred to in sub -section ( 1) the seizure  is declared to be lawful, or if the 
owner or his agent fails to make such complaint within a period of four weeks from the date of 
delivery of the cattle to him, the pound  keeper of shall require such owner or agent to make a 
declaration and to deposit t he amount of security as required by section 12A. If the owner or his agent 
fails to make such declaration or to deposit such amou nt, the cattle delivered  to him under sub -section 
(1) shall be seized for the purpose of section 16.”  
[Vide Bombay XIII of 195 9, s. 7]  
16. Procedure when owner refuses or omits to pay the fines  and expenses. —If the owner or his  
agent appear and refuse or omit to pay or (in the case mentioned in section 15) to deposit the said fines 
and expenses, the cattle, or as many of them as may be necessary, shall be sold by public auction by such  
officer  at such place and time, and subject to such conditions, as are  referred to in section 14.  
Deduction of fines and expenses. —The fines leviable and the expenses of feeding and watering, 
togeth er with the expenses of sale, if any, shall be deducted from the proceeds of the sale.  
Delivery of unsold cattle and balance of proceeds. —The remaining cattle and the balance of the 
purchase -money, if any, shall be delivered to the owner or his agent, toge ther with an account showing —  
(a) the number of cattle seized,  
(b) the time during which they have been impounded,  
(c) the amount of fines and charges incurred,  
(d) the number of cattle sold,  
(e) the proceeds of sale, and  
(f) the manner in which  those proceeds have been disposed of.  
Receipts. —The owner or his agent sha
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CATTLE-TRESPASS ACT, 1871.pdf - page 8]
) the manner in which  those proceeds have been disposed of.  
Receipts. —The owner or his agent shall give a receipt for the cattle delivered to him and for the 
balance of the purchase -money (if any) paid to him according to such account.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 16 of Act 1 of 1871 .—In section 16 of the principal Act, for the first and 
second paragraphs the following new paragraphs shall be substituted, namely: - 
“If the owner or his agent appears and refuses or omits to pay the said fines and expenses and to 
deposit the said amount of security or (in the case mentioned in section 15) to deposit the said fines, 
expenses and amount of security or to make a declaration as required by section 12A, the cattle or as 
many of them as may be necessary, shall be sold  by public auction  by such officer, at such place and time, 
and subject to such conditions, as are referred to in section 14, or disposed of in accordance with the 
provisions therein.  
The fines leviable and the expenses of feeding and watering together wit h the expenses of safe, if any, 
and the amount of security prescribed under section 12A shall be deducted from the proceeds of the sale.”  
[Vide Bombay Act XIII of 1959, s. 8]  
17. Disposal of fines, expenses and surplus proceeds of sales. —The officer by whom the sale was 
made shall send to the Magistrate of the District the fines so deducted.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CATTLE-TRESPASS ACT, 1871.pdf - page 9]
 
9 
 The charges for feeding and watering deducted under section 16 shall be paid over to the                       
pound -keeper, who shall also retain and appropriate al l sums received by him on account of such charges 
under section 13.  
The surplus unclaimed proceeds of the sale of cattle shall be sent to the Magistrate of the District, 
who shall hold them in deposit for three months, and, if no claim thereto be preferred  and established 
within that  period, shall, at its expiry, 1[be deemed to hold them as part of the revenues of the State].  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 17 of Act 1 of 1871 .—In section 17 of the principal Act, after the second 
paragraph,  the following new paragraph shall be inserted, namely: - 
“The amount of security required under section 12A shall be deposited with the pound -keeper.”  
[Vide Bombay  Act XIII of 1959, s. 9]  
18. [Application of fines and unclaimed proceeds of sale. ] Rep. by the A.O . 1937.  
19. Officers and pound -keepers not to purchase cattle at sales under Act. —No officer of police 
or other officer or pound -keeper appointed under the provisions herein contained shall, directly or 
indirectly, purchase any cattle at a sale unde r this Act.  
Pound -keepers when not to release impounded cattle. —No pound -keeper shall release or deliver 
any impounded cattle otherwise than in accordance with the former part of this Chapter , unless such 
release or delivery is ordered by a Magistrate or C ivil Court.  
2[CHAPTER V  
COMPLAINTS  OF ILLEGAL  SEIZURE  OR DETENTION  
20. Power to make complaints. —Any person whose cattle have been seized under this Act, or , 
having been so seized, have been detained in contravention of this Act, may, at any time within ten days 
from the date of the seizure, make a complaint to the Magistrate of the District or any Magistrate 
authori sed to receive and try charges without refere nce by the Magistrate of the District.  
21. Procedure on complaint .—The 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CATTLE-TRESPASS ACT, 1871.pdf - page 9]
ry charges without refere nce by the Magistrate of the District.  
21. Procedure on complaint .—The complaint shall be made by the complainant in person , or by an 
agent personally acquainted with the circumstances. It may be either in writing or verbal. If it be verbal, 
the substance of it shall be taken down in writing by the Magistrate.  
If the Magistrate, on examining the complainant or his agent, sees reason to believe the complaint to 
be well founded, he shall summon the person complained against, and make an enquiry into the case.  
22. Compensation for illegal seizure or detention. —If the seizure or detention be adju dged illegal, 
the Magistrate sha ll award to the complainant, for the loss caused by the seizure or detention, reasonable 
compensation, not exceeding one hundred rupees, to be paid by the person who made the seizure or 
detained the cattle together with all fines paid and expenses incurred by the complainant in procuring the 
release of the cattle,  
Release of cattle. —and, if the cattle have not been released, the Magistrate shall, besides awarding 
such compensation, order their release and direct that the fines and expenses leviable under this Act shall 
be paid by the person who made the seizure or detained the cattle.  
23. Recovery of compensation. —The compensation, fines and  expenses mentioned in section 22 
may be recovered as if they were fi nes imposed by the Magistrate.]3 
 
 
 
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “di spose of them as hereinafter pro vided”.  
2. Subs. by Act 1 of 1891,  s. 6, for Ch apter  V. 
3. See ss. 63 to 70 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), and s. 386 of the C ode of Criminal Procedure, 1 898 (5 of 1898); cf. 
also. s. 25 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CATTLE-TRESPASS ACT, 1871.pdf - page 10]
 
10 
 CHAPTER VI  
PENALTIES  
24. Penalty for forcibly opposing the seizure of cattle or rescuing the same. —Whoever forcibly 
opposes the seizure of cattle liable to be seized under this Act,  
and whoever rescues the same after seizure, either from a pound, or from any person taking or about 
to take them to a pound, such person being near a t hand and acting under the pow ers conferred by this 
Act, 
shall, on conviction  before a Magistrate, be punished with imprisonment for a period not exceeding 
six months, or with fine not exceeding five hundred rupees, or with both.  
125. Recovery of penalty for mischief committed by causing cattle to trespass. —Any fine 
imposed  2[under the next following section or] for the offence of mischief by causing cattle to trespass on 
any land may be recovered by sale of all or any of the cattle by which the trespass was committed, 
whether they were seized in the act of trespassing or not, and whether they  are the property of the person 
convicted of t he offence, or were only in his charge when  the trespass was committed.  
26. Penalty for damage caused to land or crops or public roads by pigs. —Any owner or keeper of 
pigs who, through neglect o r otherwise, damages or causes or permits to be damaged any land, or any 
crop or produce of land, or any public road, by allowing such pigs to trespass thereon, shall, on conviction 
before a Magistrate, be punished with fine not exceeding ten rupees.  
3[The  4[State  Government ], by notification in the Official Gazette, may from time to time , with 
respect to any local area specified in the notification, direct that the foregoing portion of this section shall 
be read as if it had reference to cattle genera lly, or to cattle of a kind described in the  notific ation, instead 
of to pigs only, or as if the words “fifty rupees ” were substituted for the words “ten rupees, ” or as if there 
were both such reference and such substitution.]  
5*              *              *     
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CATTLE-TRESPASS ACT, 1871.pdf - page 10]
s if there 
were both such reference and such substitution.]  
5*              *              *              *              * 
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Assam  
Substitution of Section 26 .—In the principal Act, for section 26, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:  — 
“26. Penalty for damage caused to land or crops or public roads or for injury caused  to any person by 
cattle or for cattle on public roads. — 
(1) Any owner or keeper or attendant of cattle who through neglect or criminal motive or otherwise 
damages or causes or permits to be damaged any land or any crop or produce of land or any public roa d 
or anything or causes injury to any person or persons by allowing such cattle to trespass thereon, or lets 
loose any cattle to stray on any public road and thereby causes obstruction to traffic shall, on conviction 
before a judicial magistrate, be punish able with fine which shall not be less than five hundred rupees but 
which may extend to one thousand rupees and in default of payment of fine, simple imprisonment for a 
term not exceeding one month for the first offence and for the subsequent offences, fin e not less than one 
thousand rupees but which may extend to two thousand rupees or to simple imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to three months.  
(2) While convicting such person under sub -section ( 1), the magistrate may order him to pay the 
person wh ose land, or crop or produce of land or anything has been damaged or the person who is injured, 
such compensation depending upon the value of the loss or expenses so incurred for the medical 
treatment, as may be considered reasonable and in default of paym ent, the cattle in respect of which the 
                                                      
1. As to the application of s. 25 in the case of cattle -trespassing on a railway, see the Indian Railways Act, 1390 (9 of 1890),                 
s. 125 ( 3). 
2. Ins. by Act 1 of 1891, s. 7.  
3. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. 
4. Subs. by the A.O
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CATTLE-TRESPASS ACT, 1871.pdf - page 10]
        
s. 125 ( 3). 
2. Ins. by Act 1 of 1891, s. 7.  
3. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. 
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “Provincial Gover nment”.  
5. The last paragraph of s ection  26 rep. by Act 10 of 1914.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CATTLE-TRESPASS ACT, 1871.pdf - page 11]
 
11 
 offence has been committed shall be forfeited and sold on auction in order to compensate the person so 
aggrieved. ” 
[Vide Assam Act 15 of 2002 , s. 2. ] 
Insertion of section 26A. — In the principal Act, after section 26,  the following new section 26A shall 
be inserted namely:  — 
“26A. Cognizance of offence .—No Court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under 
section 26 except on a report in writing of the facts constituting such offence made by the person 
aggrie ved by such offence or by person who is a public servant as defined in  section 21  of the Indian 
Penal Code, 1860 (Act 45 of 1860). ” 
[Vide Assam Act 15 of 2002, s. 3.]  
Uttar Pradesh  
Uttar Pradesh Amendment of section 26 of Act (1 of 1971). —For section 26 of the Cattle Trespass 
Act, 1871, (hereafter called the principal Act), the following shall be substituted —  
“26. Penalty for damage caused to land by cattle. —Any owner, keeper or attendant of catt le, who 
though neglect or otherwise, damages or causes or permits to be damaged any land, or any crop or 
produce of land by allowing such cattle to trespass thereon, shall on conviction before a Magistrate, 
beliable to a fine not less than Rs. 10 but not e xceeding Rs. 250 or to imprisonment for a term not 
exceeding three months or to both.”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 7 of 1954, s. 2]  
Maharashtra  
In section 26, -- 
(a) the first paragraph shall be numbered as sub -section (1) of that section;  
(b) after sub -sectio n (1) so numbered, the following sub -sections shall be inserted, namely: -- 
“(2) The Magistrate trying the offence under sub -section (1) may order, -- 
(a) that the accused shall pay such compensation, not exceeding two hundred and fifty 
rupees, as the Magist rate considers reasonable, to any person for any damage proved to have 
been caused to his crop or other produce of land by the accused committing the offence;  
(b) that the pigs in respect of which the offence has been committed shall be forfeit
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CATTLE-TRESPASS ACT, 1871.pdf - page 11]
the offence;  
(b) that the pigs in respect of which the offence has been committed shall be forfeited to the 
State Government.  
(3) Any compensation awarded under sub -section (2) may be recovered as if it was a fine 
imposed under this section.”;  
(c) the second paragraph shall be numbered as sub -section (4) of that section and in                  
sub-section (4) so n umbered the words “the foregoing portion of” shall be deleted;  
[Vide Bombay Act XXXIV of 1950, s. 2]  
27. Penalty on pound -keeper failing to perform duties. —Any pound -keeper releasing or 
purchasing or delivering cattle contrary to the provisions of section 19, or omitting to provide any 
impounded cattle with sufficient food and water, or failing to perform an y of the other duties imposed 
upon him by this Act, shall, over and above any other penalty to which he may be liable, be punished, on 
conviction before  a Magistrate, with fine not exceeding fifty rupees.  
Such fines may be recovered by deductions from the pound -keeper ’s salary.  
28. Application of fines recovered under section 25, 26 or 27. —All fines recovered under                  
section 25, section 26 or section 27 may be appropriated in whole or in part as compensation for loss or 
damage proved to the satisfaction of the convicting Magistrate.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
After section 28, the following section shall be inserted, namely: -- 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CATTLE-TRESPASS ACT, 1871.pdf - page 12]
 
12 
 “28A. Offence  under section 26 of the be cognizable .—The offence under section 26 shall be 
cognizable.”  
[Vide Bombay Act XXXIV of 1950, s. 2]  
CHAPTER VII  
SUITS FOR COMPENSATION  
29. Saving of right to sue for compensation. —Nothing herein contained prohibits any person w hose 
crops or other produce of land have been damaged by trespass of cattle from suing for compensation in 
any competent Court.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Substitution of new section 29 for existing section 29 of Act 1 of 1871 .—In the principal Act, for 
the existing section 29, the following new section shall be substituted, namely: -- 
“29. Saving of right to sue for compensation .—Nothing herein contained prohibits any person 
whose property, crops or other produce of land have been damaged or to whom any hurt or injury or 
obstruction has been caused by trespass of cattle from suing for compensation in any competent 
court.”  
[Vide Bombay Act XIII of 1959, s. 10]  
30. Set-off.—Any compensation paid to such person under this Act by order of the convicting 
Magistrate shall be set -off and deducted from any sum claimed by or awarded to him as compen sation in 
such suit.  
1[CHAPTER VIII  
SUPPLEMENTAL  
31. Power for State Government to transfer certain functions to local authority. —The State 
Government may, from time to time by notification in the Official Gazette, —  
(a) transfer to any local authority within any part of the territories under  its administra tion in 
which this Act is in operation, all or any of the functions of the State Government or the Magistrate of 
the District under this Act, within the local area subject to the jurisdiction of the local authority.  
2*   *   *              *                       *] 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Insertion of new section 32 after section 31 of Act 1 of 1871. —After section 31 of the principal 
Act, the following new section shall be inserted, namely: -- 
“32. Power to make rules .—(1) The State Gove rnm
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CATTLE-TRESPASS ACT, 1871.pdf - page 12]
llowing new section shall be inserted, namely: -- 
“32. Power to make rules .—(1) The State Gove rnment may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rule for carrying into effect the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular but without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, such rules may 
provide for the following, namely: -- 
(i) the form of, and the procedure relating to, the declaration, and the scales of deposits to be 
made, under section 12A;  
(ii) the procedure regulating the making of security deposits, custody and refund thereof;  
(iii) the manner in which  any cattle may be disposed of;  
(iv) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed.  
(3) The power to make rules under this section shall be subject to the condition of previous 
publication in the official Gazette.  
(4) All rules make under this secti on shall be laid before each house of the Legislature as soon as 
may be after they are made, and shall be subject to such modifications as the State Legislature may 
make during the session in which they are so laid, or the session immediately following.”  
[Vide Bombay XIII of 1959, s. 11]  
                                                      
1. Chapter  VIII was added by Act 1 of 1891, s. 9.  
2. Clause (b) was rep. partially by Act 10 of 1914 and partially by the A.O . 1937.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CATTLE-TRESPASS ACT, 1871.pdf - page 13]
 
13 
 [SCHEDULE. ] Rep. by the Repealing Act , 1938 (1 of 1938).  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh Amendment of section  26 and 28 of Act (1 of 1971). —The State Government may, 
by notification in the official Gazette, with respect to any local area specified in the notification declare 
that section 26 of the Principal Act, as amended by this Act and section 28 of the Principal Act, shall 
stand further am ended and modified as specified in the Schedule and with effect from the date of the said 
declaration the Principal Act shall stand amended accordingly.  
SCHEDULE  
1. For section 26 of the Principal Act, amended by this Act, the following shall be substitut ed—  
“26. Penalty for damage caused by land by cattle .—Any owner, keeper or attendant of cattle, 
who through neglect or otherwise, damage or causes or permits to be damaged any land or any crop 
or produce of land by allowing such cattle to trespass thereon , shall, on conviction before a 
Magistrate, be liabel — 
(a) for first offences to a fine not less than Rs. 10 bot not exceeding Rs. 250 or to 
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months or of both.  
(b) for the second or subsequent offence to an imprisonment for a term not exceeding 
three months and fine not exceeding Rs. 500.  
2. Application of fines recovered under section 25, 26 or 27 .—For section 28 of the Principal Act, 
the following shall be sub stitute ---  
“28. Application of fines recovered under sections 25, 26 or 27 .—All fines recovered under 
section 25, clause (a) of section 26 or section 27 may be appropriated in whole or in part as 
compensation for loss or damage proved to the satisfaction of the Convicting Magistrate.”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 7 of 1954, s. 3]  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992  
__________________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________________  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. The University.  
4. Objects of the University.  
5. Powers of the University.  
6. Jurisdiction.  
7. University  open to all classes, castes and creed.  
8. The Visitor.  
9. Officers of the University.  
10. The Chancellor.  
11. The Vice -Chancellor.  
12. Deans and Directors.  
13. The Registrar.  
14. The Comptroller.  
15. Other officers.  
16. Authorities of the University.  
17. The Board.  
18. The Academic Council.  
19. The Finance Committee.  
20. The Research Programme Committee.  
21. The Extension Education Advisory Committee.  
22. The Board of Studies.  
23. Faculties.  
24. Other authorities.  
25. Power to make Statutes.  
26. Statutes how to be made.  
27. Power to make Ordinances.  
28. Regulations.  
29. Annual report.  
30. Annu al accounts.  
31. Conditions of service of employees.  
32. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students.  
33. Right to appeal.  
34. Provident and pension funds.  
35. Disputes as to constitution of University authorities.  
36. Constitution of Committees.  
37. Filling of casual vacancies.  
38. Proceedings of University authorities not invalidated by vacancy.  
39. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
40. Mode of proof of University  records.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 2]
2 
 SECTIONS  
41. Power to remove difficulties.  
42. Transitional provisions.  
43. Statutes, Ordinances  and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid before 
Parliament.  
THE SCHEDULE.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 3]
3 
 THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992  
ACT NO. 40 OF 1992  
[26th December , 1992.]  
An Act to provide for the establishment  and incorporation of a Univer sity for the North -Eastern 
region  for the deve lopment of agricu lture and for the furtherance of the  advancement of 
learning and prosecution of rese arch in agriculture and allied sciences in that region.  
BE it enacted by Parlia ment in the Forty -third Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencemen t.—(1) This Act may be called the Central Agr icultural University 
Act, 1992.  
(2) It shall  come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in  the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, and in all Statutes made hereunder, unless th e context otherwise 
requires, — 
(a) “Academic Council” means the Acad emic Council of the University;  
(b) “academic staff”  means such categories of staff as are designated as ac ademic staff by the 
Ordinances;  
(c) “agriculture” means the basic and applied sciences of the soil and water management, crop 
production including production of all garden crops, control of plants, pes ts and diseases, horticulture 
including floriculture, animal husbandry including veterinary and dairy science, fisheries, fo restry 
including farm forestry, home -science, agricultural engineering and technology, marketing and 
processing of agricultural and animal husbandry pro ducts, land use and management;  
(d) “Board”  means the Board of Management of the University;  
(e) “Board of Studies”  means the Boar d of Studies of the University;  
(f) “Chancellor” means th e Chancellor of the University;  
(g) “college” means a constituent college of the University whether located at the hea dquarters, 
campus or elsewhere;  
(h) “Department” means a Departmen t of Studies of the University;  
(i) “employee” means any person appointed by the University and includes teachers and  other 
staff of the Univer
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 3]
” means any person appointed by the University and includes teachers and  other 
staff of the University;  
(j) “extension education”  means the educational activities concerned with the training of 
orchardists, farmers and other groups serving agriculture, horticulture, fisheries and improved 
practices related thereto and the vario us phases of scientific technology related to agriculture and 
agricultural production including post ha rvest technology and marketing;  
(k) “Faculty”  means Faculty of the University;  
(l) “North -Eastern region” means the North -Eastern region of India comprising the States of 
Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalay a, Mizoram, 2[Nagaland,]  Sikkim and Tripura;  
(m) “Ordinances”  means th e Ordinances of the University;  
(n) “Regulations” means the Regulations made by any authority of the University;  
(o) “Researc h Advisory Committee” means the Research Advisory Committee of the University;  
(p) “Statutes” means the Statutes of the University;  
  
                                                           
1. 26th January, 1993,  vide notification No. S.O. 72(E), dated 25th  January, 1993, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II ,  
sec. 3( ii). 
2. Ins. by Act 45 of 2016, s. 2 (w.e.f. 19 -8-2016).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 4]
4 
 (q) “student” means a person enrolled in the University for undergoing a course of studies for 
obtaining a degree, diploma  or other academ ic distinction duly instituted;  
(r) “teachers” means Professors, Associate Professors, Assistant Professors, Teaching Faculty 
Members and their equivalent appointed for imparting instruction or conducting research or extension 
education pro grammes or combination of these in the University, college or any institute maintained 
by the University and designated  as teachers by the Ordinances;  
(s) “Univers ity” means the Central Agricultural Univers ity established under this Act;  
(t) “Vice -Chancellor” means the Vic e-Chancellor of the University;  
(u) “Visitor” means  the Visitor of the University.  
3. The University .—(1) There shall be established a University by the name of the “ Central 
Agricultural University” . 
(2) The headquarters of the University shall be at Imphal in the State of Mani pur and it may also 
establish ca mpuses at such other places within its j urisdiction as it may deem fit.  
(3) The first Chancellor and the first Vice -Chancellor and the first members  of the Board, the 
Academic Council and all persons who may hereafter become such officers or members, so long as they 
continue to hold such office or membership are hereby constituted a body corporate by the name of the 
Central Agricultural University.  
(4) The University shall have perpetual succession and a common seal and shall su e and be sued by 
the said name.  
4. Objects of the University .—The objec ts of the University shall be — 
(a) to impart education in different branches of agricultural and allied sc iences as it may deem fit;  
(b) to further the advancement of learning and prosecution of research in a griculture and allied 
sciences;  
(c) to undertake programmes of extension education in the Sta tes under its jurisdiction; and  
(d) to undertake such other activities as it may , from time to time, determine.  
5. Pow
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 4]
ion; and  
(d) to undertake such other activities as it may , from time to time, determine.  
5. Powers of the University .—The University shall have the following powers, namely: — 
(i) to make provision for instructions in agricultural and  allied sciences;  
(ii) to make provisi on for conduct of research in agricultural a nd allied branches of learning;  
(iii) to make provision for dissemination of the findings of research and technical informatio n 
through extension programmes;  
(iv) to grant, subject to such conditions as it may determine, diplomas or certificates to, and 
confer degrees or other academic distinctions on the basis of examination, evaluation or any other method 
of testing, on persons, and to withdraw any such diplomas, certificates, degrees or other academic 
distinc tion for good and sufficient cause;  
(v) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in the man ner prescribed by the Statutes;  
(vi) to provide lectures and instructions for field workers, village leaders and other persons not 
enrolled as regular students of the University and to grant certificates to them as may  be prescribed by 
the Statutes;  
(vii) to co -operate or collaborate or associate with any other University or authority or institution 
of higher learning in such manner and for such purposes  as the University may determine;  
(viii) to establish and maintain colleges relating to agriculture, fisheries, dairying, veterinary 
medicine and animal science, home -science, agricultural engineering, forestry and allied scien ces; 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 5]
5 
 (ix) to establish and ma intain such campuses, special centres, specialised laboratories, libraries, 
museums or other units for research and instruction as are, in its opinion, necessary for the 
furtherance of its objects;  
(x) to create teaching, research and extension education p osts and to make appointments thereto;  
(xi) to create administrative, ministerial and other posts an d to make appointments thereto;  
(xii) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, stude ntships, medals and prizes;  
(xiii) to determine standards of ad mission to the University, which may include examination, 
evaluation or any other method of testing;  
(xiv) to provide and maintain residential accommodat ion for students and employees;  
(xv) to supervise the residences of the students of the University and to make arrangements for 
promoting th eir health and general welfare;  
(xvi) to lay down conditions of service of all categories of employees, i ncluding their code of 
conduct;  
(xvii) to regulate  and enforce discipline among the students and the employees, and to take such 
disciplinary measures in this r egard as it may deem necessary;  
(xviii) to fix, demand and receive such fees and other charges as may  be prescribed by the 
Statutes;  
(xix) to borr ow, with the approval of the Central Government on the security of its property, 
money for  the purpose of the University;  
(xx) to receive benefactions, donations and gifts and to acquire, hold, manage and dispose of any 
property, movable or immovable, incl uding trust and endowment prope rties for its purposes;  
(xxi) to do all such other acts and things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the 
attainmen t of all or any of its objects.  
6. Jurisdiction .—(1) The jurisdiction and responsibility of the University with respect to teaching, 
research and programmes of extension education at the University level, in the field of agricultural shall 
extend to the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Man
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 5]
University level, in the field of agricultural shall 
extend to the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalay a, Mizo ram, 1[Nagaland,]  Sikkim and 
Tripura.  
(2) All colleges, research and experimental stations or other institutions coming under the jurisdiction 
and authority of the University shall be its constituent units under the full management and control of its 
officers and authorities and no such units sh all be recognised as affiliated u nits. 
(3) The University may assume responsibility for the training of field extension workers and others 
and may develop such training centres as may be required in various parts of the  States under its 
jurisdiction.  
7. Un iversity open to  all classes, castes and creed .—The University shall be open to persons of 
either sex and of whatever caste, creed, race or class, and it shall not be lawful for the University to adopt 
or impose on any person, any test whatsoever of religi ous belief or profession in order to entitle him to be 
appointed as a teacher of the University or to hold any other office therein or be admitted as a student in 
the University or to graduate thereat or to enjoy or exercise any privilege thereof:  
Provided  that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the University from making special 
provisions for the employment or admission of women, handicapped or of persons belonging to the 
weaker sections of the society and, in particular, of the Scheduled Caste s and the Scheduled Tribes.  
8. The Visitor .—(1) The President of India shall be  the Visitor of the University.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4), the Visitor shall have the right to cause an 
inspection to be made, by such person or persons as he may direct, of the University, its buildings, 
laboratories, libraries, museums, workshops and equipments, and of any institution or college and also of 
the examination, instruction and other work conducted or done by the University, and to ca
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 5]
 also of 
the examination, instruction and other work conducted or done by the University, and to cause an inquiry 
                                                           
1. Ins.  by Act 45 of 2016, s. 3 (w.e.f. 19 -8-2016).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 6]
6 
 to be made in like manner in respect of any matter connected with the administration and finances of the 
University.  
(3) The Visitor shall, in every cas e, give notice to the University of his intention to cause an 
inspection or inquiry to be made and the University shall, on receipt of such notice, have the right to 
make, within thirty days from the date of receipt of the notice or such other period as th e Visitor may 
determine, such representations to hi m as it may consider necessary.  
(4) After considering the representations, if any, made by the University, the Visitor may cause to be 
made such inspection or inquiry as is referred to in sub -section ( 2). 
(5) Where an inspection or inquiry has been caused to be made by the Visitor, the University shall be 
entitled to appoint a representative who shall have the right to appear in person and to be heard  on such 
inspection or inquiry.  
(6) The Visitor may addre ss the Vice -Chancellor with reference to the results of such inspection or 
inquiry together with such views and advice with regard to the action to be taken thereon as the Visitor 
may be pleased to offer and on receipt of the address made by the Visitor, t he Vice -Chancellor shall 
communicate forthwith to the Board the results of the inspection or inquiry and the views of the Visitor 
and the advice tendered by him upon the action to be taken thereon.  
(7) The Board shall communicate through the Vice -Chancello r to the Visitor such action, if any, as it 
proposes to take or has been taken by it upon the results  of such inspection or inquiry.  
(8) Where the Board does not, within a reasonable time, take action to the satisfaction of the Visitor, 
the Visitor may, af ter considering any explanation furnished or representation made by the Board, issue 
such directions as he may think fit and the Board shall be bound to comply with such directions.  
(9) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this section, the Vis itor may, 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 6]
 directions.  
(9) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this section, the Vis itor may, by an order in 
writing, annul any proceeding of the University which is not in conformity with this Act, the Statutes or 
the Ordinances:  
Provided that before making any such order, he shall call upon the University to show cause why 
such an order  should not be made and, if any cause is shown within a reasonable ti me, he shall consider 
the same.  
(10) The Visitor shall have such other powers as may be  specified by the Statutes.  
9. Officers of the University .—The following shall be the officers of th e Univers ity, namely: — 
(1) the Chancellor;  
(2) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(3) Deans;  
(4) Directors;  
(5) the Registrar;  
(6) the Comptroller; and  
(7) such other officers as may  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
10. The Chancellor .—(1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such manner as may  be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Chancellor shall, by virtue of his office,  be the Head of the University.  
(3) The Chancellor shall, if present, preside at the convocations of the University held for  conferring 
degrees.  
11. The Vice -Chancellor .—(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such 
manner as may  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 7]
7 
 (2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be the principal executive and academic officer of the University and 
shall exercise general supervision and control over the affairs of the University and give effect to the 
decisions of all the  authorities of the University.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor may, if he is of opinion that immediate action is necessary on any matter, 
exercise any power conferred on any authority of the University by or under this Act and shall report to 
such authority the acti on taken by him on such matter:  
Provided that if the authority concerned is of opinion that such action ought not to have been take n, it 
may refer the matter to the Visitor whose d ecision thereon shall be final:  
Provided further that any person in the service of the University who is aggrieved by the action taken 
by the Vice -Chancellor under this sub -section shall have the right to ap peal against such action to the 
Board within three months from the date on which decision on such action is communicated to him and 
thereupon the Board may confirm, modify or reverse the actio n taken by the Vice -Chancellor.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor, if he i s of opinion that any decision of any authority of the University is 
beyond the powers of the authority conferred by the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances 
or that any decision taken is not in the interest of the University, may ask the  authority concerned to 
review its decision within sixty days of such decision and if the authority refuses to review the decision 
either in whole or in part or no decision is taken by it within the said period of sixty days, the matter shall 
be referred t o the Visitor whose d ecision thereon shall be final.  
(5) The Vice -Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
12. Deans and Directors .—Every Dean and every Director shall  be appointed in such manner and 
shall exercise such po
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 7]
ctors .—Every Dean and every Director shall  be appointed in such manner and 
shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
13. The Registrar .—(1) The Registrar shall be appointed in such manner as may  be prescribed by the 
Statutes.  
(2) The Registrar shall h ave the power to enter into agreements, sign documents and authenticate 
records on behalf of the University and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be 
prescr ibed by the Statutes.  
14. The Comptroller .—The Comptroller shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise such 
powers and perform such duties as may  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
15. Other officers .—The manner of appointment and powers and duties of the other officers of the 
University shall  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
16. Authorities of the University .—The following shall be the authoriti es of the University, 
namely: — 
(1) the Board;  
(2) the Academic Council;  
(3) the Finance Committee;  
(4) the Research Programme Committee;  
(5) the Extensio n Education Advisory Committee;  
(6) the Board of Studies; and  
(7) such other authorities as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
17. The Board .—(1) The Board shall be the principal ex ecutive body of the University.  
(2) The constitution of the Board, the term of office of its members and its powers and functions shall  
be prescribed by the Statutes.  
18. The Academic Council .—(1) The Academic Council shall be the principal academic body of the 
University and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statu tes and Ordinances, have the control 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 8]
8 
 and general regulation of, and be responsible for, the maintenance of standards of learning, education, 
instruction, evaluation and examination within the University and shall exercise such other powers and 
perform such  other functions as may be conferred or i mposed upon it by the Statutes.  
(2) The constitution of the Academic Council and the term of office of its members shall  be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
19. The Finance Committee .—The constitution, powers and functions of the Finance Committee 
shall  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
20. Th e Research Programme Committee .—The constitution, powers and functions of the 
Research Programme Committee shall  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
21. The Extension Education Advisory Committee .—The constitution, powers and functions of the 
Extension Education Advisory Committee shall  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
22. The Board of Studies .—The constitution, powers and functions of the Board of Studies shall  be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
23. Faculties .—The University shall have such Faculties as may  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
24. Other authorities .—The constitution, powers and functions of other authorities of the University 
referred to in clause ( 7) of section 16 shall be such as may  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
25. Power to make Statutes .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all 
or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) the constitution, powers and functions of the a uthorities of the University, as may be  
constituted from time to time;  
(b) the appointment and continuance in office of the members of the said authorities, the filling 
up of vacancies of members, and all other matters relating to those authorities for whi ch it may be 
necessary or desirable to provide;  
(c) the appointment, powers and duties of the officers of the U niversity and their emoluments;  
(d) the appointment of teachers, academic staff and other employees of t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 8]
ity and their emoluments;  
(d) the appointment of teachers, academic staff and other employees of the U niversity and their 
emoluments;  
(e) the appointment of teachers and academic staff working in any other University or 
organisation for a specific period f or undertaking a joint project;  
(f) the conditions of service of employees including provision for pension, insurance and 
provident fund, the manner of termination of s ervice and disciplinary action;  
(g) the principles governing the seniority of service of t he employees of the University;  
(h) the procedure for arbitration in cases of dispute between employees or students and the 
University;  
(i) the procedure for appeal to the Board by any employee or student against the action of any 
officer or authority of the University;  
(j) the establishment and abolition of Departments, Cent res, colleges and institutions;  
(k) the conferment of honorary degrees;  
(l) the withdrawal of degrees, diplomas, certificates and o ther academic distinctions;  
(m) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and p rizes;  
(n) the delegation of powers vested in the authorities  or officers of the Uni versity;  
(o) the maintenance of discipline am ong the employees and students;  
(p) all other matters which by this Act are to be, or may be, prescribed by the Statutes.  
26. Statutes how to be made .—(1) The first Statutes are  those set out in the Schedule.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 9]
9 
 (2) The Board may from time to time make Statutes or may amend or repeal the Statutes referred to in 
sub-section ( 1): 
Provided that the Board shall not make, amend or repeal any Statute affecting the status, powers or 
constitution of any authority of the Uni versity until such authority has been given an opportunity of 
expressing an opinion in writing on the proposed changes, and any opinion so expressed sh all be 
considered by the Board.  
(3) Every Statute or any amendment or repeal of a Statute shall require t he assent of the Visitor who 
may assent thereto or withhold assent therefrom or remit it to the Board for consideration.  
(4) A Statute or a Statute amending or repealing an existing Statute shall have no validity unless it has 
been assented to by the Visit or. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub -sections, the Visitor may amend or 
repeal the Statutes referred to in sub -section ( 1), during the period of three years immediately afte r the 
commencement of this Act.  
(6) Notwithstanding anyt hing contained in the foregoing sub -sections, the Visitor may direct the 
University to make provisions in the Statutes in respect of any matter specified by him and if the Board is 
unable to implement such direction within sixty days of its receipt, the Vi sitor may, after considering the 
reasons, if any, communicated by the Board for its inability to comply with such direction, make or 
amend th e Statutes suitably.  
27. Power to make Ordinances .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the 
Ordinances may provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) the admission of students to the Universi ty and their enrolment as such;  
(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas and certificates of the 
University;  
(c) the medium of instruction and examination;  
(d) the award of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions, the qualifications 
for the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 9]
ard of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions, the qualifications 
for the same and the means to be taken relating to the gran ting and obtaining of the same;  
(e) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the University and for admission to the 
examinations, degrees, diplomas and cert ificates of the University;  
(f) the conditions for award of fellowships, scholarships, s tudentships, medals and prizes;  
(g) the conduct of examinations, including the term of office and manner of appointment and the 
duties of examining bodies, examine rs and moderators;  
(h) the condition s of residence of the students;  
(i) the special arrangements, if any, which may be made for the residence, discipline and teaching 
of women students and the prescribing of speci al courses of studies for them;  
(j) the appointment and emoluments of employees other than those for whom provision  has been 
made in the Statutes;  
(k) the establishment of spe cial centres, specialized lab oratories and other committees;  
(l) the manner of co -operation and collaboration with other Universities and authorities  including 
learned bodies or associations;  
(m) the creation, composition and functions of any other body wh ich is considered necessary for 
improving the a cademic life of the University;  
(n) such other terms and conditions of service of teachers and other academic staff as are not 
prescribed by the Statutes;  
(o) the management of colleges and institutions  establ ished by the University;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 10]
10 
 (p) the setting up of a machinery for redressal of grievances of employees; and  
(q) all other matters which by this Act or the Statutes may be provided for by the Ordinances.  
(2) The first Ordinances shall be made by the Vice -Chanc ellor with the previous approval of the 
Central Government and the Ordinances so made may be amended or repealed at any time by the Board 
in the man ner prescribed by the Statutes.  
28. Regulations .—The authorities of the University may make Regulations, consistent with this Act, 
the Statutes and the Ordinances for the conduct of their own business and that of the committees 
appointed by them and not provided for by this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinanc es in the man ner 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
29. Annual report .—(1) The annual report of the University shall be prepared under the direction of 
the Board, which shall include, among other matters, the steps taken by the University towards the 
fulfilment o f its objects and shall be submitted to the Board on or after such date as may be prescribed by 
the Statutes and the Board shall consider the rep ort in its annual meeting.  
(2) The Board shall submit the annual report to the Visitor a long with its comments,  if any.  
(3) A copy of the annual report as prepared under sub -section ( 1), shall also be submitted to the 
Centra l Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid be fore both Houses of 
Parliament.  
30. Annual accounts .—(1) The annual a ccounts of the University shall be prepared under the 
directions of the Board and shall, once at least every year and at intervals of not more than fifteen months, 
be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or by such persons as h e may auth orise in this 
behalf.  
(2) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report thereon shall be submitted to the 
Board and the Visitor along with  the observations of the Board.  
(3) Any observations made by the Visitor on th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 10]
 Visitor along with  the observations of the Board.  
(3) Any observations made by the Visitor on the annual accounts shall b e brought to the notice of the 
Board and the observations of the Board, if any, sha ll be submitted to the Visitor.  
(4) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report as submitted to the Visitor, shall also 
be submitted to the Central Governme nt, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid be fore 
both Houses of Parliament.  
(5) The audited annual accounts after having been laid before both Houses of Parliament shall be 
published in the Official Gazette.  
31. Cond itions of service of  employees .—(1) Every employee of the University shall be appointed 
under a written contract, which shall be lodged with the University and a copy of which shall be furni shed 
to the employee concerned.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of the contract between th e University and any employee shall, at the 
request of the employee, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed by 
the Board, one member nominated by the employee concerned and an umpire appointed by the Visitor.  
(3) The decision of the Tribunal shall be final, and no suit shall lie in any civil court in respect of the 
matters decided by the Tribunal.  
(4) Every request made by the employee under sub -section ( 2) shall be deemed to be a submission to 
arbitration upon the ter ms of this section within the meaning of the Arb itration Act, 1940 (2 of 1940).  
(5) The procedure for regulating the work of the Tribunal shall  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
32. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disci plinary cases against students .—(1) Any student 
or candidate for an examination whose name has been removed from the rolls of the University by the 
orders or resolution of the Vice -Chancellor, Discipline Committee or Examination Committee, as the case 
may be, and who has been debarred fro m appearing at the examinations of the
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 10]
Committee, as the case 
may be, and who has been debarred fro m appearing at the examinations of the University for more than 
one year, may, within ten days of the date of receipt of such orders or copy of such resolution by him, 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 11]
11 
 appeal to the Board and the Board may confirm, modify or reverse the decision of the Vic e-Chancellor or 
the Committee, as the case may be.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of any disciplinary action taken by the University against a student shall, 
at the request of such student, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration and the provisions of  
sub-sections ( 2), (3), (4) and ( 5) of section 31 shall, as far as may be, apply to a reference m ade under this 
sub-section.  
33. Right to appeal .—Every employee or student of the University or of a college or institution 
maintained by the University shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, have a right to appeal, 
within such time as may be prescribed by the Statutes, to the Board against the decision of any officer or 
authority of the University or any college or an institution, as the case may  be, and thereupon the Board 
may confirm, modify or reverse  the decision appealed against.  
34. Provident and pension funds .—(1) The University shall constitute for the benefit of its 
employees such provident or pension fund or provide such insurance scheme s as it may deem fit in such 
manner and subject to such conditions as may  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) Where such provident fund or pension fund has been so constituted, the Central Government may 
declare that the provision of the Provident Funds Act , 1925 (19 of 1925), shall apply to such fund, as if it 
were a Government provident fund.  
35. Disputes as to constit ution of University authorities .—If any question arises as to whether any 
person has been duly appointed as, or is entitled to be, a member of any authority of the University, the 
matter shall be referred to the Visitor whose d ecision thereon shall be final.  
36. Constitution of Committees .—Where any authority of the University is given power by this Act 
or the Statutes to appoint Committees, s uch Committees shall, save as otherwise provided, consist of the 
members of 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 11]
 appoint Committees, s uch Committees shall, save as otherwise provided, consist of the 
members of the authority concerned and of such other person, if any, as the author ity in each case may 
think fit.  
37. Filling of casual vacancies .—All casual vacancies among the members (other than ex officio  
members) of any authority of the University shall be filled, as soon as may be, by the person who 
appointed or co -opted the member whose place has become vacant and person appointed or co -opted to a 
casual vacancy shall be a member of such authority or body for the residue of the term for which the 
person whose place he fills would have been a member.  
38. Proceedings of University authorit ies not invalidated by vacancy .—No act or proceedings of 
any authority of the University shall be invalid merely by reason of the existence of a vacancy or 
vacancies among its members.  
39. Protection  of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie against the Board, any au thority or officer or other employee of the University for anything which is in 
good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or 
the Ordinances.  
40. Mode of proof of  University records .—A copy of any receipt, application, notice, order, 
proceeding, resolution of any authority or Committee of the University, or other documents in possession 
of the University, or any entry in any register duly maintained by the University, if verified by th e 
Registrar, shall be received as prima facie  evidence of such receipt, application, notice, order, proceeding, 
resolution or documents or the existence of entry in the register and shall be admitted as evidence of the 
matters and transactions therein wher e the original thereof would, if produced, have been admissible in 
evidence, notwithstanding anything contained in the India n Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872 ) or in any 
other l aw for the time being in
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 11]
contained in the India n Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872 ) or in any 
other l aw for the time being in force.  
41. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any diffi culty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedie nt for re moving 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three years fro m the 
commencement of this Act.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 12]
12 
 (2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, b efore each 
House of Parliament.  
42. Transitional provisions .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act and the Statutes, — 
(a) the first Chancellor and the first Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor and shall 
hold o ffice for a term of five years;  
(b) the first Registrar and the first Comptroller shall be appointed by the Visitor and each of the 
said officers shall hold of fice for a term of three years;  
(c) the first members of the Board shall be nominated by the Visitor and shall hold of fice for a 
term of three years;  
(d) the first members of the Academic Council shall be nominated by the Visitor and shall hold 
office for a term of three years:  
Provided that if any vacancy occurs in the above offices or authorities, the same shall be filled by 
appointme nt or nomination, as the case may be, by the Visitor, and the person so appointed or nominated 
shall hold office for so long as the officer or member in whose place he is appointed or nominated would 
have held office, if  such vacancy had not occurred.  
43. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette an d to be laid 
before Parliament .—(1) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be pub lished 
in the Official Gazette.  
(2) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if , before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation or both Houses agree that the Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation s hould not be made, the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation shall
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 12]
he Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation s hould not be made, the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anyth ing previously done under 
that Statute, Ordinance or Regula tion. 
(3) The power to make Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations shall include the power to give 
retrospective effect from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this Act, to the Statut es, 
Ordinances or Regulations or any of them but no retrospective effect shall be given to any Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person to whom such Statutes, 
Ordinances or  Regulations may be applicable.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 13]
13 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 26)  
THE STATUTES  OF THE  UNIVERSITY  
The Chancellor  
1. (1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from a panel of not less than three persons 
recommended by the Board from amongst persons of eminence in education in genera l and agric ultural 
sciences in particular:  
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve of any of the persons so recommended he may call for 
fresh recommendations from the Board.  
(2) The Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years and shall not be eligible for 
reapp ointment:  
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of his term of office, the Chancellor shall continue to hold 
office until his su ccessor enters upon his office.  
The Vice -Chancellor  
2. (1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from a panel of not less than three 
persons who shall be recommended by a Committee a s constituted under clause ( 2): 
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve of any of the persons included in the panel,  he may call 
for a fresh panel.  
(2) The Committee referred to in clause ( 1), shall consist of a nominee of  the Visitor, the  
Director -General of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research and the Secretary to the North -Eastern 
Council, set -up under section 3 of the North -Eastern Council Act, 1971 (84 of 1971) and the nominee of 
the Visitor shall be  the convener of the Committee.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor shall be a whole -time sala ried officer of the University.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on w hich he enters 
upon his office, or until he attains the age of sixty -five years, whichever is earlier, and he shall not  be 
eligible for reappointment:  
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of the said period of five years, he shall continue in office 
until his successor is appoin ted and enters upon his office:  
Provided further that the Visitor may direct any Vice -Chancellor after his te
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 13]
rs upon his office:  
Provided further that the Visitor may direct any Vice -Chancellor after his term has expired, to 
continue in office for such period, not exceeding a total period of one year, as may be specified by him. 
(5) The emoluments and other con ditions of service of the Vice -Chance llor shall be as follows: —  
(i) The Vice -Chancellor shall be paid a monthly salary and allowances other than the house rent 
allowance, at the rates fixed by the Central Government fr om time to time and he shall be entitled, 
without payment of rent, to use a furnished residence throughout his term of office and no charge 
shall fall on the Vice -Chancellor in respect of the  maintenance of such residence.  
(ii) The Vice -Chancellor shall be  entitled to such terminal benefits and allowances as may be 
fixed by the Board with the approval of  the Visitor from time to time:  
Provided that where an employee of the University or a college or an institution maintained by it, 
or of any other Universit y or any Institution maintained by or affiliated to such other University, is 
appointed as the Vice -Chancellor, he may be allowed to continue to contribute to any provident fund 
of which he is a member and the University shall contribute to the account of such person in that 
provident fund at the same rate at which the person had been contributing immediately before his 
appo intment as the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided further that where such employee had been a member of any pension scheme, the 
University shall  make the necessary  contribution to such scheme.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 14]
14 
 (iii) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to travelling allowance at such rate s as may be fixed by 
the Board.  
(iv) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to leave on full pay at the rate of thirty days in a  
calendar year and the leave shall be credited to his account in advance in two half -yearly instalments 
of fifteen days each on the 1st day of January and July every year:  
Provided that if the Vice -Chancellor assumes or relinquishes charge of the office of  the  
Vice -Chancellor during the currency of a half year, the leave shall be credited proportionately at the 
rate of two and -a-half days for e ach completed month of service.  
(v) In addition to the leave referred to in sub -clause ( iv), the Vice -Chancellor shall also be entitled 
to half pay leave at the rate of twenty days for each completed year of service. This half pay leave 
may also be availed of as commuted leave on full pay on medical certificate. When commuted leave 
is availed, twice the amount of hal f pay leave shall be debi ted against half pay leave due.  
(6) If the office of the Vice -Chancellor becomes vacant due to death, resignation or otherwise, or 
if he is unable to perform his duties due to ill -health or any other cause, the senior -most Dean or 
Director, as the case may be, shall perform the duties of the Vice -Chancellor until a new  
Vice -Chancellor assumes office or until the Vice -Chancellor attends to the duties of his office, as the 
case may be.  
Powers an d duties of the Vice -Chancellor  
3. (1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be ex officio  Chairman of the Board, the Academic Council and the 
Finance Committee and shall, in the absence of the Chancellor, preside at the convocations h eld for 
conferring degrees.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to be present at, and address, any meeting of any authority 
of the University, but shall not be entitled to vote there  at unless he  is a member of such authority.  
(3) It shall be the duty of the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 14]
itled to vote there  at unless he  is a member of such authority.  
(3) It shall be the duty of the Vice -Chancellor to see that this Act, the Statutes, the Ordinances and the 
Regulations are duly observed, and he shall have all the powers neces sary to ensure such observance.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall exercise control over the affairs of the University and shall give effect 
to the decisions of all the auth orities of the University . 
(5) The Vice -Chancellor shall have all the powers necessary for the proper maintenance of discipline 
in the University and he may delegate any such powers to such person  or persons as he may deem fit.  
(6) The Vice -Chancellor shal l have the power to convene or cause to be convened the meetings of the 
Board, the Academic Cou ncil and the Finance Committee.  
Deans of colleges  
4. (1) Every Dean of a college shall be appointed by the Vice -Chancellor from among the Professors 
in the colle ge for a period of five years and he shall  be eligible for reappointment:  
Provided that a Dean on attaining the age of sixty years shal l cease to hold office as such:  
Provided further that if at any time there is no Professor in a college, the Vice -Chancel lor, or a Dean 
authorise d by the Vice -Chancellor in this behalf, shall exercise the pow ers of the Dean of the college.  
(2) When the office of the Dean is vacant or when the Dean is, by reason of illness, absence or any 
other cause, unable to perform duties  of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed by such 
person as the Vice -Chancell or may appoint for the purpose.  
(3) The Dean shall be the Head of the college and shall be responsible for the conduct and 
maintenance of the standards of teachi ng and research in the college and shall have such other functions 
as may b e prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) The Dean shall have the right to be present and to speak at any meeting of the Board of Studies or 
Committees of the college, as the case may b
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 14]
and to speak at any meeting of the Board of Studies or 
Committees of the college, as the case may be,  but shall not have the right to vote thereat  unless he is a 
member thereof.   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 15]
15 
 Director Instruction  
5. (1) The Director Instruction shall be appointed by the Board on the recommendation of a Selection 
Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole -time salaried offi cer of the University.  
(2) The Director Instruction shall hold office for a term of five years and shall  be eligible for 
reappointment:  
Provided that the Director Instruction on attaining the age of sixty years shall ce ase to hold o ffice as 
such.  
(3) The Director Instruction sh all be responsible for planning, coordination and supervision for all 
educational programmes in the various faculties of the University.  
The Director of Research  
6. (1) The Director of Research shall be appointed by the Board on the recommendation of a 
Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole -time sala ried officer of the 
University.  
(2) The Director of Research shall hold office for a term of five years and shall  be eligible  for 
reappointment:  
Provided that the Director of Research on attaining the age of sixty years shal l cease to hold office as 
such.  
(3) The Director of Research shall be responsible for the supervision and coordination of research 
programmes in the Universi ty.  
The Director of Extension Education  
7. (1) The Director of Extension Education shall be appointed by the Board on the recommendation of 
a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole -time sala ried officer of the 
University.  
(2) The Director of Extension Education shall hold office for a term of five years and shall  be eligible 
for reappointment:  
Provided that the Director of Extension Education on attaining the age of sixty years shal l cease to 
hold office as such.  
(3) The D irector of Extension Education shall be responsible for the supervision and coordination of 
all Extension Educatio n Programmes of the University.  
Registrar  
8. (1) The Registrar shall be appointed by the Board on the recommenda
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 15]
the University.  
Registrar  
8. (1) The Registrar shall be appointed by the Board on the recommendation of a Selection 
Committee constituted for the purpose and shall be a whole -time sala ried officer of the University.  
(2) He shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall  be eligible for reappointment.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Regist rar shall be such as may 
be pr escribed by the Ordinances:  
Provided that the Registrar shall retire on at taining the age of sixty years:  
Provided further that a Registrar shall, notwithstanding his attaining the age of sixty years, continue in 
office until his successor is appointed and enters upon his office or until the expiry of a period of one 
year, whichever is earlier.  
(4) When the office of the Registrar is vacant or when the Registrar is, by reason of illness, absence, 
or any other cause, unable to p erform the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed 
by such person as the Vice -Chancell or may appoint for the purpose.  
(5) (a) The Registrar shall have power to take disciplinary action against such of the employees, 
excluding teac hers, as may be specified in the order of the Board and to suspend them pending inquiry, to 
administer warnings to them or to impose on them the penalty of censure o r the withholding of increment:  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 16]
16 
 Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed unless the person concerned has been given a 
reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action propose d to be taken in regard to him.  
(b) An appeal shall lie to the Vice -Chancellor against any order of the Registrar imposing any of the 
penalti es specified in  sub-clause ( a). 
(c) In a case where the inquiry discloses that a punishment beyond the power of the Registrar is called 
for, the Registrar shall, upon conclusion of the inquiry, make a report to the Vice -Chancellor along with 
his recommendations:  
Provided  that an appeal shall lie to the Board against an order of the Vice -Chancellor imposing any 
penalty.  
(6) The Registrar shall be ex officio  Secretary of the Board and the Academic Council, but shall not 
be deemed to be a memb er of any of these authorities.  
(7) It shall  be the duty of the Registrar — 
(a) to be the custodian of the records, the common seal and such other property of the University 
as the Bo ard shall commit to his charge;  
(b) to issue all notices convening meetings of the Board, the Academic Council and of any 
Committees appointed by those authorities;  
(c) to keep the minutes of all the meetings of the Board, the Academic Council and of any 
Committees appointed by those authoriti es; 
(d) to conduct the official correspondence of the Board and the Academic Council;  
(e) to arrange for and superintend the examinations of the University in accordance with the 
manne r prescribed by the Ordinances;  
(f) to supply to the Visitor, copies of the agenda of the meetings of the authorities of the 
University as soon as they are issued; an d the minutes of such meetings;  
(g) to represent the University in suits or proceedings by or against the University, sign  
powers -of-attorney and verify pleading s or depute his repre sentatives for the purpose; and  
(h) to perform such other duties as may be specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances or the 
Regulations o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 16]
 perform such other duties as may be specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances or the 
Regulations or as may be required, from time to time, by th e Board or the Vice -Chancellor.  
The Comptroller  
9. (1) The Comptroller shall be appointed by the Board on the recommendation of a Selection 
Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole -time sala ried officer of the University.  
(2) He shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall  be eligible for reappointment.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Comptroller shall be such as 
may b e prescribed by the Ordinances:  
Provided that a Comptroller shall retire on at taining the age of sixty years:  
Provided further  that the Comptroller shall, notwithstanding his attaining the age of sixty years, 
continue in office until his successor is appointed and enter s upon his office or until the expiry of a period 
of one year, whichever is earlier.  
(4) When the office of the Comptroller is vacant or when the Comptroller is, by reason of illness, 
absence or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be 
performed by such person as the Vice -Chancell or may appoint for the purpose.  
(5) The Comptroller shall be ex officio  Secretary of the Finance Committee, but shall not be deemed 
to be a member of such Commit tee.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 17]
17 
 (6) The Comptroller shall — 
(a) exercise general supervision over the funds of the University and shall advise it as re gards its 
financial policy; and  
(b) perform such other financial functions as may be assigned to him by the Board or as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
(7) Subject to the control of the  Board, the Comptroller shall — 
(a) hold  and manage the property and investments of the University includ ing trust and endowed 
property;  
(b) ensure that the limits fixed by the Board for recurring and non -recurring expenditure for a 
year are not exceeded and that all moneys are expended on the p urpose for whic h they are granted or 
allotted;  
(c) be responsible for the preparation of annual accounts and the budget of the University and for 
their presentation to the Board;  
(d) keep a constant watch on the state of the cash and bank balances a nd on t he state of 
investments;  
(e) watch the progress of the collection of revenue and advise on the methods of collection 
employed;  
(f) ensure that the registers of buildings, land, furniture and equipment are maintained up -to-date 
and that stock -checking is co nducted, of equipment and other consumable materials in all offices, 
Specialised Laboratories, Colleges and Institutions maintained by the Uni versity;  
(g) bring to the notice of the Vice -Chancellor unauthorised expenditure and other financial 
irregularitie s and suggest disciplinary action ag ainst persons at fault; and  
(h) call for from any office, Laboratory, College or Institution maintained by the University any 
information or returns that he may consider necessary for  the performance of his duties.  
(8) Any receipt given by the Comptroller or the person or persons duly authorised in this behalf by 
the Board for any money payable to the University shall be sufficient disch arge for payment of such 
money.  
Heads of Departments  
10. (1) Each Department shall ha ve a Head who shall be not below the
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 17]
oney.  
Heads of Departments  
10. (1) Each Department shall ha ve a Head who shall be not below the rank of an Associate Professor 
and whose duties and functions and terms and conditions of appointment shall b e prescribed by the 
Ordinances:  
Provided that if there is more than one Professor in any Department, the Head of the Department shall 
be appointed by the Board on the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor from among the Professors:  
Provided further that in the case of Departments where there is only one Professor, the Board shall 
have the option to appoint, on the  recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor, either the Professor or an 
Associate Professor  as the Head of the Department:  
Provided also that in a Department where there is no Professor, an Associate Professor may be 
appointed as the Head of the Department by t he Board on the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided also that if there is no Professor or Reader, in a Department, the Dean of College concerned 
shall act  as the Head of the Department.  
(2) It shall be open to a Professor or an Associate Profes sor to decline the offer of appointment  as the 
Head of the Department.  
(3) A Professor or an Associate Professor appointed as the Head of the Department shall hold office 
as such for a period of three years and shall  be eligible for reappointment.   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 18]
18 
 (4) A H ead of a Department may resign his office at any ti me during his tenure of office.  
(5) A Head of a Department shall perform such functions as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
Librarians  
11. ( 1) Every Librarian shall be appointed by the Board on the rec ommendation of the Selection 
Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole -time sala ried officer of the University.  
(2) Every Librarian shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be assigned to him by 
the Board.  
Constitution,  powers and functions of the Board.  
12. (1) The Board shall consist of t he following members, namely: — 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor, ex officio  Chairman;  
(ii) two secretaries from amongst the secretaries in charge of the Departments of Agriculture and 
Forests of a State in the North -Eastern region to be nominated by the Visitor by rotation in the 
alphabetical ord er to represent that State;  
(iii) two eminent scientists to be nominated by the Visitor;  
(iv) two  distinguished persons representing Agro -based industries to be nominated by the Visitor;  
(v) the Deputy Director -General (Education) representing the Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research ; 
(vi) the Secretary to the North -Eastern Council set up under sec tion 3 of the North -Eastern 
Council Act, 1971 (84 of 1971);  
(vii) one Dean of college and one Director to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor on rotational 
basis;  
(viii) two  persons representing farmers in the States of the North -Eastern region to be nominated 
by the Vice -Chancellor by rotation in the alph abetical order of those States;  
(ix) an industrialist or a manufacturer having special knowledge in agricultural developme nt to be 
nominate d by the Visitor;  
(x) one woman social worker representing women social organisati on in the North -Eastern 
region;  
(xi) an Advisor (Agr iculture), Planning Commission;  
(xii) a distinguished authority on forestry, social forestry or environme nt 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 18]
Planning Commission;  
(xii) a distinguished authority on forestry, social forestry or environme nt management to be 
nominated by the Visitor;  
(xiii) three persons not below the rank of Joint Secretary representing respectively the 
Departments of the Central Government dealing with Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Forestry;  
and 
(xiv) the Registrar of  the University, Secretary.  
(2) The term of office of the members of the Board, other than ex offic io members, shall be two years.  
(3) The Board shall have the power of management and administration of the revenue and property of 
the University and the con duct of all administrative affairs of the University not otherwise provided for.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Board shall, in addition 
to all other powers vested in it, have the following powers, namely: — 
(i) to create teaching and academic posts, to determine the number and emoluments of such posts 
and to define the duties and conditions of service of teachers and other academic staff and Deans of 
colleges, Directors and heads of other institutions maintai ned by the Unive rsity;   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 19]
19 
 (ii) to appoint such teachers and other academic staff, as may be necessary, and Deans of 
colleges, Directors and heads of other institutions maintained by the University on the 
recommendation of the Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and to fill up temporary 
vacancies therein;  
(iii) to create administrative, ministerial and other necessary posts and to make appointments 
thereto in the manne r prescribed by the Ordinances;  
(iv) to grant leave of absence to any officer of the University other than the Chancellor and the 
Vice-Chancellor, and to make necessary arrangements for the discharge of the functions of s uch 
officer during his absence;  
(v) to regulate and enforce discipline among employees in accordance with the Statutes and the 
Ordinances;  
(vi) to manage and regulate the finances, accounts, investments, property, business and all other 
administrative affairs of the University, and for that pu rpose to appoint such agents as it may think fit;  
(vii) to fix limits on the total recurring and the total non -recurring expenditure for a year on the 
recommenda tions of the Finance Committee;  
(viii) to invest any money belonging to the University, includi ng any unapplied income, in such 
stocks, funds, shares or securities, from time to time, as it may think fit or in the purchase of 
immovable property in India, with the like powers of varying suc h investment from time to time;  
(ix) to transfer or accept tr ansfers of any movable or immovable proper ty on behalf of the 
University;  
(x) to provide buildings, premises, furniture and apparatus and other means needed for carrying  
on the work of the University;  
(xi) to enter into, vary, carry out and cancel contrac ts on behalf of the University;  
(xii) to entertain, adjudicate upon, and, if thought fit, to redress any grievances of the employees 
and students of the University;  
(xiii) to appoint examiners and moderators and, if necessary, to remove them, and to fix the i
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 19]
ty;  
(xiii) to appoint examiners and moderators and, if necessary, to remove them, and to fix the ir fees, 
emoluments and travelling and other allowances, after consulting the Academic Counc il; 
(xiv) to select a common seal for the University and provide for the custody and use of such seal;  
(xv) to make such special arrangements as may be necessary fo r the residence an d discipline of 
women students;  
(xvi) to delegate any of its powers to the Vice -Chancellor, the Deans, Directors, the Registrar or 
the Comptroller or such other employee or authority of the University or to a committee appo inted by 
it as it may deem fit;  
(xvii) to institute fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and pri zes; 
(xviii) to provide for the appointment of Visiting Professors, Emeritus Professors, Consultants and 
Scholars and determine the terms and cond itions of such app ointment; and  
(xix) to exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or imposed 
on it by the Act, or the Statutes.  
Quorum for meetings of the Board  
13. Seven members of the Board shall form a quo rum for a meeting of the Board . 
Constitution and  powers of the Academic Council  
14. (1) The Academic Council shall consist of t he following members, namely: — 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor, ex officio  member;   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 20]
20 
 (ii) all the Deans of the Colleges of the University;  
(iii) the Director  of Research of the University;  
(iv) the Director of Extensi on Education of the University;  
(v) the Director Instruction;  
(vi) a Librarian to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor on rotational basis;  
(vii) five outstanding teachers to be co -opted from outsi de the University re presenting different 
Faculties;  
(viii) seven heads of the Department to be nomi nated by the Vice -Chancellor;  
(ix) the Education Officer or his representative to be nominated by the North -Eastern Council set 
up under section 3 of the Nor th-Eastern Council Act, 1971 (84 of 1971);  
(x) the Registrar of the  University, ex officio  Member -Secretary.  
(2) The term of office of the members of the Academic Council other than ex offi cio members shall 
be two years.  
(3) Subject to the Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Academic Council shall, in addition to all 
other powers vested in it, have the following powers, namely: — 
(a) to exercise general supervision over the academic policies of the University and to giv e 
directions regarding methods of instructions, co -operative teaching among colleges and institutions, 
evaluation of research or impr ovements in academic standards;  
(b) to bring about inter -college co -ordination to establish or appoint committees or boards , for 
taking up proj ects on an inter -college basis;  
(c) to consider matters of general academic interest either on its own initiative or on a reference 
by a college or the Board and to take appropriate action thereon; and  
(d) to frame such regulations and rules consistent with the Statutes and the Ordinances regarding 
the academic functioning of the University, discipline, residences,  admissions, award of fellowsh ips 
and studentships, fees, concessions,  corporate life and attendance.  
Quorum for m eetings of the Academic Council  
15. Nine members of the Academic Council shall form a quorum for a m eeting
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 20]
f the Academic Council  
15. Nine members of the Academic Council shall form a quorum for a m eeting of the Academic 
Council.  
Board of S tudies  
16. (1) Each Department sha ll have a Board of Studies.  
(2) The constitution of a Board of Studies and the term of office of its members shall  be provided by 
the Ordinances.  
(3) The functions of a Board of Studies shall be to approve subjects for research for various degrees 
and other requirements of research degrees and to recommend to the concerned Board in the manne r 
prescribed by the Ordinances — 
(a) courses of studies and appointment of examiners for courses, but excluding research degrees;  
(b) appointment of supervisors of research; and  
(c) measures for the improvement of the sta ndard of teaching and research:  
Prov ided that the above functions of a Board of Studies shall, during the period of three years 
immediately after the commencement of the Act, be performed by the Department.   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 21]
21 
 Finance Committee  
17. (1) The Finance Committee shall consist of t he following members, namely: — 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(ii) the Financial Adviser, Indian Co uncil of Agricultural Research;  
(iii) three persons to be nominated by the Board, out of whom at least one shall be a member of 
the Board;  
(iv) three persons to b e nominated by  the Visitor; and  
(v) the Comptroller of th e University, Member -Secretary.  
(2) Five members of the Finance Committee shall form a quorum for a me eting of the Finance 
Committee.  
(3) The members of the Finance Committee, other than ex officio  members, shall hold of fice for a 
term of three years.  
(4) A member of the Finance Committee shall have the right to record a minute of dissent if he does 
not agree with any dec ision of the Finance Committee.  
(5) The Finance Committee shall meet at least twice a year to e xamine the accounts and to scruti nise 
proposals for expenditure.  
(6) Every proposal relating to creation of posts, and those items which have not been included in the 
Budget, should be examined by the Finance Committee before th ey are considered by the Boa rd. 
(7) The annual accounts and the financial estimates of the University prepared by the Comptroller 
shall be laid before the Finance Committee for consideration and comments and thereafter submi tted to 
the Board for approval.  
(8) The Finance Committee sh all recommend limits for the total recurring expenditure and the total 
non-recurring expenditure for the year, based on the income and resources of the University (which, in the 
case of productive works, may include the proceeds of loans).  
Selection Commit tees 
18. ( 1) There shall be a Selection Committee for making recommendations to the Board for 
appointment to the posts of teachers, Comptroller, Registrar, Librarian, Deans of colleges, Directors and 
heads of other institution s maintained by the University.  
(2) The Selection Committee for appointment to the posts spe
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 21]
ution s maintained by the University.  
(2) The Selection Committee for appointment to the posts specified in column 1 of the Table b elow 
shall consist of the Vice -Chancellor, Director Instruction, Director of Research, Director of Extension 
Education, a nominee of the Visitor and th e persons specified in the corresponding entry  in column 2 of 
the said Table:  
TABLE  
1 2 
Professor  (i) The Head of the Department concerned if he is a Professor.  
 (ii) One Professor to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor.  
 (iii) Three persons not in the service of the University, nominated 
by the Board, out of a panel of names recommended by the 
Academic Council for their special knowledge of, or interest 
in, the subject with which the Professor will be concerned.  
Associate Professor/   
Assistant Professor  (i) The Head of the Department concerned.  
 (ii) One Professor to be no minated by the Vice -Chancellor.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 22]
22 
 1  2 
 (iii) Two persons not in  the service of the University nominated 
by the Board, out of a panel of names recommended by the 
Academic Council for their special knowledge of, or interest 
in, the subject with which the Associate Professor/Assistant 
Professor will be concerned.  
Registrar, Comptroller  (i) Two members of the Board nominated by it; and  
 (ii) One person not in the service of the University, nominated by 
the Board.  
Librarian   Two persons not in the service of the University, who have 
special knowledge of the subject of the Library 
Science/Library Administration to be nominated by the 
Board.  
Dean of college, Directors or head 
of other institution maintained by 
the University   Three persons not in the service of the University of whom 
two shall be nominated by the Board and one by the 
Academic Council  for their special knowledge of, or interest 
in, a subject in which instructio n is being provided by the 
college or institution.  
NOTES : 1. Where the a ppointment is being made for an inter -disciplinary project the head of the project shall be deemed to 
be the Head of the Department concerned.  
 2. The Professor to be nominated shall be Professor concerned with the speciality for which the selection is being 
made and that the Vice -Chancellor shall consult the Head of the Department and the Dean of college before 
nominating the Professor.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor, or in his absence, his nominee shall preside at the meetings of a Selection  
Committee:  
Provided that the meetings of the Selection Committee shall be fixed after prior consultation with, 
and subjec t to the convenience of Visitor’ s nominee and the persons nominated  by the Board under  
clause ( 2): 
Provided further that the proceedings of the Selection Committ ee shall not be valid unless, — 
(a) where the number of Visitor’ s nominee and the persons nominated by the Board is four in all, 
at least  three of them attend the meeting; and  
(b) where t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 22]
ominated by the Board is four in all, 
at least  three of them attend the meeting; and  
(b) where the number of Visitor’ s nominee and the persons nominated by the Board is three in all, 
at least two of them attend the meeting.  
(4) The meeting of a Selection Committee shall be convened by the Vice -Chancellor or  in his absence 
by his nominee.  
(5) The procedure to be followed by a Selection Committee in making recommendations shall be laid 
down in the Ordinances.  
(6) If the Board is unable to accept the recommendations made by a Selection Committ ee, it shall 
record its reasons and submit the case t o the Visitor for final orders.  
(7) Appointments to temporary posts shall be made i n the manner indicated below: — 
(i) If the temporary vacanc y is for a duration longer than one academic session, it shall  be filled 
on the advice of the Selection Committee in accordance with the procedure indi cated in the foregoing 
clauses:   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 23]
23 
 Provided that if the Vice -Chancellor is satisfied that in the interests of work it is necessary to fill 
the vacancy, the appointment m ay be made on a purely temporary basis by a local Selection 
Committee referred to in sub -clause ( ii) for a p eriod not exceeding six months.  
(ii) If the temporary vacancy is for a period less than a year, an appointment to such vacancy shall 
be made on the recommendation of a local Selection Committee consisting of the Dean of the college 
concerned, the Head of the Department and a nominee of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided that if the same person holds the offices of the Dean and the Head of the Department, 
the Selection Committee may contain two n ominees of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided further that in case sudden casual vacancies of teaching posts caused by death or any 
other reason, the Dean may, in consultation with the Head of the Department concerned, ma ke a 
temporary appointment for a month and report to the Vice -Chancellor and the Re gistrar about such 
appointment.  
(iii) No teacher appointed temporarily shall, if he is not recommended by a regular Selection 
Committee for appointment under the Statutes, b e continued in service on such t emporary 
employment, unless he is subsequently selected by a local Selection Committee or a regular Selection 
Committee, for a temporary or permanent appointm ent, as the case may be.  
Special mode of appointment  
19. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Statute 18, the Board may invite a person of high 
academic distinction and professional attainments to accept a post of Professor or Associate Professor or 
any other academic post in the University, as the case may be,  on such terms and conditions as it deems 
fit, and on the person agreeing to  do so appoint him to the post.  
(2) The Board may appoint a teacher or any other academic staff working in any other University or 
organisation for undertaking a joint project in a ccordance with the manner l
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 23]
y other University or 
organisation for undertaking a joint project in a ccordance with the manner laid down in the Ordinances.  
Appointment for a fixed tenure  
20. The Board may appoint a person selected in accordance with the procedure laid down in Statute 
18 for a fixed tenure on such terms and conditions as it deems fit.  
Reco gnised teachers  
21. ( 1) The qualifications of recognised teachers shall be such as may b e prescribed by the 
Ordinances.  
(2) All applications for the recognition of teachers shall be made in such manner as may be laid down 
in the Ordinances.  
(3) No teacher shall be recognised as a teacher except on the recommendation of a Selection 
Committee constituted for the purpose in the mann er laid down in the Ordinances.  
(4) The period of recognition of a teacher shall be determined by the Ordinances made in that beha lf. 
(5) The Academic Council may, by a special resolution passed by a majority of not less than  
two-thirds of the members present and voting, withd raw recognition from a teacher:  
Provided that no such resolution shall be passed until notice in writing has  been given to the person 
concerned calling upon him to show cause, within such time as may be specified in the notice, why such 
resolution should not be passed and until his objections, if any, and any evidence he may produce in 
support of them have been considered by the Academic Council.  
(6) Any person aggrieved by an order of withdrawal under clause ( 5) may, within three months from 
the date of communication to him of such order, appeal to the Board which may pass such o rders thereon 
as it thinks fit.   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 24]
24 
 Committees  
22. ( 1) The authorities of the University specified in section 16 may appoint as many standing or 
special committees as it may deem fit, and may appoint to such committees persons who are  not members 
of such authority.  
(2) Any such committee app ointed under clause ( 1) may deal with any subject d elegated to it subject 
to confirmation by t he authority appointing it.  
Terms and conditions of service and code of conduct of the teachers, etc.  
23. ( 1) All the teachers and other academic staff of the University shall, in the absence of any 
agreement to the contrary, be governed by the terms and conditions of service and code of conduct as are 
specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances and the R egulations.  
(2) Every teacher and member of the academic sta ff of the University shall be appointed on a written 
contract, the form of which shall b e prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(3) A copy of every contract referred to in clause ( 2) shall be deposited wi th the Registrar.  
Terms and conditions of service and code o f conduct of other employees  
24. All the employees of the University, other than the teachers and other academic staff of the 
University, shall, in the absence of any contract to the contrary, be governed by the terms and conditions 
of service and code of  conduct as are specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances and the Regulations.  
Seniority list  
25. ( 1) Whenever, in accordance with the Statutes, any person is to hold an office or be a member of 
an authority of the University by rotation according to senio rity, such seniority shall be determined 
according to the length of continuous service of such person in his grade and, in accordance with such 
other principles as the Board may, from time to time,  prescribe.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the Registrar to pr epare and maintain, in respect of each class of persons to 
whom the provisions of these Statutes apply, a complete and up -to-date seniority list in accord
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 24]
to 
whom the provisions of these Statutes apply, a complete and up -to-date seniority list in accordance wit h 
the provisions of clause ( 1). 
(3) If two or more persons have equal length of continuous service in a particular grade or the relative 
seniority of any person or persons is otherwise in doubt, the Registrar may, on his own motion and shall, 
at the request of any such person, submit the matter to the Board whose decision thereon shall be final.  
Removal  of employees of the University  
26. ( 1) Where there is an allegation of misconduct against a teacher, a member of the academic staff 
or other employee of the University, the Vice -Chancellor, in the case of the teacher or member of the 
academic staf f, and the authority competent to appoint (hereinafter referred to as the appointing authority) 
in the case of other employee, may, by order in writing, place such teacher, member of the academic staff 
or other employee, as the case may be, under suspensio n and shall forthwith report to the Board the 
circumstanc es in which the order was made:  
Provided that the Board may, if it is of the opinion, that the circumstances of the case do not warrant 
the suspension of the teacher or a member of the aca demic staff , revoke such order.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the terms of the contract of appointment or of any other 
terms and conditions of service of the employees, the Board in respect of teachers and other academic 
staff, and the appointing authorit y, in respect of other employees, shall have the power  to remove a 
teacher or a member of the academic staff, or as the case may be, other empl oyees on grounds of 
misconduct.  
(3) Save as aforesaid, the Board, or as the case may be, the appointing authority , shall not be entitled 
to remove any teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee except for a good cause  and after 
giving three months’ notice or on payment of three months ’ salary in  lieu thereof.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 24]
er 
giving three months’ notice or on payment of three months ’ salary in  lieu thereof.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 25]
25 
 (4) No teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall be removed under clause ( 2) or 
clause ( 3) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action propose d 
to be taken in regard to him.  
(5) The removal of a teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall take effect from 
the date on whic h the order of removal is made:  
Provided that where the teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee is under suspension 
at the time of his removal, such removal shall take effect from the da te on which he was placed under 
suspension.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this Statute, a teacher, member 
of the academic staff  or other employee may resign, — 
(a) if he is a permanent employee, only after giving thre e months’ notice in writing to the Board 
or the appointing authority, as the case may be, or by paying three months’ salary in lieu thereof;  
(b) if he is not a permanent employ ee, only after giving one month’ s notice in writing to the 
Board or, as the case  may be, the appointing authority or by paying o ne month’ s salary in lieu thereof:  
Provided that such resignation shall take effect only on the date on which the resignation is accepted 
by the Board or the appointing  authority, as the case may be.  
Honorary  degrees  
27. ( 1) The Board may, on the recommendation of the Academic Council and by a resolution passed 
by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the members present and voting, make proposals to the Visitor 
for the conferment of honorary degrees:  
Provided that in case of emergency, the Board may, on its o wn motion, make such proposals.  
(2) The Board may, by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the members 
present and voting, withdraw, with the previous sanction of the Vi sitor, any honorary degr ee conferred by 
the University.  
Withdrawal of degrees, etc.  
28. The Board may, by a 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 25]
orary degr ee conferred by 
the University.  
Withdrawal of degrees, etc.  
28. The Board may, by a special resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the 
members present and voting, withdraw any degree or academic distinction c onferred on, or any certificate 
or diploma granted to, any person by the University  for good and sufficient cause:  
Provided that no such resolution shall be passed until a notice in writing has been given to that person 
calling upon him to show cause withi n such time as may be specified in the notice why such  a resolution 
should not be passed and until his objections, if any, and any evidence he may produce in support of 
them, have been considered b y the Board.  
Maintenance of discipline a mong students of the University  
29. ( 1) All powers relating to discipline and disciplinary action in relation to students of the 
University shall vest in the Vice -Chancellor.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor may delegate all or any of his powers as he deems proper to such officers as 
he may specify in this behalf.  
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of his powers relating to the maintenance of discipline and 
taking such action, as may seem to him appropriate for the maintenance of discipline, the Vice -Chancellor 
may, in exercise  of his powers, by order, direct that any student or students be expelled, or rusticated, for 
a specified period, or be not admitted to a course or courses of study in a college, institution or 
Department of the University for a stated period, or be punish ed with fine for an amount to be specified in 
the order, or be debarred from taking an examination or examinations conducted by the University, 
college, institution or Department for one or more years, or that the results of the student or students 
concern ed in the examination or examinations in which he or t hey have appeared be cancelled.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 25]
elled.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 26]
26 
 (4) The Deans of colleges, institutions and Heads of teaching Departments in the University shall 
have the authority to exercise all such disciplinary powers over the stu dents in their respective colleges, 
institutions and teaching Departments in the University as may be necessary for the proper conduct of 
such colleges, institutions and teaching in the Departments.  
(5) Without prejudice to the powers of the Vice -Chancello r, the Deans and other persons specified in 
clause ( 4), detailed rules of discipline and proper conduct shall be made by the University. The Deans of 
colleges, institutions and Heads of teaching Departments in the University may also make the 
supplementary  rules as they deem necess ary for the aforesaid purposes.  
(6) At the time of admission, every student shall be required to sign a declaration to the effect that he 
submits himself to the disciplinary jurisdiction of the Vice -Chancellor and other authoritie s of the 
University.  
Maintenance of discipline a mong students of colleges, etc.  
30. All powers relating to discipline and disciplinary action in relation to students of a college or an 
institution maintained by the University, shall vest in the Dean of the  college or institution, as the case 
may be, in accordance with the procedur e prescribed by the Ordinances.  
Advisory Committee  
31. Every college or institution maintained by the University shall have an Advisory Committee 
consisting of not more than fiftee n persons which shall consist of, among others, three teachers including 
the Dean of the college or institution, and two teachers of the University nominated by the Board.  
Convocations  
32. Convocations of the University for the conferring of degrees or for other purposes shall be held in 
such manner as may b e prescribed by the Ordinances.  
Acting Chairman  
33. When no provision is made for a Chairman to preside over a meeting of any authority of the 
University or any committee of such authority 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 26]
an to preside over a meeting of any authority of the 
University or any committee of such authority or when the  Chairman so provided for is absent, the 
members present shall elect one from among themsel ves to preside at such meeting.  
Resignation  
34. Any member, other than an ex officio  member of the Board, Academic Council or any other 
authority of the University o r any committees of such authority may resign by letter addressed to the 
Registrar and the resignation shall take effect as soon as such letter is received by the Registrar.  
Disqualifications  
35. ( 1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of any of the 
authorities of the University, — 
(i) if he is of unsound mind;  
(ii) if h e is an undischarged insolvent;  
(iii) if he has been convicted by a court of law of an offence involving moral turpitude and 
sentenced in respect thereof to imprisonment for a peri od of not less than six months.  
(2) If any question arises as to whether a person is or had been subjected to any of  the 
disqualifications mentioned in clause ( 1), the question shall be referred to the Visitor and his decision 
thereon shall be final and no suit or other proceeding shall lie in any civil court against such decision.  
Residence cond ition for membership and  office  
36. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Statutes, a person who is not ordinarily resident in 
India shall be eligible to be an officer of the University or a member of any authority of the University.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 27]
27 
 Membership of authorities by virtu e of membership of other bodies  
37. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Statutes, a person who holds any post in the University 
or is a member of any authority of the University in his capacity as a member of a particular authority or 
as the holder of a particular appointment shall hold such office or membership only for so long as he 
continues to be a member of that particular authority or the holder of that particular a ppointment, as the 
case may be.  
Alumni Association  
38. (1) There shall be an Alumni Association for the University.  
(2) The subscription for membership of the Alumni Association shall b e prescribed by the 
Ordinances.  
(3) No member of the Alumini Associa tion shall be entitled to vote or stand for election unless he has 
been a member of the  Association for at least one year prior to the date of the election and is a degree 
holder of the University o f at least five years standing:  
Provided that the condition relatin g to the completion of one year’ s membership shall not apply in the 
case of th e first election.  
Students’ Council  
39. ( 1) There shall be constituted  in the University, a Students’ Council for every  academic year, 
consisting of — 
(i) the Director Instruction who shall be the Cha irman of the Students’ Council;  
(ii) all students who have won prizes in the previous academic year in the fields of studies, fine 
arts, sports and extension work;  
(iii) twenty students to be nominated by the Academic Council on the basis of merit in studies, 
sports, activities and all -round dev elopment of personality:  
Provided that any student of the University shall have the right to bring up any matter concerning the 
Universi ty before the Students’ Council if so permitted by the Chairman, and he shall have the right to 
participate in the discu ssions at any meeting when the matter is taken up for consideration . 
(2) The functions of the Students’ Council shall be to mak
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 27]
e matter is taken up for consideration . 
(2) The functions of the Students’ Council shall be to make suggestions to the appropriate authorities 
of the University in regar d to the programmes of studies, students ’ welfare and othe r matters of 
importance in regard to the working of the University in general and such suggestions shall be made on 
the basis of consensus of opinion  
 (3) The Students’ Council shall meet at least once in an academic year preferably  in the beginning of 
that year.  
Ordinances how made  
40. (1) The first Ordinances made under sub -section ( 2) of section 27 may be amended or repealed at 
any time by the Board  in the manner specified below.  
(2) No Ordinance in respect of the matters enumerat ed in section 27, other than those enumerated in 
clause ( n) of sub -section ( 1) thereof, shall be made by the Board unless a draft of such Ordinance has 
been pr oposed by the Academic Council.  
(3) The Board shall not have power to amend any draft of any Ordi nance proposed by the Academic 
Council under clause ( 2), but may reject the proposal or return the draft to the Academic Council for 
reconsideration, either in whole or in part, together with any amendment which the Board may suggest.  
(4) Where the Board h as rejected or returned the draft of an Ordinance proposed by the Academic 
Council, the Academic Council may consider the question afresh and in case the original draft is 
reaffirmed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the members present and voti ng and more than half 
the total number of members of the Academic Council, the draft may be sent back to the Board which 
shall either adopt it or refer it to the Visitor  whose decision shall be final.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 28]
28 
 (5) Every Ordinance made by the Board shal l come into e ffect immediately.  
(6) Every Ordinance made by the Board shall be submitted to the Visitor within two weeks from the 
date of its adoption. The Visitor shall have the power to direct the University within four weeks of the 
receipt of the Ordinance to suspend the operation of any such Ordinance and he shall, as soon as possible, 
inform the Board about hi s objection to the proposed Ordinance. The Visitor may, after receiving the 
comments of the University, either withdraw the order suspending the Ordinan ce or disallow the 
Ordinance, and his decision shall be final.  
Regulations  
41. ( 1) The authorities of the University may make Regulations consistent with the Act, the Statutes 
and the Ordinances for t he following matters, namely: — 
(i) laying  down the procedure to be observed at their meetings and the number of mem bers 
required to form a quorum;  
(ii) providing for all matters which are required by the Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances t o be 
prescribed by Regulations;  
(iii) providing for all other matters concerning such authorities or committees appointed by them 
and not provided for by the Act, th e Statutes or the Ordinances.  
(2) Every authority of the University shall make Regulations providing for the giving of notice to the 
members of suc h authority of the dates of meeting and of the business to be considered at meetings and 
for the keeping of a record of the proceedings of meetings.  
(3) The Board may direct the amendment in such manner as it may specify, of any Regulation made 
under the S tatutes or the an nulment of any such Regulation.  
Delegation of powers  
42. Subject to the provisions of the Act and the Statutes, any officer or authority of the University 
may delegate his or its powers to any other officer or authority or person under his or its respective 
control and subject to the condition that overall responsibility for the exercise of the powers so dele
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992.pdf - page 28]
trol and subject to the condition that overall responsibility for the exercise of the powers so delegated 
shall continue to vest in the officer or authority delegating such powers.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND -REVENUE ACT, 1881  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
PREAMBLE . 
PART I  
______  
CHAPTER I.  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS.  
1. Short title.  
    Local extent.  
    Commencement.  
2. Enactments repealed.  
3. Pending proceedings.  
4. Interpretation -clause . 
______  
PART II  
_______  
CHAPTER II.  
OF REVENUE -OFFICERS : THEIR  POWERS AND  PROCEDURE . 
5. Chief Controlling Revenue -authority.  
6. Revenue -officers.  
7. Appointment,  suspension and removal  of Commissioners,  Deputy and Assistant Commissioners.  
8. Appointment, suspension and removal of Tahsildars an d Naib Tahsildars.  
9. Persons holding office when Act comes into force.  
10. Power to appoint additional Commissioners, Deputy Commissioners  and Tahsildars.  
11. Chief Commissioner may invest Assistant  Commissioner  with powers of Deputy Commissioner.  
12. Officers transferred to retain powers with which they were  invested.  
13. Provision for discharge of duties of Deputy Commissioner  dying or being disabled.  
14. Chief Commissioner may alter l imits of district or tahsi l. 
15. Power to invest Revenue -officers, — 
with power conferred by Code of Civil Proc edure;  
with power t o delegate powers.  
16. Power of Deputy Commissioner s to distribute work.  
17. Power of superior Revenue -authorities to withdraw and transfer cases . 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 2]
2 
 SECTIONS.  
18. Power of Revenue -officers to enter on land, &c.  
19. Power to make rules to regulate procedure.  
20. Persons by whom appearances and applications may be made before and to Revenue -officers.  
Obligation of parties to attend  in person.  
21. Legal practitioner's or agent's fees not allowed unless for special reasons.  
22. Appeals.  
23. Limitation of appeals.  
24. Powers of revision of Commissioner and Deputy Commis sioner. 
25. Powers of revision or Chief Commissione r. 
26. Review of  orders.  
__________  
PART III.  
OF SURVEY AND SETTLEMENT.  
_______  
CHAPTER III.  
PRELIMINARY . 
27. Notification of revenue -survey.  
Effect thereof.  
28. Notification of settlement.  
Power to amend notification.  
29. Power to appoint Settlement -officers;  
and to suspend and remove them.  
30. Settleme nt-officer may be invested with powers of Deputy  Commissioner.  
31. Certain provisions of Chapter II applied to Settlement -officers.  
32. Appointment of Settlement -comm issioner;   
delegation to him of Chief Commissioner ’s powers.  
33. Power to invest Settlement -officers with Civil Court  powers.  
34. Chief  Settlement -officer to have powers of Deputy Commissioner.  
35. Appeals in suits specified in section 33 when to lie  to Chie f Settlement -officer.  
36. Division of civil work between Settlement -officers and ordinary Courts.  
37.  Provisions of section 31 not to apply to ce rtain suits.  
38.  Appeal,  reference and revision.  
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 3]
3 
 SECTIONS . 
39.  Duration of settle ment -operations.  
Cases pending at  close of settlement -operations.  
_________  
CHAPTER IV.  
OF DEMARCATlON.  
Unowned Lands.  
40. Settlem ent-officer to invite claims to lands appearing  to have no owner.  
41. Application of Act XXIII of 1863.  
42. Procedure when limited right over land established.  
Mahals.  
43. Power to form mahals.  
Excluded Lands.  
44. Settlement -officer may exclude any town or land from settlement -operations.  
Boundary -marks.  
45. Erection of new, and repair of existing, boundary -marks.  
_________  
CHAPTER V.  
OF THE ASSESSMENT OF LAND -REVENUE . 
46. Separate sum to  be assessed on every mahal.  
Progressive assessments.  
47. Matters as to which Chief Commissioner is to instruct  Settlement -officer.  
48. What land taken into account in asses sing mahal . 
49. Assessment to whom to be offered.  
50. Sub -settlem ent to be made with inferior proprietors when  settlement is made with superior.  
51. Power to give directions as to payment of certain profits of su perior proprietors.  
52. Power to make rules for reporting assessment for sanction.  
53. Offers of assessment to be made subje ct to revision and confirmation.  
54. Option to accept or refuse assessment.  
Mode of acceptance.   
55. Proprietor not accepting in manner prescribed may be deemed to have accepted.  
56. Effect of acceptance of assessment.  
Assessment may be rescinded by Chief Commissioner;  
or by Governor General in Council.  
Malguzars may object to continuance of assessment beyond term of settlement.  
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 4]
4 
 SECTIONS.  
57. Procedure when assessment is refused.  
58. Procedure when only some proprietors accept assessment.  
59. Procedure  on refusal of assessment in village in which superior and inferior rights co -exist.  
60. Procedure on refusal of assessment by inferior proprietors.  
61. Allowance to excluded proprietors.  
62. Excluded proprietors to have occupancy -rights in their sir -land.  
63. Aggregate amount of allowance granted to, and deduction from rent allowed to, excluded 
proprietor.  
64. Sub-settlement with malik -makbuzas and other like holders of land.  
65. Revenue payable under sub -settlement to be first charge on land.  
66. Settleme nt-officer to apportion assessment over lands held in severalty . 
67. to redistribute land accordi ng to custom.    
________  
 
CHAPTER VI . 
OF CERTAIN  INVESTIGATIONS BY THE SETTLEMENT -OFFICER AND THE PREPARATION OF THE 
RECORD -OF-RIGHTS.  
68. Settlement -officer to ascertain proprietors . 
69. to determine extent of sir -land. 
70. to decide disputes among shareholders regarding  management of mahal . 
71. to determine through what lambardars revenue shall be paid . 
72. to ascertain status and rents of tenants . 
73. Enquiry into claims to hold free from revenue as against Government.  
Power of Chief Commissioner to make rules.  
74. Enquiry as to claims to hold free from revenue as against malguzars.  
Chief Commissioner may make rules for disposal of such cases.  
75. Time from which orders under sections 73 and 74 take effect.  
76. Settlement -officer to decide what village -cesses are leviable . 
77. to determine certain disputes.  
78. Procedure in cases under sections 68,69,70,72 and 77, clause s (b), (c) and ( d). 
79. Record -of-rights.  
80. Chief Commissioner may make rules regarding record -of-rights.  
81. Record -of-rights to be made over to Deputy Commissioner.  
82. Effect of entries in record -of-rights.  
83. Suits to contest certain settlement decisions or entries.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 4]
n record -of-rights.  
83. Suits to contest certain settlement decisions or entries.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 5]
5 
 SECTIONS . 
84. R evision of record -of-rights by Chief Commissioner.  
85. Proceedings regarding  lands the property of Government.  
_______  
CHAPTER VII.  
OF SETTLEMENTS MADE BEFORE THIS  ACT COMES INTO FORCE.  
86. Former settlements deemed to have been made under this Act.  
87. Effect of awards of proprietary rights at such settlements.  
88. When suits for proprietary rights will lie in Civil Courts.  
89. Chief Commissioner may allot waste -land to malik -mak-buzas entitled thereto.  
________  
 PART IV.  
OF REVENUE -ADMINISTRATION . 
________  
CHAPTER VIII.  
OF THE COLLECTION OF LAND REVENUE . 
90. Power of Chief Commissioner to regulate payment of land -revenue.  
91. “Arrear.”  
“Defaulters.”  
Realization of Revenue from Malguzars.  
92. Tahasildar’s  statement of account to be conclusive evidence of arrear.  
93. Notice of demand.  
94. Processes fo r recovery of arrears.  
95. Arrest and imprisonment for recovery of arrear.  
96. Imprisonment of defaulter in civil jail.  
97. Procedure in sales of mo veable prop erty. 
98. Management of mahal, share of land attached u nder section 94( c). 
99. Effect of attachment.  
100. Profits of land how applied.  
101. Attachment when to cease.  
102. Transfer under section 94( d). 
  Joint and several liability not affected by transfer.  
103. Procedure after receipt of sanction to annulment of settlement.  
104. Case of a portion of a mahal being managed or farmed . 
105. Settlement on expiry of management or farm.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 6]
6 
 SECTIONS . 
106. Effect of annulment of settlement.  
107. Saving of rights in sir-land.  
108. Nature of estate taken by purchaser of land sold for arrears due thereon.  
109. Rules for sale of immoveable property.  
110. Pre -emption at sales.  
111. Application of proceeds of sale of immoveable property.  
112. Costs recoverable as part of a rrear.  
113. Matters as to which Chief Commissioner may make rules.  
114. Remedies open to person denying that sum demanded as an arrear is due.  
Realization of Revenue by Malguzars.  
115. Limitation of right to set -off, &c., in suit for arrears.  
116. Recovery  of arrear through Deputy Commissioner instead of by suit.  
117. Saving of right of malguzar to demand revenue of land assessed to revenue and held free.  
118. Limitation i n suits for revenue.  
Interest on Arrears.  
119. Interest on arrears.  
_______  
CHAPTER IX . 
OF REVENUE AND VILLAGE  RECORDS . 
120. Correction of record -of-rights.  
121. Revision of record in accordance with provision therein contained.  
122. Powers of Deputy Commissioner as to correction of entry or revision of record.  
123. Power to direct that rul e or custom entered in record -of-rights shall be enforced by Government.  
        Punishment of violation of such rule or custom.  
124. Suit to set aside proceedings under section 123.  
125. Powers of Chief Commissioner as to registration of changes after preparation of record -of-rights.  
126. P ossession of proprietary rights to be notified.  
       Notice to be given by guardian in case of minority o r idiotcy.  
127. Fine for neglect to give notice of possession.  
128. Obligation to aid in preparation of village -papers.  
129. Fees for recording changes;  
 from whom leviable.  
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 7]
7 
 SECTIONS . 
 130. Annual enquiry regarding land held free from revenue.  
Procedure on breach of conditions of grant.  
Procedure on expiry of term of grant.  
131. Inspection of revenue -recor ds. 
______  
CHAPTER X.  
OF CERTAIN ADDITIONAL  POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF REVENUE -OFFICERS . 
132. Purposes for which, when settlement is not in progress, Deputy Commissioner shall exercise    
Settlement -officers’ powers.  
133. Purposes for which officers may be invested with Settlement -officers’ powers.  
134. Cognizance of, and penalty for, offence of injuring boundary -marks.  
135. Procedure when person injuring cannot be found.  
136. Partition of a mahal into two mahals.  
______  
CHAPTER XI.  
VILLAGE -OFFICERS AND PATWARIS . 
137. Power to make rules as to officers.  
138. Duties of lambardars.  
139. Lambardars may recover fees and other charges from proprietors.  
140. Deputy Commissioner may alter channel through which malik -makbuza pays revenue.  
Effect of order for payme nt of revenue direct to Government.  
141. Duties of mukaddams.  
142. Liabilities imposed by law on landholders to attach to mukaddams.  
143. Power of mukaddams to recover certain expenses incurred.  
144. Chief Commissioner may make rules as to patwaris.  
145. C hief Commissioner may make rules for guidance of Deputy Commissioner in certain matters.  
146. Chief Commissioner may define duties of patwaris.  
  Patwaris’ papers to be public documents.  
147. Patwaris to produce papers for inspection, and to allow copies to be made.  
148. Existing officers confirmed.  
149. Lambardars’ and other officers’ dues recoverable as arrears.  
150. Holders of sir -land in Sambalpur to provide  for remuneration of mukaddams.  
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 8]
8 
 ______  
PART V.  
CHAPTER XII.  
MISCELLANEOUS . 
SECTIONS . 
151. Rig ht to mines and quarries.  
152. Exclusive jurisdiction of Revenu e-authorities.  
 Matters excepted from jurisdiction of Civil Courts.  
153. For what village -cesses suit lies.  
154. Limitation of claims for composition in case of waste -land demarcated as property of Gover nment. 
155. Restriction on Revenue and Settlement -officers trading and holding land.  
156. When mahal managed or farmed, or upon proclamation under section 98 or 103, rent payable to 
Deputy Commissioner.  
Payment to proprietor in anticipatio n of due date.  
157. Recovery of balances due by farmers.  
158. Recovery of revenue due when Act comes into force;  and of money payable under Act.   
159. Past proceedings for collection of revenue legalized.  
160. Chief Commissioner may empower persons by name , or confer powers on classes.  
161. Chief Commissioner may v ary or cancel orders.  
162. Chief Commissioner may make rules and attach penalty to breach thereof.  
______  
SCHEDULE —ENACTMENTS REPEALED . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 9]
9 
 THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND -REVENUE ACT, 1881  
ACT NO. XVIII OF 1881  
______  
PASSED BY THE GOVERNOR  GENERAL OF INDIA IN COUNCIL . 
(Received the assent of the Governor General on the  8th June , 1881 .) 
_______  
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to Land -revenue and the powers of 
Revenue -officers  in the Central Provinces.  
Preamble . WHEREAS  it is  expedient to consolidate and amend the law relating to                           
Land -revenue and to the  powers of Revenue -officers in the Central Provinces ; It is hereby enacted 
as follows:  — 
PART I.  
_______  
CHAPTER I.  
PRELIMINARY . 
1. Short title. — This Act may be called “The Central Provinces  Land -revenue Act, 1881 ”:                                
Local extent.  It extends to all the territories for the time being  under the administration of the Chief 
Commissioner  of the Central Provinces,  except those specified in Part  VI of the first schedule of the 
Scheduled Districts  Act 1874:   
Commencement . and it sh all come into force on such day as the  Chief Commissioner, with the 
previous sanction of the  Governor General in Council,  may direct by notification  in the local official 
Gazette.   
2. Enactment s repeal ed.—On and from such day the enactments mentioned in the schedule hereto 
annexed, so far as they  relate to the territories to which this Act extends , and  all other rules, regulations and 
enactments relating  to the settlement and collect ion of the land -revenue  in such territories, shall be repealed.  
3. Pending proceedings. —All proceedings relating to matters dealt with by this  Act and, when 
this Act comes into force, pending before officers by whom they would be cognizable  under this 
Act, shall  be deemed, so far as may be, to have been commenced hereunder.   
 
4. Interpretation -clause. —In this Act, unless there is something repugnant in the  subject or                                  
context,  — 
(1) “Assistant Commissioner” ;—“As
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 9]
in the  subject or                                  
context,  — 
(1) “Assistant Commissioner” ;—“Assistant Commissioner ” includes also “Extra A ssistant 
Commissioner”:  
(2) “ Legal practitioner” ;—“Legal practitioner ” means an advocate, vakil  or attorney  of any High 
Court, a plead er, mukhtar or revenue -agent:  
(3) “Village -cess” ;—“Village -cess” means any cess which a pe rson resident or holding lands in a 
village pays or renders to the proprietors as such of the village , and includes service rendered or 
things furnished as well as money paid : 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 10]
10 
 (4) “Recognized agent” —“Recognized agent ” means a person authorized in writing by any party 
to a proc eeding under  this Act to make appearances and applications and to do other acts on his behalf 
in such proceeding and  also belonging to any clas s which the Chief Commissioner may, from time to 
time, by notification in the official Gazette, declare in this behalf:  
(5) “Agricultural year ”—“Agricultural year" means the  year commen cing on  the first day of June, 
or on such other  date as the Chief Commissioner may,  in the case of  any specified district or districts, 
from time  to time,  appoint:  
      (6) “Sir-land” —“Sir-land” means (a) land recorded as “sir” in the papers of the last p receding 
settlement of the local area in which such land is situate; and ( b) land not so recorded, but which has 
been cultivated  by the proprietor or one of the proprietors thereof for a period  of not less than twelve 
consecut ive y ears; and (c) waste land which has been  broken up by the proprie tor or one of the 
propr ietors thereof and cultivated by him for a period of not less than six consecutive  years; an d (d) in 
Sambalpur, includes also  “ bhogra ” land.  
Explanation .—Land which has, after the date of such settlement, or the expiry of such period of 
twelve year s, or six years (as the case may be), been for a period of six consecutive year s unoccupied 
by such proprietor is not sir -land. Land is not unoccupied by the proprietor when it is leased out by him 
with an express reservation of his sir -rights:  
(7) “Mahal” —“Maha l” means any local  area held under a  separate e ngagement for the payment of 
the land -revenue  direct to Government, and Includes also any  local  area declared, under the provisions 
of this Act, to be a mahal:  
(8) “Village” —“Village ” includes any tract of land which,  at the last settlement of such land, has 
been recognized  as a village, or which the Chief Commissioner  may, from time to time, declare to be a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 10]
n recognized  as a village, or which the Chief Commissioner  may, from time to time, declare to be a 
village for the  purposes of this Act : 
(9) “Malguzar” —“Malguzar ” means a person  who, under the  provision s of this Act, has accepted, 
or is to be deemed to have accepted, the assessment of a mahal, and includes his representatives and 
assigns; and also  any person with whom a settlement has been made before this Act comes into force, 
and his representatives and assigns:  
(10) “Malik -makbuza” —“Malik -makbuza” means any person owning one or more plots of land 
assessed with revenue in a mahal; but it does not  include a malguzar or inferior proprietor:  
(11) “Lambardar” —“Lambardar ” means a person appointed in  manner prescribed by this Act to 
represent the proprietary body of a mahal in its relations with the Government:  
(12) “Sub -lambardar” —“Sub-lambardar ” means  a person so ap pointed to represent the inferior 
proprietary body of a mahal in its relations with the superior proprietors:  
(13) “Mukaddam” —“Mukaddam” means the executive headman of a village, appointed in manner 
prescribed by this Act:  
(14) “Tenant” —“Tenant ” means a person wh o holds land of another person, and is, or but for a 
special contract would be, liable to pay rent for such land to such other person; but it does not include 
a farmer, mortgagee or the  kadar of proprietary rights.  
 
Explanation. —An inferior proprietor is not, as such, a tenant:  
 
(15) “Rent” —“Rent ” means whatever is paid, delivered or rendered, in money, kind or service, 
by a tenant on  account of the use or occupation of land let to him:  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 11]
11 
 (16) “Absolute occupancy -tenant” —“Absolute occupancy -tenant ” means, i n reference to any 
land, a tenant who, at a settlement of  such land made before this Act comes into f orce, or after such 
a settlement but before this Act  comes into force, was recorded, by order of a Revenue or 
Settlement -officer,  in respect of such land, as an “absolute occupancy -raiyat, ” or in terms 
equivalent thereto:  
(17) “Record -of-rights” —“Record -of-rights ” includes the  supplementary administration -paper 
prepared at or after the time of making a  settlement before this  Act comes into force.  
_________  
PART II.  
__________  
CHAPTER II. 
OF REVENUE -OFFICERS : THEIR  POWERS  AND  PROCEDURE . 
5. Chief controlling  Revenue -authority .— The Chief Commissioner shall, subject to the  control of 
the Governor General in Council, be the Chief Controlling Revenue -authority.   
6. Revenue -officers. —Besides the Chief Commissioner, there shall be the following classes of                
Revenue -officers (namely): — 
(a) Commissioners, who, subject to the control of the Chief Commissioner, shall be the  Chief 
Revenue -authorities within their respective divisions:  
(b) Deputy Commissioners, who, subject to th e control of the Commissioner, shall be the  chief 
Revenue -authorities within their respective  districts:  
(c) Assistant Commissioners, who shall be subordinate to, and  under the control of, the  Deputy 
Commissioners of the districts to which they  are respecti vely attached:   
(d) Tahsildars, who, subject to the control of the Deputy  Commissioner, shall  be the  Chief 
Executive Revenue -authorities in the tahsils  to which they are respectively attached : 
(e) Naib Tahsildars, who shall be subordinate to the Tahsildars of the tahsils to which they are 
respectively attached.  
7. Appointment, suspension and remov al of Commissioners, Deputy and Assistant 
Commissioners. —Subject to the control of the Governor General in Council, the Chief Commissio
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 11]
tant 
Commissioners. —Subject to the control of the Governor General in Council, the Chief Commissioner 
shall ap point, and may suspend or remove, Commissioners, Deputy Commissioners and Assistant 
Commissioners.  
8. Appoint ment, suspension and removal of Tahsildars and Naib Tahsildars. —The Chief 
Commissioner shall appoint, and may suspend or remove, Tahsildars ; and may also  make rules for 
regulating the appointment, duties, suspension and removal of Naib Tahsildars.  
9. Persons holding office when Act comes into force. —All Commissioners, Deputy Commissioners, 
Assistant Commissioners, Tahsildars and Naib Tahsildars holding office as such in the territories to which 
this Act extends when this Act comes into force  shall be d eemed to have been appointed hereunder . 
10. Power to appoint additional Commissioners, Deputy Commissioners and Tahsildars. —The 
Chief Commissioner may appoint any person to be an additional Tahsildar in any tahsil, or,  with the 
sanction of the Governor Gen eral in Council, to be an additional Commissioner or additional Deputy 
Commissioner in any division or district, and may suspend or remove any person so appointed, but subject, 
in the case of an additional Commissioner or additional Deputy Comm issioner, to  the like sanction .  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 12]
12 
 The Chief Commissioner may invest any additional Commissioner, Depu ty Commissioner or Tahsildar 
appointed under this section with all or any of the powers conferred by this Act on a Commissioner , Deputy 
Commissioner or Tahsildar, as th e case may be.  
11. Chief Commissioner may invest Assistant Commissioner with powers of Deputy 
Commissioner. —The Chief Commissioner may invest any Assistant Commissioner attached to a district 
with all  or any of the powers conferred by this Act on Deputy Co mmissioners.  
12. Officers transferred to retain powers with which they were invested. —Whenever any Assistant 
Commissioner, Tahs ildar or N aib Tahsildar is transferred from one district or tahsil to another, he shall, 
unless the Chief Commissioner otherwise directs, exercise in the dist rict or tahsil to which he is transferred 
all the powers with which he was, under any provision of this Act, invested by the Chief Commissioner in 
the district or tahsil from which he is transferred.  
13. Provision for discharge  of duties of Deputy Commissioner dying or being disabled. —When a 
Deputy Commissioner dies or is dis able from performing his duties, such officer as the Chief  Commissioner 
may by rule direct shall take executive charge of his district, and shall be deemed to be a Deputy 
Commissioner under this Act, until a successor to the Deputy Commissioner so dying or disabled  is 
appointed and such successor takes charge of his office, or until the person so disabled resumes charge of 
his office.  
14. Chief commissioner m ay alter limits of district or tahsil. —The Chief Commissioner may, from 
time to time, by notification in the official Gazette , alter the  limits of any district or tahsil, create new 
districts or tahsils  and abolish existing districts or tahsils.  
15. Power  to invest Revenue -officers .—The Chief Commissioner may, subject to the control of the 
Governor General in Council, invest  any Revenue -officer with any of the following power
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 12]
ol of the 
Governor General in Council, invest  any Revenue -officer with any of the following powers: — 
With power conferred by Code of Civil Procedure ; for the purpose of  disposing of cases under 
this  Act, any power conferred by the Code of Civil Pro cedure on a Civil Court;  
with power  to delegate power s, ower  to delegate to any Revenue -officer subordinate to him the 
exercise of any power of performance of any duty conferr ed or imposed on him by this  Act; 
and, subject to the like control , may determine  the Revenue -officer by whom any case or class of  
cases for which no express provision in this behalf is  made in this Act shall be disposed of.  
16. Power of Deputy Commissioner to distribute work. —Subject to any rules which the Chief 
Com missioner  may make in this behalf, a Deputy Commissioner  may— 
(a) refer any cas e to any Revenue -officer subor dinate to him for investigation and report , or, if such 
officer has power to dispose of such case, for disposal; or  
(b) direct that any Revenue -officer subordinate to  him shall, without such reference, deal with  any 
case or class of cases arising within any  specified area, and either investigate and  report on such case 
or class, or, if he has  power, dispose of it himself.  
The subordinate Revenue -officer shall submit his  report on any case referred to him under this section  
for report to the Deputy Commissioner, or otherwise , as may be directed in the order of reference; an d the  
officer receiving such report may, if he has power to  dispose of the case, dispose of the same, or may return  
it for further investigation to the officer submitting  the report, or may hold such investigation himself.   
17. Power of superior Revenue -authorities to withdraw and transfer cases. —The Chief 
Commissioner, the Commissioner  or the Deputy Commissioner may withdraw any case  pending before any 
Revenue -officer subordinate to  him, and eithe r dispose of it himself, or refer it for  dis
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 12]
e any 
Revenue -officer subordinate to  him, and eithe r dispose of it himself, or refer it for  disposal to any other 
Revenue -officer subordinate to  him and having power to dispose of the same . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 13]
13 
 18. Power of Revenue -officers to enter on land, &c. —All Revenue -officers a nd persons acting under  
their orders may, in the performance of any duty under this Act, enter upon and survey land, and demarcate 
boundaries, and do all other acts necessary to  the business in which they are engaged.  
19. Power to make rules to regulate procedure. —The Chief Commissioner may, with the previous 
sanction of the Governor Gene ral in Council , make rules consistent with this Act for regulatin g the 
procedure of Revenue -officers in cases for which  a procedure is not prescribed by this A ct, and may,  by 
any such rule, direct t hat any provisions of the  Code of Civil Procedure shall apply, with or without  
modification, t o all or any classes of cases before Revenue -officers. 
20. Persons by whom appearances and applications may be made before and to Revenue -
officers. —All appearances before, applications to, and acts to be done before, a ny Revenue -officer under 
this Act may be made or done — 
(a) by the pa rties themselves ; or, 
(b) with the permission of the officer, by their recognized  agents or any legal practitioner:   
Obligation of parties to attend in person . Provided that the employment of a legal practi tioner o r 
recognized agent shall not excuse the per sonal attendance of a pa rty to any proceeding in cases where s uch 
attendance is required by any order of  the Revenue -officer . 
21. Legal practitioner’s or agent ’s fees not allowed unless for special reasons. —The fees of a legal 
practitioner or recognized agent shall not be allowed as costs before any Reve nue-officer  unless such officer 
considers, for reasons to be recorded by him in writing, that such fees should be allowed . 
22. Appeals. —An appeal shall lie against every decision or order under this A ct. 
 (a) when such decision or or der is passed by any  Revenue -offic er subordinate to the Deputy  
Commissioner, except an Assistant Commis sioner  exercising the powers of 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 13]
bordinate to the Deputy  
Commissioner, except an Assistant Commis sioner  exercising the powers of a Deputy  Com missioner, —
to the Deputy Commis sioner ; 
(b) when such decision or order is passed by a  Deputy Commissioner, or by an Assistant  
Commissioner exercising the powers of a  Deputy Commissioner, whether in the first  instance or on 
appeal, —to the Commissioner  of the division;   
(c) when such decision or order is passed on appeal  or otherwise by the Commissioner of a               
division, —to the Chief  Commissioner:  
Provided that in no case shall a third appeal be allowed.  
23. Limitation of appeal s.— No appeal shall lie — 
(a) in the Court of the Deputy Commissioner or an Assistant Commissioner exercising the powers 
of a Deputy Commissioner —after the expiration of thirty days from the date of the decision or order 
complained of; or  
(b) in the Court of the Commissioner —after the expiration of sixty days from such date; or  
(c) in the Court of the Chief Commissioner —after the expiration of ninety days fr om such date.  
In computing such periods of limitation, and in all respects not herein specified, the provisions of the Indian 
Limitation Act, 1877, shall apply.  
24. Powers of revision of Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner. —Any Commissioner or 
Deputy Comm issioner  may at any time, for the purpose of satisfying himself  as to the legality or propriety 
of any order passed by,  and as to the regularity of the proceedings of, any  Revenue -officer subordinate to 
him, call for and examine  the record of any case pend ing before, or disposed  of by, such officer, and may 
pass such order in  reference thereto as he thinks fit :  Provided that he  shall not under this section modify or 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 14]
14 
 reverse any  order affecting any question of right between private  persons, without having given to the 
parties interested  reasonable notice to appear and be heard in support of  such order.  
25. Powers of revision or Chief Commissioner. —The Chief Commissioner may at any time call  for 
and examine the record of any case pending before, or disposed of by, any Revenue -officer, and may pass 
such order in reference thereto as he thinks fit:  
Provided that no order affecting any question of right between private persons shall be passed under 
this section unless the  Chief Commissioner has given the parties  interested an opportunity of being heard.  
26. Review of orders.  —Every Revenue -officer may, either on his own  Motion or on the application 
of any party interested, review, and on so reviewing modify, reverse or confirm,  orders passed by himself 
or by any of his predecessors  in office:  
Provided as follows — 
(1) when a Commissioner or Deputy Commissioner  thinks it necessary to review any order which 
he has  not himself passed, and when an officer under the  rank of a Deputy Commissioner proposes to 
review any  order, whether  passed by himself or by any predecessor,  he shall first obtain the sanction of 
the officer to  whom he is immediately subordinate:   
(2) no order shall be modified or reversed unless  reasonable notice has been given to the parties 
interested  to appear and be heard in support of such order:  
(3) no order against which an appeal has been preferred  shall be reviewed while such appeal is 
pending:  
(4) no order affecting  any question of right between  private persons shall be reviewed except on 
the application of a party to the proceedings; and no application  for the review of such an order shall 
be entertained unless it is made within ninety days from  the passing of the order, or unless the applicant  
satisfied the Revenue -officer that he had sufficient  cause for not making the application within such 
pe
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 14]
ed the Revenue -officer that he had sufficient  cause for not making the application within such 
period.  
For the purposes of this section, the Deputy Commissioner  shall be deemed to be the successor in 
office  of any Revenue -officer who has left the district or has  ceased to exercise powers as a Revenue -
officer, and to  whom there is no successor in office.  
______  
PART III.  
OF SURVEY AND SETTLEMENT . 
______  
CHAPTER III.  
PREL IMINARY . 
27. Notification of revenue -survey . Effect thereof .—Whenever it appears to the Chi ef Commis sioner  
that a revenue -survey should be made in any local ar ea, he shall publish a  notification in the official Gazette 
directing that such s urvey be made, and cause translations of such notification in the language  of the district 
to be posted up in conspicuous places in such area; an d thereupon a ll officers in charge of such s urvey, their 
assistants, servants, agents and workmen may enter upon the lands to be surveyed, a nd erect survey -marks, 
and do all other acts necessary for  making the survey.  
28. Notification  of settlement. —When any local  area  is to be settled, the Chief Commissioner may, 
with the previous sanction  of the Governor General in Council, issue a notification of settlement, and in 
such notification shall — 
(a) defin e the local area to be settled;  
(b) specify the operat ions which are to be carried  out in the settlement;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 15]
15 
 Power to amend notification. —and may from time to time, with the like sanction , amend, alter or 
cancel such notification.  
Every such notification, amendment, alteration  and cancellation shall be published in the local official  
Gazette.   
29. Power to appoint Settlement -officers .—The Chief Commissioner may from tim e to time appoint 
one or more officers (hereinafter called Settlement -officers) to make the settlement of such  area; and when 
he appoints  more than one such officer,  he shall appoint one of them (hereinafter called the Chief 
Settlement -officer) to control such settlement, an all  other officers appointed for the purposes of such 
settlement  shall be subordinate to the Chief Settlement -officer.  
and to suspend and remove them .—The Chief Commissione r may suspend or remove  any officer 
appointed under this section . 
30. Settlement -officer may  be invested with powers of Deputy Commissioner. —During the 
progres s of the settlement of any  local ar ea, the  Chief Commissioner may invest any  Settlement -officer 
within such area with all or any of  the powers of a Deputy Commissioner under this Act,  to be ex ercised 
by him in such classes of cases as the  Chief Commissioner may from time to time direct.  
31. Certain provisions of Chapter II applied to Settlement -officers. —The provisions of section 
eleven and sections  fifteen to twenty -six, both inclusive, shall apply,  mutatis mutandis, to Settlement -
officers and to proceedings  before them, the expression “Settlement -officer ” being read for the expressions 
“Assistant  Commissioner ” and “Revenue -officer, ” and the  expression  “Chief Settlement -officer ” for the 
expression “Deputy Commissioner, ” wherever those expressions  occur:  
Provided that an appeal from any appealable order  passed by a subordinate Settlement -officer shall lie  
to the Chief Settlement -officer if preferred within sixty  days from the date of such order:  
Provided also that no appeal s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 15]
fficer if preferred within sixty  days from the date of such order:  
Provided also that no appeal shall lie from any  decision of a  Chief Settlement -officer which c an be  
called in question in a  Civil Court. 
32. Appoint ment  of Settle ment -commissioner .—The Chief Commissioner may, from time to  time, 
with the previous sanction of the Governor  General in Council,  
(a) appoint a Settlement -commissioner, and transfer  to him,  within any local area under settlement,  
all or any of the powers which the Commissioner  of the division, if the land to be  settled were wholly 
situate within such division,  would otherwise exercise under this Act  in matters connected with such 
settlement;  and 
(b) delegation to  him of Chief Commissioner’s powers.  delegate to the Settlement -commissioner 
such of his own powers in regard to matters connected with such settlement as he thinks fit.  
33. Powe r to invest Settlement -officers with Civil  Court pow ers.—When any local area is under  
settlement,  the Chief Commissioner may invest any subordinate Settlement -officer with the powers of any 
of the first five  grades of Courts described in section four of the  Central Provinces Courts ’ Act, 1865, and 
the Chief Settlement -officer with the powers of a Court of a  Deputy Commissioner described in the same 
Act, sections twelve, nineteen and twenty, for the trial, in  the first instance, of any of the following classes 
of suits instituted within such area (namely): — 
(a) suits for arrears of rent due on account of any right of pasturage, forest -rights, fisheries or the 
like; 
(b) suits by lambardars for  arrears  of revenue payable  through them by the  proprieto rs whom they        
represent;  
(c) suits by proprietors for their share of the profits  of an estate or any part thereof after payment· 
of the  revenue and v illage-expenses, or for a settlement of  accounts;   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 15]
 accounts;   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 16]
16 
 (d) suits by muafidars or assignees of revenue for  arrears of revenue owing to them as such  
muafidars  or assignees;  
(e) suits by superior proprietors for arrears of  revenue due to them as such superior proprietors;  
(f) suits by proprietors and others in receipt  of the rent of land against any agents employed by  them 
in the management of land or collectio n of rents, or a gainst the sureties of such agents, for money  
received or accounts kept by such agents in the course  of such employment, or for papers in  their 
possession;  
     (g) suits regarding any matter which a Settlement -officer is required to decide or to enter in the 
record -of-rights,  and of which Civil Courts can take cognizance;  
     (h) suits relating to land, or the rent, profits or  occupation of land.  
34. Chief Settlement -officer to have powers of Deputy Commissioner. —When the Chief 
Commissioner invests any  subordinate Settlement -officer with the powers of a  Civil Court for the trial of 
any of the suits mentioned  in section thirt y-three, the Chief Settlement -officer to whom such Settlement -
officer is subordinate shall have  the powers of the Court  of a Deputy Co mmissioner  described in the Central 
Provinces Courts ’ Act, 1865,  sections twelve, nineteen and twenty, with reference  to proceedings be fore, 
or decrees and order s of, such  settlement -officer in such suits.  
35. Appeals in suits specified in section  33 when to lie to Chief Settlement -officer. —When any 
local  area is under settlement and  Settlement -office rs have  been invested with the powers  mentione d in 
section thirty -three in such local area,  the Chief Commissioner may, with respect to all or to  any of the suits 
specified in that section, declare that  all or any of the decrees and orders passed in exercise  of the powers 
of Courts of the first four grades aforesaid,  by Assistant Commissioners or Tahsildars not  being Settlement -
officers, shall be appeal able to the  Ch
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 16]
istant Commissioners or Tahsildars not  being Settlement -
officers, shall be appeal able to the  Chief Settlement -officer, and not to the Deputy Com missioner  of the 
district.  
36. Division of civil work between Settlement -officer s and ordinary Courts. —When  any local area 
is under settlement and the Settlement -officers therein have be en invested with powers under section thirty -
three, the Chief Commis sioner  may withdraw f rom the jurisdiction of the  ordinary Civil Courts within such 
area the classes of suits which Settlement -officers have power to dispose  of under that section, or he may 
direct that, in respect  of such suits, the Settlement -officers shall have concurrent  jurisdiction with the 
ordinary Civil Courts:   
Provided that no proceedings which have  been  inadvertently or erroneously taken before the Civil  Court 
shall be deemed to be i nvalid merely on the  ground that, by the Chief Commissioner's order, they  should 
have been taken before a Settlement -officer.   
37. Provisions of section 31 not to apply to certain suits. —Nothing in section thirty -one shall apply 
to suits and appeals or other proceedings instituted before, or determined by, Settlement -officers in  
pursuance of powers conferred upon them under section thirty -three, thirty -four or thirty -five. 
38. Appeal, reference and revision. —Except as provided in sections thirty -three, t hirty -four and 
thirty -five, the decrees and orders of  a Settlement -officer passed, whether in the first instance or on appeal, 
in exercise of the powers of a  Civil Court of any grade, shall, for the purposes of appeal, reference and 
revision, be deemed to be decrees  and orders of a Civil Court of such grade, and no appeal shall lie under 
the provisions of section twenty -two from such decrees  or orders.  
39. Duration of settlement -operations .—Every settlement notified under section twenty -eight shall 
be deem ed to  be in progress until the Chief Commissioner, by not
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 16]
nder section twenty -eight shall 
be deem ed to  be in progress until the Chief Commissioner, by notification in the official  Gazette, 
declares that it is completed.  
Cases pending at close of settlement -operations. —When the settlement of any local area has  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 17]
17 
 been notified as completed, all the powers exercised by the  Settlement -officers in such area shall cease, 
and a ll suits and applications pending before such officers  shall be transferred to such of the Courts 
ordinarily  having jurisdiction in such cases as the Commissioner  of the division di rects; or, if there are 
no such  Courts, shall be disposed of in such manner as the  Chief Commissioner directs.   
______  
CHAPTER IV.  
OF DEMARCATION.  
Unowned Lands.  
40.  Settlement -officer to invite claims to lands appearing to have no owner. —When any local 
area is under settlement, the Settlement -officer shall make lists of all lands in such area which appear 
to him to have no lawful owner, and shall thereupon issue a notification declaring his inten tion to 
demarcate such lands as the property  of the Government and inviting every person having claims to or 
over them to present in his court, within three months from the date of the notification, a petition in 
writing setting forth such claims and the respective grounds thereof.  
41. Application of Act XXIII of 1863. —Every such notification shall be deemed to  be an 
advertisement under Act No. XXIII of 1863  (to provide f or the ad judication of claims to waste  lands), 
section one;   
the demarcation of such lands shall be deemed  to be a disposition of them within the meaning of  
that Act;   
the Settlement -officer shall exercise all the powers  vested in the Collector by that Act;  and  
claims to or over t he land comprised in such notification  shall be dealt with as nearly as may be in  
the manner prescrib ed in that Act.  
42. Procedure when limited right over land established .—Whenever a claim to the exercise or 
enjoyment  of any right (not a mounting to the right of exclusive  possession) in, to or over, any land 
comprised  in such notification is established, either before the  Settlement -officer or before the Court 
constituted  under the said Act No. XXIII of 1863, section s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 17]
ettlement -officer or before the Court 
constituted  under the said Act No. XXIII of 1863, section seven,  the Settlement -officer may assign to 
the claimant as  his property a definite portion of such land, or, with  the sanction of the Chief 
Commissioner, he may  otherwise compensate the claimant; and such assignment  or compensation shall 
be held to extinguish all  claims on account of such exercise or enjoyment.   
Mahals.  
43. Power to form mahal s.—The Settlement -officer may declare any local are a to be a mahal.  
Exclu ded Lan ds. 
44. Settlement -officer may exclude any town or land from settlement -operations .—For the 
purpose of excluding from all or any  of the operations of the settlement any town or any land from 
which the owner can derive no profit, the Settlement -officer may mark off the site and determine the 
limits of such town or land:  
Provided that no land in respect of which land -revenue  is payable at the date of the notification  
issued under section twenty -eight shall, under this  sectio n, be exempted from assessment without the  
sanction of the Chief Commissioner.  
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 18]
18 
 Boun dary-marks.  
45. Erection of new, and repair of existing, boundary -marks. —When any local area is under 
settlement, the  Settlement -officer may order all persons who have proprietary ri ghts in the land 
comprised in such area to erect boundary -marks of such desc ription and at  such places as he thinks 
necessary in order to define  the limits of the mahals, fields or other lands in their  possession , or to 
repair boundary -marks already existing;  and may fix a reasonable time for obeying his  order;   
and if his order is not o beyed within such time,  may cause such marks to be erected or repaired 
under  his own orders, and may recover the cost of such  erection or repair from the perso ns against 
whom  his order was made, in such proportion as he thinks  fit.  
_______  
CHAPTER V.  
OF THE ASSESSMENT OF LAND -REVENUE.  
46. Separate sum t o be assessed on every mah al. Progressive assessments .—On every maha l a 
definite an d separate sum  shall be assessed as land -revenue; but the sum so assessed may be reduced 
in such manner and to such extent as the Chief Commissioner thinks fit, for any period not exceeding 
ten years from the date on which the assessment takes effect.  
47. Matters as to which C hief Commissioner is to inst ruct Settlement -officer. —The Chief 
Commissioner may from time to  time, with the previous sanction of the Governor General  in Council, 
give instructions to the Settlement -officer  as to the principl e on which land -revenue i s to be assessed, 
and as to the sources of miscellaneous  income to be taken into account in the assessment.  
48. What la nd taken into account in asse ssing mah al.—In assessing a ma hal all land situate t herein  
shall be taken into account except the following (that is to say): — 
(a) land purchased free from revenue under any  rules for the time being in force to regulate  the sale 
of wast e-lands;   
(b) land in respect of which the revenue has been  redeemed under any rules fo
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 18]
 
of wast e-lands;   
(b) land in respect of which the revenue has been  redeemed under any rules for the t ime being in 
force;  
(c) land excluded from assessment under section  forty -four;  
(d) land in respect of which a claim to hold it free  from revenue as against the Government is  
established under the provisions hereinafter  contained;  
(e) land which the Chief Commissioner, su bject t o the control of the Governor General in  Council , 
may from time to time exempt from assessment.  
49. Assessment to whom to be offered. —The assessment of every mahal shall be offered  to the 
entire proprietary body of such mahal: provided  that, when superior  and inferior proprietary  rights           
co-exist in the same ma hal, the Settlement -officer  may, subject to such rules as the Chief Commissioner 
may make in this behalf, determine whether  the assessment shall be offered to the superior or to  the 
inferior  proprietors.  
Subject to such rules as the Chief Commissioner  may make in this behalf, the Settlement -officer 
may determine the manner and proportion in which the  proprietary profits of the maha1 shall be allotted 
between  the superior and the inferior prop rietors .  
When a proprietor has mortgaged his rights in  any maha l, and the mortgagee has entered into 
possession,  such mortgagee, so long as he is in possession,  shall, for the purposes of this section, stand 
in the  place of the mortgagor.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 19]
19 
 50. Sub-settlement to be made  with  inferior proprietors when settlement is made with superior. —  
When in a mahal in which superior and inferior  proprietors co -exist, the Settlement -officer makes a 
settlement with the superior proprietors, he shall ma ke on their behalf a sub -settlement with the                  
inferio r proprietors, by which such inferior proprietors shall be bound to pay to the superior proprietors 
an annual revenue equal to the land -revenue with which  the mah al is assessed and to the profit s to 
which the  superior proprietors are entitled under section forty -nine. 
51. Power to  give directions  as to  payment of  certain pr ofits of superior  proprietors. —When in 
any such  mahal the settlement is  made with the inferior proprietors, the Settlement -officer  may direct that 
the profits to which the  superi or proprietors are entitled under section forty -nine,  shall be paid by the inferior 
proprietors direct to such  superior proprietors, or that such profits shall be collected  as if they were land -
revenue  and shall be paid  to the superior proprietors from the Government  Treasury.  
52. Power to m ake rules for reporting assessment for sanction. —The Chief Commissioner may 
make rules prescribing  the manner in which the Settlement -officer  shall report for sancti on his rates and 
method of  assessment; and no assessment sh all be offered without the previous sanction of the Chief 
Commissioner.   
53. Offe rs of assessment to be made s ubject to  revision and confirmation. —In making any offer of 
assessment the Settle ment-officer shall state that it is made subject to con firmation by the Governor General 
in Council, and also to revision by the Chief Commissioner at any time before such confirmation is received.  
54. Option to accept or refuse assessment. —It shall be in the o ption of the persons to whom an 
assess ment is offered to accept or refuse the same.   
Mode of accepta nce.—If they are willing to
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 19]

assess ment is offered to accept or refuse the same.   
Mode of accepta nce.—If they are willing to accept it, they shall make and sign an acceptance in 
writing, in such form as the Chief Commissioner may from time to time prescribe in this behalf,  and deliver 
the same to the Settlement -officer. 
55. Propriet or not accepting  in manner  prescribed may be deemed to have  accepted. —Any 
proprietor who, within such reasonable  period as may be specified by the Chief Commissioner,  fails to  
make, sign and deliver such acceptance, or to  inform the Settlement -officer that he refuses the proposed 
assessment, shall, if the Settlement -officer by an  order in writing so directs, be deemed to have accepted  
such assessment.  
56. Effect of acceptance o f assess ment.—Whenever the assessment of a ma hal has been  accepted 
under this Act, the persons who have  accepted it shall be bound to pay the amount thereof  from such date 
and for such term as the Chief Commissioner  may appoint in this behalf, or, if at the expiry of that term no 
new assessment has been made  and is ready to take effect, until a  new assessment has  been made and is 
ready to take effect: Provided as  follows:  — 
Assessm emt may be rescinded  by Chief Com missioner;  or by Governor  General in  Council. — 
1st—any assessment may be rescinded by the  Chief Comm issioner at any time before it has been  
confirmed by the Governor General in Council;  
2ndly—the Governor General in Council may rescind any assessment submitted to him for 
confirmation;  
Malguzr s may object to continuance of assessment beyond term of settlement. — 
3rdly—if all the ma lguzars of a mah al, six months before the expiry of the term fixed under this section,  
apply in writing to the Deputy Commissioner stating  that they are unwilling that  the assessment should  
continue in force beyond the expiry of such term, the  assessment shall, on the expiry of such term, cease to  
be in force.   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 19]
the  assessment shall, on the expiry of such term, cease to  
be in force.   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 20]
20 
 57. Procedure when assessment is refused. —Where there is but one class of proprietors in  a mahal, 
and all refuse to accept in manner required by section fifty -four the assessment offered, the Settlement -
officer may, with the previous sanction of the  Chief Commissioner, exclude them from settlement  for a 
period not exceeding thirty years from t he date  of such exclusion, and may either let the mahal in  farm, or 
take it under direct management.  
58. Procedure when  only some proprietors accept assessment .—If some of the proprietors consent, 
and some refuse, so to accept the assessment offered, the Settle ment -officer may, with the previous sanction 
of the Chief Commissioner, if the interest of the recusant proprietors in the lands taken into account in the 
assessment consists entirely of lands held by them separately form the other proprietors, exclu de such 
recusant proprietors from settlement for a period not exceeding thirty years fr om the date of such exclusion, 
and either let their lands in farm or take such lands under direct management.  
In other cases the assessment of the entire mahal  shall be offered to the proprietors who consented to  
accept the assessment when originally offered, and if  they refuse it the mahal shall be dealt with under the  
provisions of section fifty -seven.  
When the recusant proprietors are excluded under  this section, the lands of the proprietors who 
consented  to accept the assessment originally offered shall be  deemed to be a separate mahal, and shall be 
assessed  as such; and such assessment shall be offere d to the  proprietors so consenting; and if the lands of 
the recusan t proprietors are let in farm, the farm shall be  first offered to the proprietors who consented to 
accept  the assessment originally offered.  
59. Proced ure on refusal of assessment in village  in which  superior  and inferior  rights co -exist. —
When an assessmen t is offered in a ma hal in which both superior and inf
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 20]
erior  rights co -exist. —
When an assessmen t is offered in a ma hal in which both superior and inferior proprietors co -exist — 
(a) if all the proprietors of the class with which  the Settlement -officer proposes to make the 
settlement  refuse to accept as aforesaid the assessment offered,  the assessment  shall be offered to the 
proprietors of  the other class; and if all such proprietors refuse the  assessment, the Settlement -officer 
shall proceed as  provided in section fifty -seven;  
(b) if some only of the propr ietors of the class  with which the Settlement -officer proposes to make  
the settlement refuse the assessment, he may either  proceed as if all had refused it or may deal with the  
mahal under section  fifty-eight : 
Provided that if, in the case contemplated by  clause (b), the proprietors  who consented to a ccept  
the assessment when originally offered refuse to accept  it, such assessment shall be offered to the other 
class  of proprietors . 
60. Procedure  on refusal of  assessment  by inferior  proprietors. —If all or  any of the inferior 
proprietors refuse  any assessment offered under section fifty, the Settlement -officer may exclude them all 
from the  sub-settlement,  and assign the proprietary management and  profits of the mahal to the superior 
proprietor for any  term not exceeding the term of settlement.   
61. Allowance  to excluded  proprietors. —Any proprietor ex cluded from settlement  under section 
fifty-seven or section fifty -nine, clause  (a), shall be  entitled to receive from the Government  an annual 
allowance,  the amount of which shall be fixed by the Chief Commissioner , but which shall not  be less than 
five per cent., or more than ten per cent.,  on the amount  of the assessment offered to him by the  Settlement -
officer.  
62. Excluded proprietors to have occupancy -rights in their sir -land. —Any proprie tor excluded 
from settlement or  sub-settlement under section s fifty-seven to sixty,  both inclus
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 20]
 tor excluded 
from settlement or  sub-settlement under section s fifty-seven to sixty,  both inclusive, shall be entitled to 
retain possession of  his sir -land (if any) as if he were an absolute occu pancy -tenant, and the rent to be paid 
by him for such land during the term of his exclusion shall be fixed  by the Settlement -officer accordingly.  
63. Aggregate amount of allowance granted to , and deduction from rent allowed to, excluded 
proprietor. —The aggregate amount of any allowance under section sixty -one, and of the  difference 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 21]
21 
 between the rent fixed under sect ion sixty-two and t he rent w hich the excluded pr oprietor would be liable 
to pay if he were a tenant -at-will, shal1 not be less than five or more than fifteen per cent. on the amount of 
the assessment  offered to him by the Settlement -officer . 
64. Sub-settlement with malik -makbuzas and other like holders of land. —The Settlement -officer 
may make, on behalf of malik -makbuzas or other  like holders of land, such  a sub -settlement as shall secure 
to them from the malguza rs of the  mahal their existing rights; and may provide that, in addition to the land -
revenue payable by them, they shall pay to the malguzars such percentage  thereon, not exceeding twenty 
per cent., as  may in his opinion be sufficient to compensate the  said malguzars  for their responsibility in 
respect of  the land -revenue, and to provide for the fees of lambardars  and mukaddams.  
65. Revenue payable under sub -settlement to be first charge on land. —The amount of revenue 
payable under a sub -settlement  shall be  a first charge upon all the land  comprised in such sub -settlement.   
66. Settlement -officer to apportion assessment over lands held in severalty ;—When the whole of 
the land comprised in a mahal  is held in severalty, the Settlement -officer shall apportion t o the several 
holdings the amount with which such land is assessed under a settlement or sub -settlement.  
      When only part of the land comprised in a mahal  is held in severalty, the Settlement -officer shall 
apportion  such amount to the part held in common and  the part held in severalty, and shall further apportion  
to the several holdings the amount to which they are  liable under the former apportionment.  
       67. to redistribute land according to custom. —When by established custom the land held by each 
proprietor in any mahal is subject to periodical redistribution, the Settlement -officer may, in his dis cretion, 
on the application of the  propr
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 21]
l redistribution, the Settlement -officer may, in his dis cretion, 
on the application of the  proprietors, make  such redistribution according to such custom.  
 
CHAPTER VI.  
OF CERTAIN  INVESTIGATIONS BY THE SETTLEMENT -OFFICER AND  
THE PREPARATION OF THE RECORD -OF-RIGHTS.  
 
68. Settlement -officer to  as certain pro prietors ;—The Settlement -officer shall as certain the persons 
who are in possession as proprietors of the land  comprised in each mahal.  
69. to determine extent of sir -land ;—The Settlement -officer shall ascertain the  situation and 
determine the extent of all the land  held as sir in each mal al. 
70. to decide disputes among shareholders regarding management of mahal. —The                         
Settlement -officer shall ascertain the customs or rules by which the proprietors in each maha l are mutually 
bound as to the granting of patt as, the ejectment of tenants, the realization and distribution  of rents and 
other profits, the payment of  land revenue, village -expenses and other c harges, and  generally as to the 
control and management of the  mahal; and shall decide all disputes and record all agreements regarding the 
matters mentioned in this  section.  
71. to determine through what lambardars revenue shall be paid ;—The Settlement -officer shall 
determine through  which of the lambardars or sub -lambardars the amount of revenue payable by each 
proprietor, sub -proprietor or malik -makbuza shall be paid.  
72. to ascertain status and rents of tenants. —The Settlement -officer shall ascertain, and  record for 
each mahal, the status of all tenants occupying land therein, the lands respectively held by  them, the 
conditions on which they respectively hold  such lands, and the rents (if any) payable by them  respectively.  
73. Enquiry into claims to hold free from revenue as against Government. —The Settlement -officer 
shall investigate all  claims against the Government to hold land free from  revenue or at less than a 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 21]
ll investigate all  claims against the Government to hold land free from  revenue or at less than a full 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 22]
22 
 assessment , or to receive  the whole or part of the land -revenue assessed on land  which is not free from 
revenue.  
Power of Chief Commissioner to make rules. —The Chief Commissioner may, with the previous 
sanction of the Governor General in Council, make rules determining the principles by which the                       
Settlement -officer  shall be guided in the disposal of claims coming under this section.  
74. Enquiry as to claims to hold free from revenue as against malguzars. —When any land not 
being land which any person is entitled to hold free from revenue as against  the Government is held by a 
proprietor, whether  himself a m alguzar or not, who claims to hold it wholly or partially free from revenue 
as against the other malguzars of the mahal, the Settlement -officer  shall decide whether the claimant is 
entitled to be  exempted from paying the whole or any part of the  revenue which would otherwise be payable 
in respect  of such land, and, if he decides that the claimant is  so entitled, shall also determine the conditions 
under  which, and the term for which, the claimant i s entitled to such exemption:  
Provided that no decision under this section shall  exempt any land from the payment of revenue,  when  
the maha l in which such land is comprised is sold for  arrears of revenue.  
Chief Commissioner may make rules for disposal of such cases. —The Chief Commissioner may 
make rules for the  guidance of Settlement -officers in dealing with cases under this section.  
75. Time from which orders under section s 73 and 74 take effect. —When the Settlement -officer 
decides, under section seventy -three or section seventy -four, that land which has been held free  from 
revenue, or at less than a full assessment, is liable to pay revenue, or to pay the same at enhanced rates, 
such decision  shall take effect from the first day of the agricultura l year next ensuing; unless the Chief 
Commis sioner directs that the amount payable in re
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 22]
ricultura l year next ensuing; unless the Chief 
Commis sioner directs that the amount payable in respect of such  land on account of the revenue accruing 
due within  anyone or more of the last preceding twelve years  shall be realized.   
76. Settlement -officer to decide what village -cesses are leviable ;—The Settlement -officer shall 
determine and record the village -cesses if any , which are leviable in accordance with village -custom, and 
the persons by  and from whom, and the rates at which, they are leviable; and such cesses shal l, if sanctioned 
by the Chief  Commissioner, be leviable accordingly.  
77. to determine certain disputes. —The Settlement -officer may determine disputes regarding any of 
the following matters (namely): — 
(a) the right of any lambardar, mukaddam, patwari, village -watchman or other village -servant to 
any customary dues, or other remuneration, and his liability to render any customary service in return 
for such dues or remuneration;  
(b) the rights of persons resident in the village or holding lands c omprised in the ma hal, in or to 
the common land of the mahal and its produce, and the village -site; 
(c) any customs relating to irrigation or to rights -of-way and other easements;  
(d) any other rights and customs which the Chief  Commissioner directs to be recorded in the  
administration -paper.   
78. Procedure in  cases under  sectio ns 68, 69, 70, 72  and 77,  clauses ( b), (c) and ( d).—If a dispute 
arises regarding any matter mentioned  or referred to in sections sixty -eight, sixty -nine,  seventy,                        
seventy -two and seventy -seven, clauses  (b), (c) and (d), the Settlement -officer shall decide it  summarily 
after making such enquiry as he thinks  fit, and shall not be bound to hear any party to such  dispute or to 
receive any evidence  tendered by any  such party; but in the case of every such dispute  he shall record a 
proceeding stating the nature of  such dispute,· his decision the
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 22]
y such dispute  he shall record a 
proceeding stating the nature of  such dispute,· his decision thereon, the grounds of  such decision and such 
other particulars as he thinks  fit. 
79. Reco rd-of-rights. —The Settlement -officer shall prepare for every  mahal, or, if he thinks fit, for 
any group of neighbouring  mahals, a record -of-rights, and shall include  in it— 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 23]
23 
 (a) the results of the inquiries made under this  chapter in respect of such mahal or group;  and  
(b) any other matters which the Chief Commissioner  may, by rules in this behalf, direct to  be 
entered in such paper.  
80. Chief Commissioner may make rules regarding record -of-rights .—The Chief Commissioner 
may make rules presc ribing the language in which the record -of-rights shall be drawn up, the fo rm of the 
papers of which it shall consist, and the manner in which such paper s shall be signed and attested by the 
Settlement -officer and the parties interested in the matters to which they refer.  
 81. Record -of-rights to be made over to Deputy Commissioner. —When the Settlement -officer has 
completed a record -of-rights in manner hereinbefore prescri bed, he shall, subject to any order issued by the 
Chief Com missioner in this behalf, make it over to the Deputy Commissioner for custody.  
82. Effect of entries in record -of-rights. —When the record -of-rights is duly made and  attested, all 
entries therein shall be presumed to be  correct until the contra ry is shown.  
83. Suits to contest certain settlement decisions or entries. —Any person deeming himself  aggrieved 
by any decision under section seventy -eight , or by any decision of the Chief Settlement -office r in appeal 
therefrom , or by any entry made in the record -of-right s as to any matter referred to in that section , may 
institute a suit in the Civil Court to have such  decision set aside or such entry cancelled or amended:  
Provided as follows: — 
When any suit under this section is instituted for  the cancellation or amendme nt of an entry, the 
Gover nment,  if it so desires, and all persons interested in  the e ntry, shall be made parties to the suit:   
No persons by whom the record -of-rights was  signed,  and no pe rsons claiming through or under  them 
shall, without the previous sanction of the Chief  Commissioner, institute any suit with a view to  modify or 
set asid
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 23]
previous sanction of the Chief  Commissioner, institute any suit with a view to  modify or 
set aside any entry relating to an y matter mentioned in section seventy or section seventy -seven,                          
clause (b), (c) or (d). 
84. Revision of record -of-rights by Chief Commissioner. —After an assessment has been confirmed 
by the Governor Genera l in Council, the Chief Commis sioner  shall not exercise, in respect of any entry of 
the descriptions referred to in s ection eighty -three duly made in a record -of-rights prepared in connec tion 
with such assessment and duly attested, the  power of revision conferred by sections twenty -five and thirty -
one, unless it is proved that such entry  was made inadvertently.   
85. Proceedings  regarding  lands the  property of  Governme nt.— In respect of lands declared to be 
the property  of Government, the Settlement -officer shall, instead of proceeding as hereinbefore provided, 
conduct  such operations, and prepare such record, as the  Chief Commissioner may direct.   
________  
CHAPTER VII.  
OF SETTLEMENTS MADE BEFORE THIS ACT COMES INTO  
FORCE . 
86. Former  settlements  deemed to  have been  made under  this Act .—Settlements made before this 
Act comes into  force shall be deemed, so far as may be, to have been made hereunder; and the provisions 
of this Act in  regard to p roceedings taken and records prepared by  Settlement -office rs in the making of 
settlements hereunder  shall apply in like manner to proceedings  taken and records prepared before this Act 
comes into  force.  
87. Effect of  awards of  propri etary  rights at  such settlements. —When a Settlement -officer or 
Settlement  Court has, at any settlement made before this Act  comes into force, made an award of proprietary 
rights  in any land, all claims which after consideration by  such officer  or Court may  have been expressly 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 23]
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 24]
24 
 decided  by him or it to be invalid, or inferior to the claims of  the persons in whose favour the award was 
made , shall be barred both as against Government and as  against the persons last mentioned; and no suit 
shall  lie for the enforcement of such claims in any Civil  Court.  
The award at any such settlement of proprietary  rights in land to a widow shall  be deemed to confer  on 
her those rights only which, in accordance with  the personal law to which she is subject, she would  enjoy 
in land inherited by her from her husband.  
88. When suits  for proprietary rights  will lie in Civil Courts .— Any person whose claim to 
proprietary rights  in any land was not expressly decided by such officer  or Court may sue in  a Civil Court 
to establish such claim; and if he can prove that, when proprietary rights in such land were awarded by such 
officer or  Court to other persons, he was entitled to interests  therein of the same nature as those upon 
consideration  of which the award was made, the Civil Co urt may  declare him entitled to a proprietary right 
of such  nature and extent in the land as it may deem just.  
89. Chief Commissioner may allot waste -land to malik -makbuzas entitled  thereto .—When at any  
settlement made before this Act comes into force mali k-makbuzas have been declared  entitled to a portion 
of the waste -lands compr ised in any mahal  the Chief Commissioner may , notwithstandin g anyth ing 
conta ined in the record of such settlement, prescribe the extent of such portion and the mode in which the 
same shall be assigned to them; and may  determine the nature and extent of their interests  therein and the 
conditions on which they may hold  it. 
______  
PART IV.  
OF REVENUE -ADMINISTRATION . 
_______  
CHA PTER  VIII.  
OF THE COLLECTION OF  LAND -REVENUE . 
 
90.  Power of Chief Commissioner to regulate payment of land -revenue. —Notwithstanding 
anything contained in the record -of-rights of any village, the Chief Commis
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 24]
enue. —Notwithstanding 
anything contained in the record -of-rights of any village, the Chief Commissioner may fix the number and 
amount of the instalments, and the times, places a nd manner, at and in which  land-revenue, whether payable 
direct to the Governm ent or not, shall be paid.  
Until the Chief Commissioner otherwise directs, all  such payments shall be made on the dates, in the 
instal ments, in the  manner and at the places on,  in and at which they are p ayable when this Act comes into  
force.  
 91. “Arrear.” “Defaulters. ”.—When any sum payable under a settlement or sub -settlement is not 
paid within the time at which it is p ayable under section ninety, such sum sha ll be deemed to be an arrear, 
and all the persons with  whom such settlement or sub -settlement was made,  their representatives and 
assigns,  shall thereupon become jointly and severally liable for it, and shall  be deemed to be defaulters 
within the meaning of t his Act. 
Realization of Revenue from  Malguzars.  
92. Tahsildar ’s statement of account  to be conclusive evidence of arrear. —A statement of account,  
authenticated by the  signature of the Tahsildar, shall, for the pu rposes of  this chapter, be conclusive 
evidence of the existence  of any arrear pa yable direct to the Gove rnment, of its  amount,  and of the persons 
who in respect thereof are defaulters.  
93. Notice of demand. —The Deputy Commissioner or any officer empowered by him in this behalf 
may, if he thinks fit,  before any of the processes hereinafter referred to are  issued for the recovery of such 
an arrear, cause a  notice of demand to be served on any of the defaulters.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 25]
25 
 94. Processes for recovery of arrears. —An arrear payable directly to Government may  be recovered 
by anyone or more of the  following  processes: — 
(a) by arresting the  defaulter and imprisoning  him in  the civil jail;  
(b) by attaching and selling his moveable  property;  
(c) by attaching the mahal in respect of which  the arrear has accrued or the share or land  of any 
malguzar who has not paid the  portion  of the revenue which, as between him  and the other malguzars, 
is paya ble by him, and taking the same mahal, share or land  under direct management;   
(d) by transferring the share or  land of any ma lguzar who has not paid such portion to any  malguzar 
who has paid the same, or, if every  such malguzar  declines to accept such share  or land, to any person 
having a mortgage or  charg e upon the same, and who consents to accept it;  
(e) by annulling the settlement of the mahal in  respect of which the arrear has a ccrued, and  taking 
such maha l under direct management  or farming the same;  
(f) by selling such mahal, or the share or land  of any malguzar who has not paid the portion  of the 
revenue aforesaid;  
      (g) by selling immoveable property belonging to  the defaulter other than the land in respect  of which 
the arrear has accrued:   
Provided as follows :— 
(1) the process mentioned in clause (a) shall not  be issued against any female, minor, lunatic  
or idiot;  
(2) the processes mentioned in clauses (d), (e), (f) and (g) shall not be enforced without  the 
previ ous sanction of the Chief Commiss ioner; 
(3) no land shall be sold, and the settlement of no  land shall b e annulled, on account of an  arrear 
accruing in respect of land whilst it is under attachment, or under charge of the Superintendent of 
Government Wards, or  held under direct management,  or let in farm  in accordan ce with any of the 
provisions of  this Act.   
The processes specified in c lauses (a), (b) and (g) may be enforced either in the district
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 25]
 Act.   
The processes specified in c lauses (a), (b) and (g) may be enforced either in the district in which 
the default has been made, or in any other district.  
95. Arrest and imprisonment for recovery of arrear. —The process mentioned in section                     
ninety -four, clause (a), may be executed by issuing a warrant directing the officer named therein, if the 
defaulter fails to pay the arrear by  a date to be fixed in the warrant, to bring him to the tahsil.   
If, when the defaulter ar rives at the tahsil, the  arrear is still unpaid, the Tahsildar may order him to  be 
taken before  the Deputy Commissioner, or may  keep hi m under  personal restraint at the tahsil  for a  period 
not exceeding ten days, unless within such period the arrear is paid, and may then, if the arrea r is still 
unpaid, cause him to be taken before the Deputy Commi ssioner.  
96. Imprisonment  of defaulter  in civil jai l.—If the arrear is not paid when the defaulter  arrives before 
the Deputy  Commissio ner, the Deputy  Commissioner may issue an order to the officer in  charge of the civil 
jail of the district, directing him  to confine the defaulter in such jail for such period , not exceeding three 
months from th e date of the  order, as the Deputy Commissioner may think fit,  unless within such period 
the arrear is paid.  
97. Procedur e in sales of  moveable  property. —Attachments and sales of moveable property  made 
under this chapter shall be conducted as nearly  as may be according to the law for the time being in  force 
for the attachment and sale of moveable property  under the decree of  a Civil Court.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 26]
26 
 98. Management  of mah al, share or land  attached under  section  94 (c).—After causing any  
attachment to be made  under section ninety -four, clause (c), the Deputy  Commissioner shall issue a 
proclamation declaring the  attachment to be in force,  and shall take the attached  mahal, share or land under 
his own management, or  place it u nder the management of any agent whom  he may appoint for the purpose.   
99. Effect of attachment. —During the continuance of an attachment  under section ninety -eight, th e 
defaulters  shall be excluded  from possession of the land attached, and the  Deputy Commissioner or the 
agent appointed by him  shall have all their rights to manage the land and to  realize the rents and profits 
arising therefrom, and  shall be bound by all their liabilities as malguzars or  proprietors to any subordinate 
propriet ors or tenants  of such land.  
100. Profits of  land how  applied. —The surplus profits of such land, after defraying  the cost of  
attachment and management, shall  be applied, first, to the  payment of any revenue  becoming due in respect 
of such land during the  attachment; and next,  to discharging the  arrear for the reco very of which the 
attachment was made.  
101. Attachment when to cease. —The attachment shall continue until the  arrear is paid  or realized 
from the profits of the land  attached, or the Deputy Commissioner reinstates the  defaulters in possession:  
Provided that no attachment shall continue beyond  five years from the first day of the agricultural year  
next following its commencement .  
102. Transfer under section 94 ( d).—When it is proposed to execute the process  mentioned in section 
ninety -four, clause (d), the persons to whom the share or land in respect of which the arrear is due is to be 
transferred shall be required  to pay such arrear, or to secure its payment to the  satisfaction of the Deputy  
Commissioner.  
No such transfer shall be made for a term exceeding fifteen
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 26]
sfaction of the Deputy  
Commissioner.  
No such transfer shall be made for a term exceeding fifteen years from the first day of the  agricultural  
year next after the date on which it is sanctioned by  the Chief Com missioner.  
Joint and several liability not affected by transfer. —No proceedings taken under this section shall  
affect the joint and several liability of the malguzars  of the mahal for arrears accruing in respect of such  
mahal subsequently to the transfer of t he share or  land, except that, as regards all such arrears, the  transferee 
shall stand in the place of the malguzar  whose share or land is transferred.   
103. Procedure after receipt of  sanction to annulment of settlement. —When the Chief 
Commissioner sanctions the annulment of the settlement of any mahal, the Deputy Commissioner shall 
proclaim such annulment, and may then exclude the defaulters from the possession of the mahal, and either 
manage the maha l or any portion ther eof himself or through an agent,  or let the ma hal or any portion thereof 
in farm for  such term and on such conditions as the Chief Commissioner  directs:  
Provided that no management or farm under this  section shall continue for a longer period than fifteen   
years from the first day of the agricultural year next  after the proclamatio n of annulment of settlement.  
After the date of such proclamation no liabilities  shall accrue under the settlement so annulled; but such 
annulment shall not affect anything done o r any  liability incurred under the settlement before such  date.  
104. Case of a  portion of a  mah al being  managed or  farmed.—When a portion only of t he maha l is 
managed  or let in farm under section one hundred and  three, the rest of such ma hal shall be separately 
resettled with the  proprietors thereof for the remainder  of the term of settlement.  
105. Settlement on expiry of management or farm. —As soon as the management or farm of any 
maha l or portion thereof has come t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 26]
 management or farm. —As soon as the management or farm of any 
maha l or portion thereof has come to an end, the  Deputy commi ssioner s hall offer to the persons entitled 
under section forty -nine to an offer of assessment a new  assessment  of the land,  on such conditions as the 
Chief Commissioner  may direct, for the remainder  of the term of the settlem ent of the mahel ; and, if such  
offer is refused, may, with the previous  sanction of the Chief Commissioner, let such  mahal  or portion in 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 27]
27 
 farm for the remainder of the term of  settlement to some other person,  or manage it himself  or through an 
agent for such period.   
106. Effect of Annu lment of settlement. —No leases, liens or other incumbrances  created by the 
defaulters, or by any person through  or under whom they claim, of, or upo n any land  managed or let in farm 
under this Act, shall, during  such management or farm, be binding upon the  Deputy Commissioner or 
Settlement -officer, his agent  or lessee.   
107. Saving of rights in sir -land. —No defaulter shall be deprived of the possession  of his sir -land in 
the execution of any of the  processes mentioned in section ninety -four, clauses  (c), (d) and (e); but every 
such defaulter shall, while  such process is being enforced, be entitled to retain  possession of, and liable to 
pay rent for, such land as  if he were an absolute occupancy -tenant, at such rent  as may be fixed by the 
Deputy Commissioner.  
108. Nature of estate taken by purchaser of land sold for arrears due thereon. —Unless the Chief 
Commissioner in sanctioning  the sale otherwise directs, a purchaser of any  land sold for arrears of revenue 
due in respect thei r of acquires the full proprietorship or superior or inferior  proprietors hip of it, as the case 
may be, free of all  leases,  liens and other incumbrances; and all grants  or contracts previously made by any 
person other than  the purchaser in respect of such land shall become  void as against such purchaser.  
Nothing in this section shall — 
(a) affect the rights of any proprietor, superior or  inferior to the defaulters, or of any malik -makbuza 
or occupancy -tenant, who does not  derive his rights as such proprietor, malik -makbuza  or tenant f rom 
express contract  with such defaulters, or any person through  whom they claim; or   
(b) apply to lands held under leases at fair rents  for the erection thereon of dwelling -houses,  places 
of worship or manufactories, or for  workin g mines
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 27]
e erection thereon of dwelling -houses,  places 
of worship or manufactories, or for  workin g mines, minerals, coals and quarries,  or for laying out and 
maintaining gardens  and burial -grounds, or for constructing  tanks and canals, so long as the lands 
continue  to be used for the purposes specified  in such leas es respectively; or    
(c) deprive any  defaulter whose property is sold of  the rights in respect to his sir -land conferred  by 
any law for the time being in force.   
The Chief Commissioner may, from time to time,  determine what rents shall be dee med to be fair 
rents  within the meaning of this section.  
109. Rules for sale of immoveable property. —When immoveable property is sold under this Act, the 
rules prescribed in sections 287, 288, 293 and 306 to 316, both inclusive, of the Code of Civil Procedure 
shall be followed, except in the following p articulars (that is to say): — 
(a) The defaulter may pay the arrear in respect of which the land is to be sold at any time  before 
the day fixed for the sale, and on such payment the sale shall be stayed.   
(b) The proclamation directed by the said section 287 shall, w hen the sale is under clause (f), section 
ninety -four, of this Act, declare  that, subject to the provisions of section one  hundred and eight, the full  
proprietorship , or superior or inferior proprietorship, as the  case may  be, is to be sold fre e from all  
leases, liens, and other incumbrances, and  the certificate mentioned in section  316 of   the said Code 
shall contain a similar statement . 
(c) The last two clauses of the said section 287  shall not apply.   
(d) An appeal from any ord er under section 312  of the said Code for confirming or setting  aside the 
sale shall lie to the Commissioner of the Division, and an appeal from the  Commissioner's order on 
such appeal shall  lie to the Chief Commissione r. 
(e) The Deputy Commissioner may, from time to time, postpone any sale which he has proclaimed,  
report
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 27]
 The Deputy Commissioner may, from time to time, postpone any sale which he has proclaimed,  
reporting such postponement to the  Commissioner of the Division.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 28]
28 
 (f) Section 309 of the said Code shall be read as  if, after the words “for such payment, ” the words 
“and every sale of such property  made after a postponement ” were added.  
(g) Section 313 of the said Code shall not apply to  sales under section ninety -four, clause (f), of 
this Act.  
(h) Section 316 of the  said Code shall be read as if  the words “The Deputy  Commissioner shall  
place the purchaser in possession of the  lands which he has purchased ” were added  thereto.  
110. Pre -emption at sales. —In the course of a sale under section ninety -four, clause (f), if the  property 
is knocked down to a stranger, the following persons may claim to tak e it at the sum last bid in the following 
order: — 
(a) any malguzar  who has paid the revenue which, as between him and t he other ma lguzars, is  
payable by him;   
(b) if the superior proprietorship is sold, the inferior proprietor;   
(c) if the inferior proprietorship is sold, the superior proprietor ; 
Provi ded that such claim is made before the  officer conducting the sale closes the sitting at which  the 
sale is held, and that the claimant undertakes to  fulfil all the c onditions of the sale  binding on the  purchaser.  
111. Application of proc eeds of sale of i mmoveable property. —The proceeds of every sale in 
execution of any process mentioned in section ninety -four shall be applied,  first, in satisfaction of the  arrear 
on account of which the sale was held and of the expenses of such  sale; secondly, to the payment of any 
other arrear due to Government by the defaulter; and the surplus , if any, shall then be payable to him, or, 
where there are  more defaulters than one, to such defaulters accordi ng to their respective shares in the 
property sold.   
112. Cost s recoverable as part of arrear. —The costs of serving a notice of demand under section 
ninety -three and of enforcing any process mentioned in section ninety -four shall be recoverable as part of 
the arrear in respect 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 28]
ny process mentioned in section ninety -four shall be recoverable as part of 
the arrear in respect of which the notice was served and the process was issued.  
113. Matters as to which Chief Commissioner m ay make rules. —The Chief Commissioner may 
make rules — 
(a) for the guidance of Revenue -officers in issuin g notices deman d under  section ninety-three and 
executing the processes mentioned in  section ninety -four;   
(b) defining the classes of officers by whom the  processes mentioned in section ninety -four,                
clauses (a) and (b), may be enforced;   
(c) prescribing the agency by which any of the pr ocesses issued under section ninety -four shall be 
executed.   
114. Remedies  open to p erson denying that sum demanded as an arrear is due .—Notwit hstanding 
anything contained in sec tion ninety -two, when  proceedings are taken unde r this Ac t for the recovery of an 
arrear, the person aga inst whom such proceedings are taken may, if he denies that the arrear or any part 
thereof is d ue, pay the same under protest made at the time of payment  and duly signed by him or by his 
agent, and institute a suit in  the Civil Court for the recovery of the  amount which he denies to be due.   
Realization of Revenue  by Malguzars.  
115. Limitation of right to set -off, &c ., in suit for arrears. —In a suit for the re covery of an ar rear of 
revenue  not being revenue payable directly to Gove rnment, and in a suit brought by a lambardar to recover 
the amount of any revenue payable to Government  through him, the defendant shall not, except with  the 
permission of the Court, — 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 29]
29 
 (a) set-off against the plaintiff's dema nd any sum of money recoverable by him from the                     
plaintiff;  or 
(b) claim credit for any payment purporting to have been made on account when such payment  was 
made before the date on which the amount thereof became due.  
116. Recovery of arrear through Deputy Commissioner instead of by suit. —Any lambardar or            
sub-lambardar entitled to recover an arrear, or any m alguzar  to whom su ch an arrear is due under a                                    
sub-settlement, may, before  instituting  a suit for the recover y thereof, apply to the  Deputy Commissioner  
to recover such arrear on his behalf as if it were an arrear of revenue payable  directly to Government.  
The Deputy Commissioner may, if he thinks fit, comply with such application, but shall, before 
compliance therewith, give to the persons who would be defendants if a suit were instituted for the recovery 
of such arrear, opportunity to show cause against th e order which he proposes to make.  
The Deputy Commissioner shall not be made a defendant  to any suit instituted under section                                    
one hundred  and fourteen in respect of an arrear as to which an  order has been made under this section.  
No person on wh ose account the Deputy Commissioner proceeds under this section to recover an arrear  
shall thereby be relieved of his responsibility for such  arrear.  
117. Saving of right of magluzar to  demand revenue of land assessed to revenue and  held                 
free.—Nothing in the Indian Limitation Act, 1877, and no agreement made after this Act comes into 
force, shall bar the right of the malguzars  of any mahal assessed with land -revenue to demand revenue 
in respect of any land which, having been take n into account in such assessment, has been held by                 
any person without payment of revenue.  
The Chief Commissioner may, in his discretio n, exempt any case from the operat
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 29]
ayment of revenue.  
The Chief Commissioner may, in his discretio n, exempt any case from the operation of this section.  
118. Limitation in suits for revenue. —No suit for the recovery of revenue payable  under a 
settlement or sub -settlement shall be instituted after three years reckoned from the date on  which such 
revenue  becomes payable.  
In other respects the limitation of such suits shall  be governed by the Indian Limitation                           
Act, 1877.  
Interest on Arrears.  
 
119. Interest on arrears. —Interest shall not be charged on an arear of revenue unless the Chief 
Commissioner, by general or special order, so directs; provided that the Court may award interest at such 
rate as it thinks fit on sums payable under a sub -settlement.  
______  
 
CHAPTER IX . 
OF REVENUE AND VILLAGE RECORDS . 
 
120. Correction of record -of-rights. —Any entry in the record of rights may, after such record has 
been made over to the Deputy Commissioner,  be corre cted by the Deputy Commissioner on the application 
of any person interested, or of his own motion. Such correction may be made  on one or  more of the 
following grounds and on no others: — 
 
(a) that all persons interested in such entry wish  to have it corrected; or   
(b) that by a decree in a suit brought under section  eighty -three it has been dec lared to be  erroneous; 
or    
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 30]
30 
 (c) that, being founded on a decree or order of  a Civil Court, or on the order of a Revenue  or 
Settlement -officer, it is not in accordance with such decree  or order; or  
(d) that, being founded on such decree or order, the order or decision has subsequently bee n 
modified on appeal or review,  or has been revised by the Chief Commissioner.  
121. Revision of record in accordance with provision therein contained. —The Deputy 
Commissioner may revise a record -of-rights when such revision is provided for in such record.  
122. Powers of Deputy Commissioner  as to correction of entry or revision of r ecord. —When the 
Deputy Commissioner takes pro ceedings for the correction of any entry in the record -of-rights or for the 
revision of such record -of-rights, he shall exercise, for the purpose of such correction or revision, all the 
powers which the Chief Settlement -officer might have exercised if the proceedings had been taken whilst 
the settlement was in progress.  
123. Power to direct that rule or custom entered in record -of-rights  shall be enforced by 
Government .—The Chief Commissioner may, in his discretion,  by notification in the official Gazette, 
direct that  any specified rule, custom or condition duly entered  in the record -of-rights of any specified 
village shall be  enforced by  the Government.  
 Punishment of violation of such rule or custom. — If any of the persons with whom a settlement or 
sub-settlement has been made, violate or neglect any rule, custom or condition with respect to which the 
Chief Commissioner has made a direct ion under this section, the Deputy Commissioner may, if no penalty 
is provided by any law for the time being in force  for such violation or neglect, recover from such person 
a penalty not exceeding two hundred rupees.  
124. Suit to set aside proceedings un der section 123. —Any person against whom proceedings have  
been taken under section one hundred and twenty -three may institute a suit against G
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 30]
eedings have  
been taken under section one hundred and twenty -three may institute a suit against Government to set aside 
such proceedings on the ground that no rule, custom or condition was, in fact, violated or neglected. If the 
Court finds that no rule, custom or condition has been violated or neglected, it may by its order annul such 
proceedings, and direct that any penalty paid by the plaintiff be refunded; and may also award to him such 
costs as he has nec essarily incurred in the  proceedings, and such further sum as compensation as  it thinks 
fit. 
125.  Powers of Chief Commissioner as to registration of changes after preparation of record -of- 
rights. —The Chief Commissioner  may— 
(a) direct that the mukaddam  of each village shall, for  the purpose of showing the changes occurring  
therein subsequently to the preparation of the record -of-rights,  prepare, or, where there is a patwa ri, 
cause to be prepared, and furnish, annually for such village,  papers in such f orm, at such time, 
containing such particulars, and attested in such manner, as the  Chie f Commissioner may, from time to 
time, prescribe;   
(b) lay down the procedure to be followed in order to ascertain that a change has occurred in the  
village, and the nature of such change .  
All changes referred to in this section sha ll be recorded in such registers as the Chief Commissioner 
appoints, and not in the record -of-rights,  and the  Chief Commissioner may d irect that, before any 
specified  changes are recorded, the order of a specified  Revenue -officer shall be obtained in this behalf.  
126. Possession of proprietary rights to be notified. —All persons lawfully entering into possession 
of proprietary rights and interests in any land shall, within a reasonable time, give notice of such entry to 
the Tahsildar of the tahsil in which such land is situated.  
If any question arises whether any right or interest is a proprietary right or interest within the meaning 
of this se
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 30]
ises whether any right or interest is a proprietary right or interest within the meaning 
of this section, the decision thereof by the Chief Commissio ner shall be final.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 31]
31 
 Notice to be given by guardian in case of minority or idiotcy. —If the person so entering is a minor, 
lunatic or idiot, the guardian or other person who has charge of his property shall give the notice require by 
this section.  
127. Fine for neglect to give notice of possession. —Any person neglecting to give the notice  required 
by section one hundred and twenty -six shall   be liable, at the discretion of the Deputy Commissioner or 
Assistant Commissioner, to fi ne which may  extend to fif ty rupees for each day during which such neglect 
continues.  
128. Obligation to aid in preparation of village -papers. —All persons being in possession of 
proprietary rights in land shall, on being so required by the  Deputy Commissioner, prepare, or cause to be 
prepared,  such papers, and furnish such information, as  may be required for the preparation of the village -
papers  prescribed under section on e hundred and  twenty -five. 
129. Fees for recording changes; —The Chief Commissioner may direct that  fees shall be  leviable 
when changes are recorded under the last clause of section one hundred and twenty -five, and may fix the 
amount of such fees.  
from whom leviable. —All fees so leviable shall be levied from the person in whose favour the change 
is made.  
130. Annual enquiry regarding land held free from revenue. —The Deputy Commissioner shall in 
each year make enquiry regarding all cases in which land  has been g ranted by Government, conditionally 
or for  a time, free, wholly or in part, from the payment of  revenue.  
Procedure on breach of conditions of grant. —If it appears to the Deputy Commissioner that the 
conditions of any grant have been broken by the  grantee, he shall report the case through the Commissioner 
of the division for the orders of the Chief  Commissione r, who may direct that the land be assessed, or may 
pass such other order as he thinks fit.   
Procedure on expiry of term of grant. —If it appears to the Deputy Commissione
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 31]
 as he thinks fit.   
Procedure on expiry of term of grant. —If it appears to the Deputy Commissioner that the  term of 
any such grant has expired, or  (when the grant is for a life or liv es) if the person last entitled  to hold the 
land comprised in the grant, free from  revenue, or at less than full revenue -rates, has died,  he shall assess 
the same, and shall report his proceedings  through the Commissioner of the division for  the sa nction o f the 
Chief Commissioner.  
131. Inspection of revenue -records. —All records kept under this Act shall be open to public 
inspection at such times, and on such  conditions as to fees or otherwise, as the Chief Commissioner from 
time to time directs.  
CHAPTER X.  
OF CERTAIN ADDITIONAL POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF  
REVENUE -OFFICERS . 
132. Purposes for which, when settlement is not in progress , Deputy Commissioner shall exercise 
Settlement -officers’  powers. —The Deputy Commissioner shall, when a settlement is not in progress , 
exercise the powers  conferred by this Act on Settlement -officers for the following purp oses:— 
(a) causing boundary -marks to be erected or repaired, and recovering the cost of such erection  and 
repair;  
(b) assessing land -revenue on lands which are liable  to assessment, but have not been assessed;  
(c) declaring any local area to be a mahal;  
(d) settling lands from which the proprietors were excluded at settlement and to which they have  
been or are about to be re -admitted;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 32]
32 
 (e) settling ma hals in respect of which an application has been made under the third proviso  to 
section fifty -six; 
(f) dealing with claims to hold land wholly or partially free from revenue as against the  malguzars;  
(g) assessing lands gained by alluvion;  
(h) ascertaining and recording vil lage-cesses which are levied when this Act comes into force, but  
have not been recorded at the settlement.  
133. Purposes for which officers may be in vested with Settlement -officers’ powers. —The Chief 
Commissioner may, during the currency of a settlement, invest any officer with the powers conferred on a 
Settlement -officer by sections  forty, forty -one and forty -two; or,  
with the sanction of the Governor General in  Council, with any other of t he powers which are by  this 
Act conferred on a Settlement -officer; but not  so as to enable him to enhance the amount of an  assessment 
in force under section fifty -six. 
134. Cognizance of, and penalty for, offence of injuring boundary -marks. —Any person wilf ully 
erasing, removing or  damaging a boundary -mark may be ordered by the Deputy Commissioner or by a 
Tahsildar or naib Tahsildar empowered by the Chief Commissioner in this behalf to pay to the officer 
making the order, in addition to any fine to which s uch person would be liable under section 434 of the 
Indian Penal  Code, such sum, not exceeding fifty rupees, as may in the opinion of such officer be ne cessary 
to defray the expense of restoring the same, and  of rewarding the person (if any) who gave infor mation of 
such erasure, re moval o r damage.   
135. Procedure when person injuring cannot be found. —Whenever the pe rson erasing, removing 
or damaging such mark cannot be discovered, or if for any other reason it is found imprac ticable  to recover 
from him the  sum which he has been ordered to pay, the mark shall be re -erected or repaire d at the cost of  
the p roprieto rs, mortgagees or fr amers of such one or more of the adjoinin
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 32]
ire d at the cost of  
the p roprieto rs, mortgagees or fr amers of such one or more of the adjoining lands as the Deputy 
Commis sioner thinks fit . 
136. Partition of mahal into two maha ls.—Any malguza rs of a mahal who a re not co -sharers with 
the malguzars of such mahal in any lands comprised in su ch maha l, except such lands as are under  the law 
relating to partition for the time being i n force indivisible, may apply to the Deputy Commissio ner to make 
the lands held by them sep arately from such  other malguzars a separate mahal; and  the Deputy 
Commissioner shall thereupon make such lands and the lands held separately by the remaining ma lguzars  
separate mahals, and shall, with the previous sanction of the Commissioner, apportion between the  two new 
maha ls thus constituted the entire revenue assessed upon the origi nal mahal. 
______  
 
CHAPTER XI.  
VILLAGE-OFFI CERS AND PATWAR IS. 
137. Power to make rules as to officers. —The Chief Commissioner may make rules  regulating the 
appointment , remuneration , suspension and  removal of lambardars, sub -lambardars and  mukaddams:  
Provided that, except with the previous sanction of the Governor General in Council, proprietors, other  
than malik -makbuzas, shall not be liable to pay, on account of the aggregate remuneration of lambardars  or 
sub-lambardars and mukaddams, a sum exceeding five per cent. on the land -revenue which is assessed on 
their land, or which, when t heir land is free from revenue, would, in the judgment of the Deputy 
Commissioner, be assessed on their land if it were subject to assessment.  
In framing rules for the appointment under this section of lambardars and sub -lambardars for any mahal, 
the Chie f Commissioner shall have regard among other matters to local custom and hereditary claims, and 
to entries on the subject in the record -of-rights of such mahal.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 33]
33 
 In every village in which there are resident malguzars, one of such m alguzars shall be the muk addam.  
 
138. Duties of lambardars. —It shall be the duty of every lambardar and sub -lambardar — 
(a) to collect and pay into the Government Treasury  so much of the land -revenue as may  under 
section seventy -one be payable through  him, eit her solely or jointly with other lambardars  or                     
sub-lambadars;   
(b) to collect and pay to the mukaddam, or into  the Government Treasury, as the Deputy  
Commissioner may direct, all sums of money  payable  through him, either solely or jointly  with other 
lambar dars or sub-lambardars, by  the prop rietors whom he represents, on  account  of the remuneration 
of the mukaddam,  patwaris or village -watchmen, or on account of any expenses which the mukaddam  
is authorized to recover from the lam bardars or sub-lambardars of his village;  
(c) to assist the mu kaddam in obtaining all part iculars which he is bound to ente r in the  annual 
village -papers, or to report under this  Act. 
139. Lambardars may recover free and other charges from proprietors. —Together with the                 
land-revenue, lambardars and sub -lambardars may recover from the  proprietors whom they respectively 
represent — 
(a) any remuneration to which they are entitled as such; and  
(b) the sum which, under section one hundred and  thirty -eight, they are bound  to pay to  
mukaddams:   
Provided that no such recovery shall  made from malik -makbuzas paying a percentage which includes  
remuneration to mukaddams and lambardars.  
140. Deputy Commissioner may alter channel through which malik -makbuza pay s revenue. — 
On the application of any malik -makbuza or other like holder of land, or of the lambadar or sub -lambardar  
through whom such malik -makbuza  or other holder of land pays the revenue assessed on his holding, the 
Deputy Commissioner may, for sufficient cause shown, order that such revenue be paid throug
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 33]
ng, the 
Deputy Commissioner may, for sufficient cause shown, order that such revenue be paid through any other 
lambardar or sub -lambardar, or that it be paid into the Government Treasury.  
Effec t of order for payment of revenue direct to Government. —When the Deputy Commissioner 
orders such payment to be made into the Government Treasury, such portion of the percentage fixed under 
section sixty -four as the Deputy Commissioner, subject to the contr ol of the Chief Commissioner, may 
determine, shall be so paid, and the malik -makbuza or other person shall pay the rest to the mukaddams on 
account of their fees and the other village -expenses.  
141. Duties of mukaddams. —It shall be the duty of every mukadd am— 
(a) to control  and superintend the  village -patwar i and village -watchmen; to report their deaths  or 
absence from duty; to maintain them in  the possession of any lands appertaining to  their office; to 
recover and pay to them any  cash allowances to which they may be en titled; and to take such steps as 
may be necessary to compel them to perform their duties;  
(b) to furnish reports regarding the state of his village, at such places and times as the  Deputy 
Commissioner fixes in this behalf;  
(c) to report and , if possible, to prevent encroachments on the public paths and roadways in  his 
village;  
(d) to preserve such stations and marks erected in his village by Government -surveyors as may  be 
made over to his care;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 34]
34 
 (e) subject to any rules issued by the Chief Commissioner, to keep his village in good sanitary 
condition;  
(f) to report violations of any rules which the  Chief Commissioner may make for the preservation  
of underwood, forests and trees  growing on the village -lands, and for securing  to persons entitle d to cut 
wood and enjoy  other privileges in the waste -lands of the  village the rights to which they are entitled;      
(g) to collect, or aid in the collection of, all payments  due to Government in his village;   
(h) to report all birt hs and deaths taking place in  his village.  
The Chief Commissioner may make rules — 
(1) adding to the list of duties which a mukaddam  is required to perform under this section;  and  
(2) regulating the liability of persons residing in  any village for charges necessarily incurred  by 
mukaddams in the performance of the  duties specified in clause (e) in respect of  such village, and for 
apportioning such  charges among such persons; and  
(3) determining the officers to whom r eports under  this section shall be made.  
142. Liabilities impo sed by law  on land -holders to attach to mukaddams. —When, by any 
enactment for the time being in force, any public duties are imposed on, or public liabilities are declared to 
attach to, landholders, their managers and agents and the like, such duties shall be deemed to be imposed 
on, and such liabilities shall be held to attach to, mukaddams appointed under this Act:  
Provided that nothing herein contained shall discharge landholders, their managers or agents, or the  
like, from any liabilities imposed upon them by law. 
143. Power of mukaddams to recover certain e xpenses incurred. —Every mukaddam may recover 
from the lambardars or sub -lambardars of the village to which he is appointed his own remuneration, 
together with any expenses necessarily incurred in the performance  of his duties.  
144. Chief Commissioner may m ake rules as to patwaris. —The Chief Commi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 34]
rformance  of his duties.  
144. Chief Commissioner may m ake rules as to patwaris. —The Chief Commissioner may make 
rules —  
(a) regulating the manner in which patwar is are to be selected; prescribing the conditions  under 
which they may be appointed; and fixing the limits of their circles and the  nature, mode  and amount of 
their remuneration;  
(b) prescribing the conditions under which substitutes may be appointed for persons having  
hereditary claims to the office of patwari, when such persons are unable to act;  
(c) prescribing the fines which may be imposed  on patw aris and their substitutes for neglect  of their 
duty, and stating the circumstances  under which they may  be suspended or removed:  
Provided that, except with the previous sanction  of the Governor General in Council, no proprietor  shall 
be compelled to pay as remuneration to patwar is a sum exceeding six per cent. on the revenue for the  time 
being assesse d on his land, or which, when his  land is free from revenue, would, in the judgment of  the 
Deputy Commissioner, be assessable on his land  if it were liabl e to assessment.  
145. Chief Commissioner may make rules for guidance of Deputy Commissioners in certain 
matters. —The Chief Commissioner may make rules  for the guidance of Deputy Commissioners in dealing  
with cases where, at the time of making the  settlement  next before this A ct comes into force, the 
maintenance of a patwari was made optional, and the  persons settled with are unable to agree as to whether 
a patwari should be maintained, and for dealing with  cases where no patwari is, under such option, 
maintained  and the mukaddams  or proprietors have made  default in the performance of the duties of a 
patwari.  
Such rules may empower the Deputy Commissioner,  in the latter class of cases— 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 35]
35 
 (a) to impose fines not exceeding fifty rupees on  such mukaddams or p roprietors, and therefrom  to 
make provision for the temporary  performance of the duties in respect of w hich they have made default;   
(b) to appoint patwaris in the villages of such  proprietors, either for the term of  the settlement  or 
for any shorter term,  and to fix the  remuneration of such patwaris . 
Nothing in the proviso to section one hundred and  forty -four shall apply to patwaris so appointed.  
146. Chief Commissioner may define duties of patwa ris.—The Chief Commissioner may make rules  
prescribing the d uties of patwaris — 
(a) towards the Government; and may in such  rules determine the registers, returns or other  papers 
which they shall keep or furnish, the  forms and language in which such registers  and returns are to be 
prepared, the mode of  their preparation and attestation, and the  dates on which they are to be furnished;   
(b) towards the members of the village -commu nity; and may in such rules fix the remuneration ,                  
if any, other than the fixed emolu ments of their office, which the  patwaris  may demand in respect of 
the performance  of such duties.  
Patwaris ’ papers to be public documents. —All records and papers which patwaris are required  to 
prepare or keep by any rule made by the Chief Commissioner under this section shall be deemed to be 
public documents within the meaning of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, and to be the property of 
Government.  
147. Patwaris to produce papers for inspection, and to allow copies to be made. —Patwaris shall 
produce at all reasonable times, for the inspection of all persons interested therein, all records and papers 
which they are so required to prepare or keep, and shall allow such p ersons to make copies of such records 
and papers.   
148. Existi ng officers confirmed. —All existing lambardars, sub -Iambardars, mukaddams and 
patwaris shall, unless the Chief Commissioner in any specif
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 35]
bardars, sub -Iambardars, mukaddams and 
patwaris shall, unless the Chief Commissioner in any specified case otherwise directs, be  deemed to have 
been appointed under this Act.  
149. Lambardars’ and other officers ’ dues recoverable as arrears. —Any sums which lambardars, 
sub-Iambardars, mukaddams and patwaris are entitled to recover or demand under this chapter may, if the 
Deputy Commissioner so directs, be recovered in the same manner as an arrear of revenue payable direc tly 
to the Government.  
150. Holders of sir -land in Sambalpur to provide for remuneration of mukaddams. —In each 
village of the district of Sambalpur a ll persons holding sir -land, other than mukaddams, are bound to 
provide for the due remuneration of the m ukaddam of the village; and the Chief Commissioner may make 
rules for the enforcement of this obligation.  
______  
 
PART V.  
CHAPTER XII.  
MISCELLANEOUS . 
151. Right to mines and quarries. —Unless it is otherwise expressly provided in  the records of a 
settlement or by the terms of a grant made by the Government, the right to all mines,  minerals, coals and 
quarries, and to all fisheries in navigable rivers, and the right to extract sap from  all palmyra and cocoanut 
trees, shall be deemed to belong to Government; an d the Government shall have all powers necessary for 
the proper enjoyment of such rights:  
Provided that, whenever in the exercise by the Government of the rights herein referred to over any  
land, the rights of any persons are infringed by the occupation or  disturbance of the surface of such land, 
the Government shall pay to such persons compensation for such infringement, and the amount of such 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 36]
36 
 compensation shall be determined as nearly as may be in accordance with the provisions of the Land 
Acquisition Act , 1870.  
152. Exclusive jurisdiction of Revenue -authorities . Matters excepted from jurisdiction of Civil 
Courts .—Except as otherwise hereinbefore  provided, — 
(a) no Civil Court shall entertain any suit instituted, or application made, to obtain a decision or  order 
on any matter which the Governor General in Council, the Chief Commissioner or a Revenue or Settlement -
officer is, by this Act, empowered to determine or dispose of; and in particular  
(b) no Civil Court shall exercise jurisdiction over any of the fo llowing matters:  
(1) any matters provided for in sections forty,  forty -one, forty -two and eighty -nine, as to  waste -
lands:  
(2) the claim of any person to have an assessment  offered to, or sub -settlement made with, him:  
(3) the amount of revenue or rate to be assessed  on any mah al, share or portion of a ma hal under 
this or any other Act for the time  being in force:   
(4) questions as to the validity of any engagement  with Government for the payment of                                
land-revenue,  or of any agre ement entered into  by superior or inferior proprietors in a settlement or                    
sub-settlement:  
(5) claims connected with or arising out of any  process enforced on account of refusal to  accept the 
assessment offered in a settlement  or sub -settlement by the Settlement -officer  or Deputy 
Commissioner:  
(6) the amount of the allowance or rent fixed under section sixty -one or sixty -two: 
(7) the redistribution according to established custom, by a Settlement -officer, of land comprised  
in a mahal:  
(8) the formation of the record -of-rights, the preparation, signing or attestation of any  of the 
documents contained therein, or the notification of settlement:  
(9) any matters provided for or referred to in section seventy -three, seventy -four or o ne hundred  
and thirty as 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 36]
rovided for or referred to in section seventy -three, seventy -four or o ne hundred  
and thirty as to lands held or claimed to be he1d free from revenue, except rights  arising under any 
contract between the Government of India and grantees of land:  
(10) claims connected with, or arising out of, the collection of revenue, or any process enforced  on 
account of an arrear of revenue, or on account of any sum which is under this or  any other Act realizable 
as revenue:  
(11) claims to set aside, on any ground other than fraud, sales for arrears of revenue:  
(12) corrections of entries  revisions of records under sections one hundred and twenty, one  hundred 
and twenty -one and one hundred and twenty -two: 
(13) claims to have a partition and apportionment made under section one hundred and thirty -six, 
and questions as to the distribution or apportionment under that section of the land or of the revenue of 
a mahal:  
(14) claims to the office of patwari, lambardar, sub -lambardar or mukaddam, or in respect of any 
injury caused by exclusion therefrom, or to compel the performance of the duties  thereof: 
(15) claims to compel the performance of any duties imposed by this Act on any Revenue or 
Settlement -officer.  
In all the above cases jurdi sdiction shall rest with the Revenue -authorities only.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 37]
37 
 153. For what village -cesses suit lies. —No suit shall lie  in any Civil or Revenue Court for the recovery 
of any village -cess which has not been sanct ioned by the Chief Commissioner and also either recorded at a 
settlement or under section  one hundred and thirty -two, clause (h). 
154. Limitation of claims for comp ensation in case of waste -land demarcated as property of 
Government. —Whenever, at any settlement made before this Act  comes  into force, waste -1ands  have be en 
demarcated as the property of Government, no cla im of any person to , or in respect of , such lands shall be  
entertained by any Civil Court after the expiration of three years from the date o f such demarcation.  
155. Restriction on Revenue and Settlement -officers trading and holding land. —No Revenue or 
Settlement -officer, and no person employe d in any Revenue or Settlement office,  shall, except with the 
express permission of the Chief Commissioner ,—  
(a) engage  in trade, or be in any way concerned,  directly or indirectly, in any commercial  
transaction, or in the purchase or hiring of  land, in the district to which he is appointed,  or in which he 
is employed;   
(b) purchase or bid for, either in person or by  agent, in his own name or in that of another,  or jointly 
or in shares with others, any pro perty which may be sold by order of any  Revenue -authority in such 
district.   
The Chief Commissioner may delegate to Commissioners  of divisions or to Deputy Commissioners the  
power of granting the permission mentioned in this  section in the case of any s pecified class of officers.   
Nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude  any person  from becoming a member of a company  
incorporated under the Indian Companies Act,  1866. 
156. When mahal managed or farmed, or upon proclamation under section 98 or 103, rent 
payable to Deputy Commissioner.  Payment to proprietor in anticipation of due date. —When  any 
mahal  is manag ed or let in farm unde
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 37]
ayment to proprietor in anticipation of due date. —When  any 
mahal  is manag ed or let in farm under section fifty -seven or fifty -eight, or when either  of the proclamations 
mentioned in sections ninety -eight  and one hundred and three has been made, all  sums due to the proprietor 
in respect of the mahal,  share or land mentioned in any of the said sections  shall be payable only to the 
Deputy Commissioner or  Settlement -officer, his agent or lessee; and no payment  made to such proprietor 
in anticipation of the us ual period  for such payment shall, without the sanction of  the Deputy Commissioner 
or Settlement -officer, be  credited to the person making the same in account  with the Deputy Commissioner 
or Settlement -officer,  his agent or lessee.   
157. Recovery of balances due  by farmers. —When any land has been let in farm under  the provisions 
of this Act, any revenue due from the  farmer in respect of such land may be recovered from   him or his 
surety as an arrear of revenue payable  directly  to Government.  
158. Reco very of revenue due when Act comes into force; and of money payable under Act. —All 
land-revenue due when this Act comes  into force, and all penalties or other moneys payable  to, or 
recoverable by , an officer of Government under  this Act, shall be recovered  from the persons from  whom 
they are due and from the sureties if  any of  such persons as if such land -revenue, penalties or  moneys were 
an arrear of revenue payable directly to  Government due under this Act by such persons and  their sureties.   
159. Past proceedings for collection of revenue legalized. —All proceedings taken before this Act 
comes  into force for the collection of the land -revenue or the  realization of arrears thereof shall be deemed 
to have  been taken in accordance with law.   
160. Chie f Commissioner may empower persons by name, or confer powers on classes. —In 
conferring powers under thi s Act the  Chief Commissioner may empower per
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 37]
er powers on classes. —In 
conferring powers under thi s Act the  Chief Commissioner may empower persons by name  or classes of 
officials generally by their official titles.  
161. Chief Commissioner may vary or cancel orders. —The Chief Commissioner may vary or cancel  
any order conferring powers under this Act .  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 38]
38 
 162. Chief Commissioner may make rules and attach penalty to breach thereof. —The Chief 
Commissioner  may, with the previous sanction of the Governor Genera l in Council, make rules consistent 
with this Act for carrying out its provisions , and may attach to the breach of any  such rule, or of any other 
rule made by him under this Act, a penalty which may extend to two hundred  rupees, or, when such breach 
is a continuing breach,  to fifty rupees for each day during which such breach  continues.  
All powers to make rules conferred by this Act  on the Chief Commissioner shall be exercised subject  
to the control of the Governor General in Council,  and may be exercised from time to time as occasion 
requires.  
No rule made by the Chief Commissioner under  this Act shall take effect until it has been published  in 
the local official Gazette.   
All such rules, when so published, shall have the  force of law.  
 
 
_____ _____  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CENTRAL PROVINCES LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1881.pdf - page 39]
39 
 SCHEDULE . 
(See section  2.) 
ENACTMENTS  REPEALED.  
 
Number and year . Title . Extent of r epeal.  
Act XII of 1841.  For amending the Bengal Code 
in regard to sales of land for 
arrear of revenue.  So much as has not been 
repealed.  
 
Act I of 1847  For the establishment and 
maintenance of boundary -marks 
in the North -Western Provinces 
of Bengal.  The whole.  
Act XXXI of 1858.  To make further provision for the 
settlement of land gained by 
alluvion in the Presidency of Fort 
William in Bengal.  The w hole.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHARITABLE ENDOWMENTS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE CHARITABLE ENDOWMENTS ACT, 1890  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definition.  
3. Appointment and incorporation of treasurer of Charitable Endowments.   
3A. Definition of “appropriate Government”,  etc. 
4. Orders vesting property in treasurer.   
5. Schemes for administration of property vested in the treasurer.   
6. Mode of applying for vesting orders and schemes.   
7. [Omitted .]. 
8. Bare trusteeship of treasurer.  
9. Annual publication of list of properties vested in treasurer.   
10. Limitation of functions and powers of treasurer.   
11. Provision for continuance of office of treasurer in certain contingencies.   
12. Transfer of property from one treasurer to another.  
13. Power to make rules.  
14. Ind emnity to Government and treasurer.  
15. Saving with respect to Advocate General and Official Trustee.  
16. [Omitted. ].  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHARITABLE ENDOWMENTS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 2]
2 
 THE CHARITABLE ENDOWMENTS ACT, 1890  
ACT NO. 6 OF 18901 
[7th March , 1890 .] 
An Act to provide for the vesting and administration of property held in trust for charitable 
purposes.  
WHEREAS  it is expedient to provide for the vesting and administration of property held in trust for 
charitable purposes; It is hereby enacted as follows:  –– 
1. Title, extent and commencement . ––(1) This Act may be called the Charitable Endowments 
Act, 1890.  
(2)  It extends to the whole of India, 2***, 3***; and  
(3)  It shall come into force on the first day of October,  1890.  
2. Definition . ––In this Act “charitable purpose ” includes relief of the poor, edu cation, medical 
relief and the advancement of any other object of general public utility, but does not include a purpose 
which relates exclusively to religious teaching or worship.  
3. Appointment and incorporation of treas urer of Charitable Endowments . ––4[(1) The 
Central Government may appoint an officer of the Government by the name of his office to be 
treasurer of Charitable Endowments for India, and the Government of any State may appoint an 
officer of the Government by  the name of his office to be  treasurer  of Charitable Endowments for the 
State.]  
(2) Such treasurer shall, for the purposes of taking, holding and transferring movable or 
immovable property under the authority of this Act, be a corporation sole by the name  of the treasurer 
of Charitable Endowments for  5[India or, as the case may be, the State], and, as such treasurer, shall 
have perpetual succession and a corporate seal, and may sue and be sued in his corporate name.  
6[3A. Definition of “appropriate Government ”, etc.  ––In the subsequent provi sions of this Act 
“the appropriate Government ” means, as respects a charitable endowment, the objects of which do not 
extend beyond a single State and are not objects to which the executive authority of the Central 
Government extends, the Government of the State, and as respect
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHARITABLE ENDOWMENTS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 2]
 executive authority of the Central 
Government extends, the Government of the State, and as respects any other charitable e ndowment 
the Central Government.]  
4. Orders vesting property  in treasurer . ––(1) Where any property is held or is to be applied in  
trust for charitable purpose, the  7[appropriate Government],  if it thinks fit, may, on application made 
as hereinafter mentioned, and subject to the other pro visions of this section,                                  
                                                           
1. This Act has been declared to be in force in the Sonthal Parganas by the Sonthal Parganas Settlement Regulation, 1872 (3 
of 1872), section 3: in the Khondmals District by the Khondmals  Laws Regulation, 1936 (4 of 1936), section 3 and 
Schedule; and in the Angul District by the Angul Laws Regulation, 1936 (5 of 1936), section 3 and Schedule . It has also 
been extended to Berar by the Berar Laws Act, 1941 (4 of 1941).  
This Act has been amended in its application to Bengal by the Bengal Wakf Act, 1934 (Ben. Act 13 of 1934);  
This Act shall not apply to any wakf to which the Wakf Act, 1954 (29 of 1954) applies,  
The Act has been extended to and brought into force in Dadra  and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and the First 
Schedule (w.e.f. 1 -7-1965): Goa, Daman and Diu by Reg. 11 of 1963, s. 3 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 1 -2-1965) and 
Lakshadweep by Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 and Schedule (w.e.f. 1 -10-1967) and to Pondichedrry b y Reg. 7 of 1963, s. 3 and 
the First schedule (w.e.f. 1 -10-1963). The Act has been ceased to be in force in the State of Madras by Madras Act 22 of 
1959 (when notified).  
The Act has been amended in Mysore by Mysore Act 19 of 1973.  
2. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule                       
(w.e.f. 31 -10- 2019).  
3. The words “inclusive of British Baluchistan” omitted by the A.O. 1948. 
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for Sub -s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHARITABLE ENDOWMENTS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 2]
 “inclusive of British Baluchistan” omitted by the A.O. 1948. 
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for Sub -section ( 1). 
5. Sub s., ibid., for “the territories subject to the L.G.”  
6. Ins., ibid.  
7. Subs. ibid., for “L.G.”  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHARITABLE ENDOWMENTS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 3]
3 
 order, by 1notification  in the  Official Gazette, that the property be vested in the treasurer of Charitable 
Endowments on such terms as to the application of the property or the income thereof as may be 
agreed on between the  2[appropriate Government]  and the person or persons ma king the application, 
and the property shall thereupon so vest accordingly.  
(2) When any property has vested under this section in a treasurer of Charitable Endowments, he is 
entitled to all documents of title relating thereto.  
3*   *   *   *   * 
(4) An order under this section vesting property in a treasurer of Charitable En dowments shall not 
require or be deemed to require him to administer the property, or impose or be deemed to impose 
upon him the duty of a trustee with respect to the administration thereof.  
5. Schemes for administration of property vested in the treasurer . ––(1) On application made 
as hereinafter mentioned, and with the concurrence of the person or persons making the application, 
the 2[appropriate Government] if it thinks fit, may settle a scheme for the administration of any 
property which has been or is to be vested in the treasurer of Charitable Endowments, and may in 
such scheme appoint, by name or office, a person or persons, not being or including such treasurer, 
toad minister  the property.  
(2) On application made as hereinafter mentioned, and with the concurrence of the person or 
persons making the application, the  2[appropriate Government] may, if it thinks fit, modify any 
scheme settled under this section or substitute anoth er scheme in its stead.  
(3) A scheme settled, modified or substituted under this section shall, subject to the other 
provisions of this section come into operation on a day to be appointed by the  2[appropriate 
Government]  in this behalf, and shall remain i n force so long as the property to which it relates 
continues to be vested in the treasurer of Charitable Endowments or until it has been modified
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHARITABLE ENDOWMENTS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 3]
ates 
continues to be vested in the treasurer of Charitable Endowments or until it has been modified or 
another such scheme has been substituted in its stead.  
(4) Such a scheme, when it comes into operation, sh all supersede any decree or direction relating 
to the subject -matter thereof insofar as such decree or direction is in any way repugnant thereto, and 
its validity shall not be questioned in any court, nor shall any court give, in contravention of the 
provi sions of the scheme or in any way contrary or in addition thereto, a decree or direction regarding 
the administration of the property to which the scheme relates:  
4 [Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall be construed as precluding a court from in quiring 
whether the Government by which a scheme was made was the appro priate Government.]  
(5) In the settlement of such a scheme effect shall be given to the wishes of the author of the trust 
so far as they can be ascertained, and, in the opinion of the  2[appropriate Government], effect can 
reasonably be given to them.  
(6) Where a scheme has been settled under this section for the administration of property not 
already vested in the treasurer of Charitable Endowments, it shall not come into operation unti l the 
property has become so vested.5  
                                                           
1. For notifications issued under this section conjunction with s. 5, see different local R. and O.  
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “L.G.”.  
3. Subs -section ( 3) omitted, ibid. 
4. Ins ., ibid. 
5. A proviso to section 5, applicable only to Bengal, has been added by the Bengal Wakf Act, 1934 (Ben. 13 of 1934), 
section 79.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHARITABLE ENDOWMENTS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 4]
4 
 6. Mode of applying  for vesting orders and schemes .––(1) The application re ferred to in the two  
last foregoing sections must be made,  –– 
(a) If the property is already held in trust for a charitable purpose, then by the person acting in 
the administration of the trust, or, where there are more persons than one so acting, then by those 
persons or a majority of them; and  
(b) If the property is to be applied in trust for such a purpose then by the person or persons 
propo sing so to apply it.  
(2) For the purposes of this section the executor or administrator of a deceased trustee of property 
held in trust for a charitable purpose shall be deemed to be a person acting in the administration of the 
trust.1  
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Uttar Pradesh  
Addition of section 6 -A in Act II of 1890 .––After section 6 of the Charitable Endowments Act, 
1890, the following shall be inserted as section 6 -A. 
 “6-A. (1) If the State Government is satisfied upon representation made or otherwise, that in  any 
case, where any property has already vested in the Treasurer of Charitable Endowments under section 
4 and a scheme has been settled under section 5 that the person or persons acting in the administration 
thereof are wasting or mal -administering the sa me, it may by notice  require the person or persons to 
show cause why the scheme settled for administration be not modified or substituted by another 
scheme.  
(2) The notice under sub -section (1) shall be served in such manner as may be specified.  
(3) Where the person or persons served with the notice fail to show cause within the time allowed 
or the Government is satisfied after considering their explanation, if any, and making such enquiry  as 
it may deem necessary that the property is being wasted  or mal -administered it may notwithstanding 
anything contained in section 5 or 6, modify the scheme or substitute another scheme in its place.”  
[Vide the Uttar Pradesh Act 37 of 1952, s. 2]  
7. [Exercise  b
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHARITABLE ENDOWMENTS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 4]
tute another scheme in its place.”  
[Vide the Uttar Pradesh Act 37 of 1952, s. 2]  
7. [Exercise  by Governor General in Council of Powers of Local Government .] ––Omitted by the  
A.O. 1937.  
8. Bare trusteeship of treasurer .––(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, a treasurer of 
Charitable Endowments shall not, as such treasurer, act in the administration of any trust whereof any 
of the property is for the time being vested in him under this Act.  
(2) Such treasurer shall keep a separate account of each property for the time being so vested 
insofar as the property consists of securities for money, and shall apply the property or the income 
thereof in accordance with the provision made in that behalf in the vesting order under section 4 or in 
the scheme, if any, under section 5, or in both those documents.  
(3) In the case of any property so vested other than securities for money, such treasurer shall, 
subject to any special order which he may receive from the authority by whose order the property 
became vested in him, permit the persons acting in the administration of the trust to have the 
possession, management and control of the property and the applic ation of the income thereof, as if 
the property had been vested in them.  
9. Annual publication of list of properties vested in treasurer . ––A treasurer of Charitable 
Endowments shall cause to be published annually in the Official Gazette, at such time as 
                                                           
1. A new sub -section ( 3), applicable only to Bengal, has been added by the Bengal Wakf Act, 19 34 (Ben. 13 of 1934), s. 80.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHARITABLE ENDOWMENTS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 5]
5 
 the 1[appropriate Government] may direct, a list of all properties for the time being vested in him 
under this Act and an abstract of all accounts kept by him under section 2 of the last foregoing 
section.  
10. Limitation of functions and powers of treasurer .––(1) A treasurer of Chari table 
Endowments shall always be a sole trustee, and shall not, as such treasurer, take or hold any property 
otherwise than under the provisions of this Act, or, subject to those provisions, transfer any property 
vested in him e xcept in obedience to a decree divesting him of the property, or in compliance with a 
direction in that behalf issuing from the authority by whose order the property became vested in him.  
(2) Such a direction may require the treasurer to sell or otherwise dispose of any property vested in 
him, and, with the sanction of the authority issuing the direction, to invest the proceeds of the sale or 
other disposal of the property in any such security for money as is  2[specified in the direction], or in 
the purchas e of immovable property.  
(3) When a treasurer of Charitable Endowments is divested, by a direction of  3[the appropriate 
Government]  under this section, of any property, it shall vest in the person or persons acting in the 
administration thereof and be held  by him or them on the same trusts as those on which it was held by 
such treasurer.  
11. Provision for continuance of office of treasurer in certain contingencies . ––If the office 
held by an officer of the Government who has been appointed to be treasurer o f Charitable 
Endowments is abolished or its name is changed, the  1[appropriate Government]  may appoint the 
same or another office of the Government by the name of his office to be such treasurer, and 
thereupon the holder of the latter office shall be deeme d for the purposes of this Act to be the 
successor in office of the holder of the former office.  
4[12. Transfer of property from one treasurer to another .––If by r
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHARITABLE ENDOWMENTS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 5]
e holder of the former office.  
4[12. Transfer of property from one treasurer to another .––If by reason of any alteration of 
areas or by reason of the appointment of a treasurer of Charitable  Endowments for India or for any 
State for which such a treasurer has not previously been appointed or for any other reason it appears 
to the Central Government that any property vested in a treasurer of Charitable Endowments should 
be vested in another su ch trea surer, that Government may direct that the property shall be so vested 
and thereupon it shall vest in that other treasurer and his successors as fully and effectually for the 
purposes of this Act as if it had been originally vested in him under thi s Act.]  
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Karnataka  
Insertion of new section 12A .––After section 12 of the Charitable Endowments Act, 1890 
(Central Act 6 of 1890), as in force in the [State of Karnataka] , the following section shall be inserted, 
namely: –– 
“12A. Delegation of powers .––Where the appropriate Government is the State Government, it 
may by notification in the official Gazette, direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act 
(except  the power to make rules under section 13) or rules made thereunder shall, in respect of any 
endowment which does not exceed rupees ten thousand in value, in relation to such matters and 
subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the direct ion, be exercisable also by such  
officer or authority subordinate to the State Government as may be specified in the notification:  
Provided that the powers under sections 4 and 5 shall not be delegated to any officer other than 
the Head of a Department of Government.”  
                                                           
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “ Local Government ”. 
2. Subs. , ibid., for “ mentioned in section 4, sub -section  (3), clause ( a), (b), (c), (d), or ( e)”.  
3. Subs., ibid., for “ the Local Government or the Governor General in Council
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHARITABLE ENDOWMENTS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 5]
(c), (d), or ( e)”.  
3. Subs., ibid., for “ the Local Government or the Governor General in Council ”.  
4. Subs., ibid., for section  12. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHARITABLE ENDOWMENTS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 6]
6 
 [Vide Karnataka Act 19 of 1973, s. 2].  
1[13 Power to make rules. –– 2[(1)] The 1[appropriate Government]  may 3[, by notification in the 
Official Gazette ,] make rules consistent with this Act for –– 
(a) prescribing the fees to be paid to the Government in respect of any property vested under 
this Act in a treasurer of Charitable Endowments;  
(b) regulating the cases and the mode in which schemes or any modification thereof are to be 
published before they are settled or made under section 5;  
(c) prescribing the forms in which accounts are to be kept by treasurers of Charitable 
Endowments and the mode in which such accounts are to be audited; and  
(d) generally carrying into effect the purposes of this Act.]  
3[(2) Every rule made by the State Gover nment under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before the State Legislature.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may  be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree  in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the Rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case 
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment sha ll be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rule.  ] 
14. Indemnity to Government and treasurer .––No suit shall be instituted against the 
Government in respect of anything done or purporting to be done under this Act, or in respect of any 
alleged neglect or omission to perform any duty devolving on the Government under this Act, or in 
respect of the ex ercise of, or the failure to exercise, any power c
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHARITABLE ENDOWMENTS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 6]
vernment under this Act, or in 
respect of the ex ercise of, or the failure to exercise, any power conferred by this Act on the 
Government, nor shall any suit be instituted against a treasurer of Charitable Endowments except for 
divesting him of property on the ground of its not being subject to a trust f or a charitable purpose, or 
for making him chargeable with or accountable for the loss or misapplication of any property vested 
in him, or the income thereof, where the loss or misapplication has been occasioned by or through his 
willful neglect or default . 
15. Saving with respect to Advocate General and Official Trustee .––Nothing in this Act shall 
be construed to impair the operation  4[of any enactment]  for the time being in force, respecting the 
authority of an Advocate General  5*** to act with respect to  any charity  6[or of the Official Trustees 
Act, 1913]  respecting the vesting of property in trust for a charitable purpose in an Official Trustee.  
16. [General Controlling Authority of Governor General in Council .]––Omitted  by the Devolution 
Act, 1920 (38 of 1920),  s. 2 and the First Schedule , Pt. I. 
 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 1920, s. 2 and the First Schedule, Pt. I, for section  13.  
2. Sub -section ( 2) of section 13 re -numbered as sub -section ( 1) by Act 56 of 1982, s. 2. Earlier sub -section ( 1) omitted by the 
A. O. 1937 .  
3. Ins. by  Act 56 of 1982,  s. 2. 
4. Subs. by Act 58 of 1960, s. 3 and the Second Schedule, for “of section III of the Statue 53, George III, Chapter 155, or of  
any other enactment”.  
5. The words “at a Presidency” omitted by s. 3 and the Second Sc hedule, ibid.  
6. Subs. by s. 3 and the Second Schedule, ibid., for “ or of sections 8, 9, 10, and 11 of Act No. XVII of 1864 (An Act to 
constitute an office of Official Trustee)”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHILD AND ADOLESCENT (PROHIBITION AND REGULATION) ACT, 1986.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE CHILD AND ADOLESCENT (PROHIBITION AND REGULATION)  ACT, 1986  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
PART II 
PROHIBITION OF EMPLOYMENT OF CHILDREN IN CERTAIN OCCUPATIONS AND PROCESSES  
3. Prohibition of employment of children in  any occupation  and process . 
3A. Prohibition of employment of adolescents in certain hazardous occupations and process es. 
4. Power to amend the Schedule.  
5. Technical Advisory Committee . 
PART III  
REGULATION OF CONDITIONS OF WORK OF CHILDREN  
6. Application of Part.  
7. Hours and period of work.  
8. Weekly holidays.  
9. Notice to Inspector.  
10. Disputes as to age.  
11. Maintenance of register.  
12. Display of notice containing abstract of sections 3 and 14.  
13. Health and safety.  
PART IV  
MISCE LLANEOUS  
14. Penalties.  
14A. Offences to be Congnizable . 
14B. Child and Adolescent Labour Rehabilitation Fund.  
14C. Rehabilitation of rescued child or adolescent . 
14D. Compounding of offences . 
15. Modified application of certain laws in relation to penalties.  
16. Procedure relating to offences.  
17. Appointment of Inspectors . 
17A. District Magistrate to implement the provisions.  
17B. Inspection and monitoring.  
18. Power to make rules.  
19. Rules and notifications to be laid before Parliament or State legislature.  
20. Certain other provisions of law not barred.  
21. Power to remove difficulties . 
22. Repeal and savings.  
23 to 26 [ Repealed .] 
THE SCHEDULE.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHILD AND ADOLESCENT (PROHIBITION AND REGULATION) ACT, 1986.pdf - page 2]
2 
 THE CHILD AND ADOLESCENT LABOUR (PROHIB ITION AND REGULATION) ACT, 
1986  
ACT NO. 61 OF 1986  
[23rd December , 1986.]  
1[An Act to prohibit the engagement of children in  all occupations and to prohibit the engagement 
of adolescents in hazardous occupations and processes and the matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto.]  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called 2[the Child and Adolescent 
Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 ].  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) The provisions of this Act, other than Part III, shall come into force at once, and Part III shall come 
into force on such date3 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, 
and different dates may be appointed for different States and fo r different classes of establishments.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
4[(ia)]“appropriate Government ” means, in relation to an establishment under the control of the 
Central Government or a railway administration or a major port or a mine or oilfield, the Central 
Government, and in all othe r cases, the State Government;  
5[(i) “adolescent” means a person w ho has completed his fourteenth year of age but has not 
completed his eighteenth year;]  
6[(ii) “child ” means a person who has not comple ted his fourteenth year of age  or such age as may 
be specified in the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education  Act, 2009  (35 of 2009) , 
whichever is more ;] 
(iii) “day” means a period of twenty -four hours beginning at mid -night;  
(iv) “establishment ” includes a shop, commercial establishment, workshop, farm, residential hotel, 
restaurant, eating house, theatre or other place of pub lic amusement or entertainment;  
(v) “family ”, in relation to an occupier, means the individual, the wife or hus
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHILD AND ADOLESCENT (PROHIBITION AND REGULATION) ACT, 1986.pdf - page 2]
or entertainment;  
(v) “family ”, in relation to an occupier, means the individual, the wife or husband, as th e case may 
be, of such individual, and their children, brothe r or sister of such individual;  
(vi) “occupier ”, in relation to an establishment or a workshop, means the person who has the 
ultimate control over the affairs of  the establishment or workshop;  
(vii) “port authority ” means any authority administe ring a port;  
(viii) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under section 18;  
(ix) “week ” means a period of seven days beginning at midnight on Saturday night or such other 
night as may be approved in w riting for a pa rticular area by the Inspector;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 35 of 2016, s. 2, for the long title (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “the Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986  (61 of 1986) ” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
3. 26th May, 1993, vide notification No. S.O. 333(E), dated 26th March, 1993, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,               
sec. 3( ii). 
4. Clause ( i) renumbered as clause ( ia) thereof by Act 35 of 20 16, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
5. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e. f. 1-9-2016).  
6. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for clause ( ii) (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHILD AND ADOLESCENT (PROHIBITION AND REGULATION) ACT, 1986.pdf - page 3]
3 
 (x) “workshop ” means any premises (including the precincts thereof) wherein any indus trial 
process is carried on, but does not include any premises to which the provisions of section 67 of the 
Factories Act, 1 948 (63 of 1948), for the time being, apply.  
PART II 
PROHIBITION OF EMPLOYMENT OF CHILDREN IN CERTAIN OCCUPATIONS AND PROCESSES  
1[3. Prohibition of employment of children in any occupation  and process .—(1) No child shall be 
employed or permitted to work in  any occupation  or process . 
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall apply where the child, — 
(a) helps his family or family enterprise , which is other than any hazardous occupations or 
processes set forth in the Schedule, after his s chool hours or during vacat ions;  
(b) works as an arti st in an audio -visual entertainment industry, including advertisement, films, 
television serials or any such other entertainment or sports activities except the circus, subject to such 
conditions and safe ty measures, as may be pre scribed:  
Provided that no such work under this clause shall effect the school education of the child. 
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, the expression,  
(a) “family” in relation to a child, means his mother, father,brother, sister an d father’s sister 
and brother and mother’s sister and brother;  
(b) “family enterprises” means any work, profession, manufacture or business which is 
performed by the members of the family with the engagement of other persons;  
(c) “artist” means  a child who performs or practices any work as a hobby or profession  directly 
involving him as an actor, singer, sports person or in such other activity as may be prescribed 
relating to the entertainment or sports activities falling under clause ( b) of                        sub-section 
(2).] 
2[3A. Prohibition of employment of adolescents in certain hazardous occupations and 
process es.—No adolescent shall be employed or permitted to work in any of the hazardous occupatio
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHILD AND ADOLESCENT (PROHIBITION AND REGULATION) ACT, 1986.pdf - page 3]
 
process es.—No adolescent shall be employed or permitted to work in any of the hazardous occupations or 
processes set forth in the Schedule:  
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification, specify the nature of the non -hazardous 
work to which an adolescent may be permitted to work under this Act.]  
4. Power to amend the Schedule. —The Central Government, after giving by notif ication in the 
Official Gazette, not less than three months ’ notice of its intention so to do, may, by like notification, 3[add 
to, or, omit from,  the Schedule  any hazardous occupation or process ] and thereupon the Schedule shall be 
deemed to have been amended accordingly.  
5. 4[Technical Advisory Committee ].—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, constitute an advisory committee to be called the 4[Technical Advisory Committee ] 
(hereafter in this section referred to as the Committee) to advise the Central Government for the purpose of 
addition of occupations and processes  to the Schedule.  
(2) The Committee shall consist of a Chairman and such other members not  exceeding ten, as may be 
appoi nted by the Central Government.  
(3) The Committee shall meet as often as it may consider necessary and shall have power to regulat e 
its own procedure.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 35 of 2016, s. 5, for section 3 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
2. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f . 1-9-2016). 
3. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for “ add any occupation or process to the Schedule ” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
4. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for “Child Labour Technical Advisory Committee” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHILD AND ADOLESCENT (PROHIBITION AND REGULATION) ACT, 1986.pdf - page 4]
4 
 (4) The Committee may, if it deems it necessary so to do, constitute one o r more sub -committees a nd 
may appoint to any such sub -committee, whether generally or for the consideration of any particular matter, 
any person who is not a member of the Committee.  
(5) The term of office  of, the manner of filling casual vacancies in the  office of, and the allowances, if 
any, payable to, the Chairman and other members of the Committee, and the conditions and restrictions 
subject to which the Committee may appoint any person who is not a member of the Committee  as a 
member of any of its su b-committees shall be such as may be prescribed.  
PART III  
REGULATION OF CONDITIONS OF WORK OF 1[ADOLESCENTS]  
6. Application of Part .—The provisions of this Part shall apply to an establishment or a class of 
establishments in which none of the occupations or processes referred to in 2[section 3 A] is carried on.  
7. Hours and period of work .—(1) No 3[adolescent]  shall be required or permit ted to work in any 
establishment in excess of such number of hours as may be prescribed for such establishm ent or class of 
establishments.  
(2) The period of work on each day shall be so fixed that no period shall exceed three hours and that 
no 3[adolescent ] shall work for more than three hours before he has had an interval for rest for at least one 
hour.  
(3) The period of work of a 3[adolescent]  shall be so arranged that inclusive of his interval for rest, 
under sub -section ( 2), it shall not be spread over  more than six hours, including the time spent in waiting 
for work on any day.  
(4) No 3[adolescent]  shall be permitted or required t o work between 7 p.m . and 8 a.m.  
(5) No 3[adolescent] shall be required  or permitted to work overtime.  
(6) No 3[adolescent]  shall be required or permitted to work in any establishment on any day on which 
he has already been working in another establishment.  
8. Weekly holidays. —Every 4[adolescent]  employed in an estab
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHILD AND ADOLESCENT (PROHIBITION AND REGULATION) ACT, 1986.pdf - page 4]
n working in another establishment.  
8. Weekly holidays. —Every 4[adolescent]  employed in an establishment shall be allowed in each 
week, a holiday of one whole day, which day shall be specified by the occupier in a notice permanently 
exhibited in a conspicuous place in the establishment and the day so specified shall not be altere d by the 
occupier more than once in three months.  
9. Notice to Inspector .—(1) Every occupier in relation to an establishment in which a 5[adolescent]  
was employed or permitted to work immediately before the date of commencement of this Act in relation 
to such establishment shall, within a period of thirty days from such commence ment, send to the Inspector 
within whose local limits the establishment is situated, a written notice containing the f ollowing particulars, 
namely: — 
(a) the name and situation of the  establishment;  
(b) the name of the person in actual m anagement of the establishment;  
(c) the address to which communications relating to the establishment should be sent; and  
(d) the nature of the occupation or process carried on in the establishment.  
(2) Every occupier, in relation to an establishment, who employs, or permits to work, any 5[adolescent]  
after the date of commencement of this Act in relation to such establishment, shall, within a period of thirty 
days from the date of such employment, sen d to the Inspector within whose local limits the establishment 
is situated, a written notice containing the particulars as are mentioned in                    sub-section ( 1). 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 35 of 2016, s. 9, for “CHILDREN” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
2. Subs. by s. 10, ibid.,  for “section 3” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
3.  Subs. by s. 11, ibid.,  for “child” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
4. Subs. by s. 12,  ibid.,  for “child” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
5. Subs. by s. 13,  ibid.,  for “child” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHILD AND ADOLESCENT (PROHIBITION AND REGULATION) ACT, 1986.pdf - page 4]
 13,  ibid.,  for “child” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHILD AND ADOLESCENT (PROHIBITION AND REGULATION) ACT, 1986.pdf - page 5]
5 
 Explanation .—For the purposes of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), “date of commencement  of this Act, in 
relation to an establishment ” means the date of bringing into force of this Act in relation to such 
establishment.  
(3) Nothing in sections 7,  8 and 9 shall apply to any establishment wherein any process is carried on by 
the occupier with t he aid of his family or to any school established by, or receiving assistance or recognition 
from, Government.  
10. Disputes as to age. —If any question arises between an Inspector and an occupier as to the age of 
any 1[adolescent]  who is employed or is permitted to work by him in an establishment, the question shall, 
in the absence of a certificate as to the age of such 1[adolescent]  granted by the prescribed medical authority, 
be referred by the Inspector for decision to the presc ribed medical authority.  
11. Maintenance of register .—There shall be maintained by every occupier in respect of 2[adolescent]  
employed or permitted to work in any establishment, a register to be available for inspection by an Inspector 
at all times  during working hours or when work is being carried on in a ny such establishment, showing — 
(a) the name and date of birth of every 3[adolescent]  so employed or permitted to work;  
(b) hours and periods of work of any such 3[adolescent]  and the intervals of rest to which he is 
entitled;  
(c) the nature  of work of any such 3[adolescent] ; and  
(d) such other particulars as may be prescribed.  
12. Display of notice containing  abstract of 4[sections 3 A and 14 ].—Every railway administration, 
every port authority and every occupier shall cause to be displayed in a conspicuous and accessible place 
at every station on its railway or within the limits of a port or at the place of work, as the case may be, a 
notice in the local language and in the English language containing an abstract of 4[sections 3 A and 14 ]. 
13. Health and safety. —(1) The appropriate Government may, by 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHILD AND ADOLESCENT (PROHIBITION AND REGULATION) ACT, 1986.pdf - page 5]
bstract of 4[sections 3 A and 14 ]. 
13. Health and safety. —(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for the health and safety of the 5[adolescen t] employed or permitted to work in any establishment 
or class of establishments.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the said rules may provide for all 
or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) cleanliness in the place o f work  and its freedom from nuisance;  
(b) disposal of wastes and effluents;  
(c) ventilat ion and temperature;  
(d) dust and fume;  
(e) artificial humidification;  
(f) lighting;  
(g) drinking water;  
(h) latrine and urinals;  
(i) spittoons;  
(j) fencing of machinery;  
(k) work  at or near machinery in motion;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 35 of 2016, s . 14, for “child” (w.e.f 1 -9-2016).  
2. Subs. by s . 15, ibid., for “children” (w.e.f 1 -9-2016).  
3. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for “child” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
4. Subs. by s. 16, ibid., for “section 3 and 14” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
5. Subs. by s. 17, ibid., for “children” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHILD AND ADOLESCENT (PROHIBITION AND REGULATION) ACT, 1986.pdf - page 6]
6 
 (l) employment of 1[adolescent]  on dangerous mach ines; 
(m) instructions, training and supervision in relation to employment of 1[adolescent]  on dangerous 
machines;  
(n) device for cutting off power;  
(o) self-acting machines;  
(p) easing of new machinery;  
(q) floor, stairs and means of access;  
(r) pits, sumps, o penings in floors, etc.;  
(s) excessive weights;  
(t) protection of eyes;  
(u) explosive  or inflammable dust, gas, etc.;  
(v) precautions in case of fir e; 
(w) maintenance of buildings; and  
(x) safety of buildings and machinery.  
PART IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
14. Penalties .—2[(1) Whoever employs any child or permits any child to work in contravention of the 
provisions of section 3 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six 
months but which may extend to two years, or with fine which shall not be less than twenty thousand rupees 
but which may extend to fifty thousand rupees, or with both:  
Provided that the parents or gu ardians of such children shall not be punished unless they permit such 
child for commercial purposes in contravention of the provisions of section 3.  
(1A) Whoever employs any adolescent or permits any adolescent to work in contravention of the 
provisions of section 3A shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six 
months but which may extend to two years or with fine whic h shall not be less than twenty thousand rupees 
but which may extend to fifty thousand rupees, or with both:  
Provided that the parents or guardians of such adolescent shall not be punished unless they permit such 
adolescent to work in contravention of the provisions of section 3A.  
(1B) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and (1A) the parents or guardians of any 
child or adolescent referred to in section 3 or section 3A, shall not be liable for punishment, in case of the 
first offence .] 
3[(2) Whoever, having been convicted of an offence under
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHILD AND ADOLESCENT (PROHIBITION AND REGULATION) ACT, 1986.pdf - page 6]
nishment, in case of the 
first offence .] 
3[(2) Whoever, having been convicted of an offence under section 3 or section 3A commits a like 
offence afterwards, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one 
year but which may extend to three years.  
(2A) Notwithsta nding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), the parents or guardian having been 
convicted of an offence under section 3 or section 3A, commits a like offence afterwards, he shall be 
punishable with a fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees .] 
(3) Whoever — 
4*   *  *   *   * 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 35 of 2016, s. 17, for “children” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
2. Subs. by s. 18, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
3. Subs. by s. 18, ibid.,  for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
4. Clauses ( a), (b) and  (c) omitted by s. 18, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHILD AND ADOLESCENT (PROHIBITION AND REGULATION) ACT, 1986.pdf - page 7]
7 
 (d) fails to comply with or contravenes any other provisions of this Ac t or the rules made 
thereunder,  
shall be punishable with simple imprisonment which may extend to one month or with fine which may 
extend to ten thousand rupee s or with both.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Gujarat  
Amendment  of section  14 of 61  of 1986.— In the Child and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and 
Regulation) Act, 1986  (61 of 1986) , in its application to the State of Gujarat (hereinafter referred to as 
“the principal Act”), in section 14, - 
(i) in sub -section (1), for the words “fifty thousand rupees”, the words “one lakh rupees” shall 
be substituted;  
(ii)  in sub -section (1A), for the words “fifty thousand rupees”, the words “one lakh rupees” 
shall be  substituted.  
[Vide Gujarat Act 19 of 2021, s. 2]  
1[14A. Offences to be Congnizable. —Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , any offence committed by an employer and punishable under section 3 or 
section 3A shall be cognizable.  
14B.Child and Adolescent Labour  Rehabilitation Fund. —(1) The appropriate Government shall 
constitute a Fund in every district or for two or more distri cts to be called the Child and Adolescent Labour 
Rehabilitation Fund to which the amount of the fine realized from the employer of the child and adolescent, 
within the jurisdiction of such district o r districts, shall be credited.  
(2) The appropriate Gover nment shall credit an amount of fifteen thousand rupees to the Fund for each 
child or adolescent for whom the fine amount has been credited under sub -section ( 1).  
(3) The amount credited to the Fund under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall be deposited in suc h banks or 
invested in such manner, as the appropriate Gov ernment may decide.  
(4) The amount deposited or invested, as the case may be under sub -section ( 3), and the interest accrued 
on it, shall be paid to the child or adolescent in whose favour such amou nt is credited,
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHILD AND ADOLESCENT (PROHIBITION AND REGULATION) ACT, 1986.pdf - page 7]
t accrued 
on it, shall be paid to the child or adolescent in whose favour such amou nt is credited, in such manner as 
may be prescribed.  
Expla nation. —For the purposes of appropriate Government, the Central Government shall include the 
Administrator or the Lieutenant Governor of a Union territory under article 239A of the Constitution.  
14C. Rehabilitation of rescued child or adolescent .—The child or adolescent, who is employed in 
contravention of the provisions of this Act and rescued, shall be rehabilitated in accordance with the laws 
for the time being in force.  
14D. Compounding of offence s.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , the District Magistrate may, on the application of the accused person, 
compound any offence committed for the first time by him, under sub -section ( 3) of section 14 or any 
offence committed by an accused person being parent or a guardian, in such manner and on payment of 
such amount to the appropriate Government, as may be prescribed.  
(2) If the accused fails to pay such amount for composition of the offenc e, then, the proceedings shall 
be continued against such person in accordance with the provisions of this Act.  
(3) Where any offence is compounded before the institution of any prosecution, no prosecution shall 
be instituted in relation to such offence, ag ainst the offender in relation to whom the offence is so 
compounded.  
(4) Where the composition of any offence is made after the institution of any prosecution, such 
composition shall be brought in writing, to the notice of the Court in which the prosecutio n is pending and 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 35 of 2016, s. 19 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHILD AND ADOLESCENT (PROHIBITION AND REGULATION) ACT, 1986.pdf - page 8]
8 
 on the approval of the composition of the offence being given, the person against whom the offence is so 
compounded, shall be discharged .] 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Gujarat  
Amendment  of section 14D of 61 of 1986. - In the principal Act, in section 14D, in sub -section (1), for the 
words “District Magistrate”, the words “District Magistrate, Municipal Commissioner, Director of Labour 
or, as the case may be, the Regional Commissioner of Municipalities” shall be  substitu ted. 
[Vide Gujarat Act 19 of 2021, s. 3]  
15. Modified application of certain laws in relation to penalties. —(1) Where any person is found 
guilty and convicted of cont ravention of any of the provisions mentioned in sub -section ( 2), he shall be 
liable to penalties as provided in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) of section 14 of this Act and not under the Acts 
in which those provisions are contained.  
(2) The provisions referred to in sub -section ( 1) are the provisions mentioned below: — 
(a) section 67 of the Factori es Act, 1948 (63 of 1948);  
(b) section 40 of th e Mines Act, 1952 (35 of 195 2); 
(c) section 109 of the Merchant Shipp ing Act, 1958 (44 of 1958); and  
(d) section 21 of the Motor Transport Workers Act, 1961 (27 of 1961).  
16. Procedure relating to offences .—(1) Any person, police officer or Inspector may file a complaint 
of the commission of an offence under this Act in any c ourt of competent jurisdiction.  
(2) Every certificate as to the age of a child which has been granted by a prescribed medical authority 
shall, for the purposes of this Act, be conclusive evidence as to the age o f the child to whom it relates.  
(3) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first class shall try any 
offence under this Act.  
17. Appointment of  Inspectors .—The appropriate Government may appoint Inspectors for the 
purposes of securing compliance with the provisions of this Act and any Inspector so appointed shall be 
deemed to be a public ser
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHILD AND ADOLESCENT (PROHIBITION AND REGULATION) ACT, 1986.pdf - page 8]
e with the provisions of this Act and any Inspector so appointed shall be 
deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
1[17A. District Magistrate to implement the provisions .—The appropriate Government may confer 
such powers and impose such duties on a District Magistrate as may be necessary, to ensure that the 
provisions of this Act are properly carried out and the  District Magistrate may specify the officer, 
subordinate to him, who shall exercise all or any of the powers, and perform all or any of the duties, so 
conferred or imposed and the local limits within which such powers or duties shall be carried out by th e 
officer as may be prescribed.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Gujarat  
Amendment  of section 17A of 61  of 1986 .— In the principal Act, in section 17A,  - 
(i) for the words “District Magistrate”, the words “District Magistrate, Municipal Commissioner, 
Director of Labour or, as the case may be, the Regional Commissioner of Municipalities” 
shall be substituted;  
(ii) in the marginal note, for the word “District Magistrate”, the words “District Magistrate, 
Municipal Commissioner, Director of Labour or Regional Commissioner of Municipalit ies” 
shall be  substituted.  
[Vide Gujarat Act 19 of 2021, s. 4]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 35 of 2016, s. 20 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHILD AND ADOLESCENT (PROHIBITION AND REGULATION) ACT, 1986.pdf - page 9]
9 
  
 
 
17B. Inspection and monitoring .—The appropriate Government shall make or cause to be made 
periodic inspection of the places at which the employment of children is prohibited  and hazardous 
occupations or processes are carried out at such intervals as it thinks fit, and monitor the issues, relating to 
the provisions of this Act.]  
18. Power to make rules. —(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazett e and subject to the condition of previous publication, make rules for carrying into eff ect the 
provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide 
for all or any of t he following  matters, namely: — 
1[(a) the conditions and the safety measures under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) and other activities 
under clause ( b) to Explanation  of sub -section ( 2) of section 3; ] 
2[(b)] the term of office of, the manner of filling casual vacancies of, and the allowances payable 
to, the Chairman and members of the 3[Technical Advisory Committee ] and the conditions  and 
restrictions subject to which a non -member may be appointed to a sub -committee under sub -section ( 5) 
of section  5; 
4[(c)] number of hours for which a 5[adolescent ] may be required or permitted to work unde r sub -
section ( 1) of section 7;  
6[(d)] grant of certificates of age in respect of young persons in employment or seeking 
employment, the medical authorities which may issue such certificate, the form of such certificate, the 
charges which may be made thereunder and the manner in which such cer tificate may be  issued:  
Provided that no charge shall be made for the issue of any such certificate if the application is 
accompanied by evidence of age deemed satisfact ory by the authority concerned;  
7[(e)] the other particulars which a register maintaine d under section 11 should contain.  
8[(f) the manner of payment of amount to the child or adolescent under sub -s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHILD AND ADOLESCENT (PROHIBITION AND REGULATION) ACT, 1986.pdf - page 9]
n 11 should contain.  
8[(f) the manner of payment of amount to the child or adolescent under sub -section ( 4) of section 
14B;  
(g) the manner of composition of the offence and payment of amount to the appropriate 
Government under sub -section ( 1) of section 14D;  
(h) the powers to be exercised and the duties to be performed by the officer specified and the local 
limits within which such powers or duties shall be carried out under section 17A. ] 
19. Rules and notifications to be laid before Parliamen t or State legislature .—(1) Every rule made 
under this Act by the Central Government and every notification issued under section 4, shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made or issued, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total 
period of thirty days  which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or notif ication or both Houses agree that the rule 
or notification should not be made or issued, the rule or notification shall thereafter have effect only in such 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 35 of 2016 , s. 21 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
2. Clause ( a) relettered  as clause ( b) thereof by s. 21, ibid. (w.e.f  1-9-2016).  
3. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for “Child Labour Technical Advisory Committee” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
4. Clause ( b) relettered as clause ( c) thereof by s. 21, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
5. Subs. by s. 21,  ibid., for “child”  (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
6. Clause ( c) relettered as clause ( d) thereof by s. 21, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
7. Clause ( d) relettered as clause  (e) thereof by s. 21, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-9-2016).  
8. Ins. by Act 35 of 2016, s. 21 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHILD AND ADOLESCENT (PROHIBITION AND REGULATION) ACT, 1986.pdf - page 10]
10 
 modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or ann ulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done u nder that rule or notification.  
(2) Every rule made by a State Government under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is 
made, before the legislature of that State.  
20. Certain other provisions of law not barred. —Subject to the provisions contained in section 15, 
the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, 
the provisions of the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948), the Plantations Labour Act, 1951 (69 of 1951) and 
the Mines Act, 1952 (35 of 1952).  
21. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient  for removal of the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of three years from t he date on 
which this Act receiv es the assent of the President.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before the 
Houses of Parliament.  
22. Repeal and savings .—(1) The Employment of Children Act, 1938 (26  of 1938) is hereby r epealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken or purported to have been done or 
taken under the Act so repealed shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be 
deemed to have  been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
[Sections  23 to 26.]—Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act , 2001 (30 of 2001), s. 2 and the First 
Schedule  (w.e.f . 3-9-2001).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHILD AND ADOLESCENT (PROHIBITION AND REGULATION) ACT, 1986.pdf - page 11]
11 
 1[THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 3 A) 
(1) Mines.  
(2) Inflammable substances or explosives.  
(3) Hazardous process.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this Schedule, “hazardous process” has the meaning assigned to it 
in clause ( cb) of the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948) ]. 
                                                           
1. Subs. b y Act 35 of 2016, s. 22, for the Schedule (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHUTIA NAGPUR ENCUMBERED ESTATES ACT, 1876.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE  CHUTIA NAGPUR ENCUMBERED ESTATES ACT, 1876  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
I.—PRELIMINARY . 
PREAMBLE . 
SECTIONS . 
1. Short title . 
II.—VESTING  ORDER . 
2. Power to vest management of property in an officer appointed by Commissioner . 
3. Effect of order . 
    Bar of suits.  
    Freedom from arrest.  
    Moveable property not liable to attachment for prior debts.  
    Cessation of power to alienate.  
    Immoveable property freed from attachment.  
    Cessation of power to contract.  
III.—DUTIES OF MANAGER . 
4. Manager to receive rents and profits, and pay therefrom . 
a. the Government demand,  
b. rent due to superior landlord,  
c. annual sum for maintenance of holder of property and his heir . 
d. costs of repairs and improvements.  
e. costs of management, and  
f. the debts and liabilities.  
IV.—SETTLEMENT OF DEBTS . 
 
5. Notice to claimants against holder of property.  
Notice how published.  
6. Claim to contain full particulars.  
Documents to be given up.  
Entries in books . 
Exclusion of documents not produced.  
7. Debt not duly notified to be barred.  
Provision for admission of claim within further period of nine months.  
8. Determination of debts. 
9. Power to inquire into consideration for leases.  
    Power to set aside leases.  
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHUTIA NAGPUR ENCUMBERED ESTATES ACT, 1876.pdf - page 2]
2 
 SECTIONS . 
10. A ppeal to Deputy  Commissioner.  
Appeal to Commissioner.  
11. Scheme for settlement of debts.  
Power to return scheme for revision.  
12. Restoration of owner to his property.  
 Restoration of owner to his property.  
 Revival of barred proceedings and debts.  
 Reinstatement of mortgagees.  
 Period of limitation as to revived proceedings and debts.  
 
V.—POWERS OF MANAGER . 
 
13. Power to call for further particulars.  
14. Power to summon witnesses and compel production of documents.  
15. Investigation to be deemed a ju dicial proceeding.  
      Statements of persons examined to be evidence.  
16. Manager to have powers of holder of estate.  
      Power to remove mortgagee or conditional vendee in possession.  
17. Power to lease.  
18. Power to raise money by mortgage or sale.  
 Manager’s receipts.  
 
VI.—MISCELLANEOUS . 
19. Power to make rules.  
20. Power to appoint new Managers.  
21. Managers to be public servants.  
22. Bar of suits.  
23. Saving of jurisdiction of Courts in Chutia Nagpur in respect of certain suits.  
24. Act not to affect powers conferred by Bengal Act II of 1869.  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHUTIA NAGPUR ENCUMBERED ESTATES ACT, 1876.pdf - page 3]
3 
  
 
THE CH UTIA  NAGPUR ENCUMBERED ESTATES ACT, 1876  
ACT NO. VI OF 1876  
[14th March , 1876 .] 
An Act to relieve certain Landholders in Chutia  Nagpur . 
Preamble. —WHEREAS  it is expedient to provide for the relief of holders of land in Ch utia Nagpur 
who may be in debt, and whose immov eable property may be subject to mortgages, charges and liens;  It is 
hereby enacted as follows: — 
I.—PRELIMINARY . 
1. Short title. —This Act may be called “The Ch utia Nagpur Encumbered Estates Act, 1876. ” 
II.—VESTING  ORDER . 
2. Power to vest management of property in an officer appointed by Commissioner. —Whenever 
any holder of immov eable property, or (when such holder is a minor, or of unsound mind, or an idiot) his 
guardian, committee or other legal curator,  
or the person who would be heir to such holder if he died intestate,  
or (when such person is a minor, or of unsound mind, or a n idiot) his guardian, committee or other legal 
curator,  
or when any such property belonging to such holder has been attached in execution of a decree of a 
Civil Court, the Deputy Commissioner within whose jurisdiction such property is situate,  
applies in writing to the Commissioner, stating that the holder of the said property is subject to, or that 
his said property is charged with, debts or liabilities other than debts due, or liabilities incurred, to 
Government, and requesting that the provisions of thi s Act be applied to his case,  
the Commissioner may, with the previous consent of the Lieutenant -Governor of Bengal, by order 
published in the Calcutta Gazette , appoint an officer (hereinafter called the Manager), and vest in him the 
management of the whole  or any portion of the immoveable property of or to which the said holder is then 
possessed or entitled in his own right, or which he is entitled to redeem, or which may be acquired by or 
devolve on him or his heir, during the continuance of such managemen t. 
3. Effect of order .—On the such publication th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHUTIA NAGPUR ENCUMBERED ESTATES ACT, 1876.pdf - page 3]
s heir, during the continuance of such managemen t. 
3. Effect of order .—On the such publication the following consequences shall ensue :— 
Bar of suits .—First , all proceedings which may then be pending in any Civil Court in  British India, in 
respect to such debts or liabilities, shall be barred; and all processes, execu tions and attachments for or in 
respect of such debts and liabilities shall become null and void;  
Freedom from arrest .—Secondly , so long as such management continues, the holder of the said 
property and his heir shall not be liable to arres t for or in respect of the debts and liabilities to which the 
said holder was immediately before the  said publication subject, or with which the property so vested as 
aforesaid or any part thereof was at the time of the said publication charged, other than  debts due, or 
liabilities incurred, to Government , 
Mov eable property not liable to attach ment  for prior debts. —nor shall their movable property be 
liable to attachment or sale, under process of any Civil Court in  British India , for or in respect of such d ebts 
and liabilities other than as aforesaid; and  
Cessation of power to alienate.  —Thirdly , so long as such management continues,  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHUTIA NAGPUR ENCUMBERED ESTATES ACT, 1876.pdf - page 4]
4 
 (a) the holder of the said immov eable property and his heir shall be incompetent to mortgage, charge, 
lease or alienate their immov eable property or any part thereof, or to grant valid receipts for the rents and 
profits arising or accruing therefrom,  
Immov eable property freed from attachment. —(b) such property shall be exempt from attachment 
or sale under such process as aforesaid except for or in respect of debts due, or liabilities incurred, to 
Government , and 
Cessation of power to contract. —(c) the holder of the same property and his heir shall be incapable 
of entering into any contract which may involve them , or either  of them, in pecuniary liability.  
III.—DUTIES OF MANAGER . 
4. Manager to receive rents and profits ,—The Manager shall, during his management of the said 
immov eable property, receive and recover all rents and profits due in respect thereof; and shall , upon 
receiving such rents and profits, give receipts for the same.  
From the sums so received, he shall pay — 
 and pay therefrom the Government demand, First , the Government revenue, and all debts of 
liabilities for the time being due or incurred to Governm ent; 
rent due to superi or landlord , Secondly , in the case of under -tenures, the rent (if any) due to the 
superior landlord, in respect of the said property : 
annual sum for maintenance of holder of property and his heir , Thirdly , such annual sums as 
appears to the Commissioner requisite for the maintenance of the holder of the property, his heir, and their 
families : 
costs of repairs and improvements , Fourthly  the costs of such repairs and improvements of the 
property as appear necessary to the Manager and are approved by the Commissioner:   
cost of management and the debt and liabilities , and the residue shall be applied in discharge of the 
costs of the management, and in settlement of such debts and liabilities of the holder of the property and 
his heir , as may be established under the provision 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHUTIA NAGPUR ENCUMBERED ESTATES ACT, 1876.pdf - page 4]
liabilities of the holder of the property and 
his heir , as may be established under the provision hereinafter contained.  
IV.—SETTLEMENT OF DEBTS . 
5. Notice to claimant against holder of property. —On the publication of the order vesting in him the 
management on the said property, the manager shall publish a notice in English , Urdu and Hindi, calling 
upon all persons having claims against the holder of the said property to notify the same in writing to such 
Manager within three months from the date of the publication.  
Notice how publish ed.—Such notice shall be published by being posted at the kachahris in the district 
or districts in which the said property lies, and at such other places as the Manager thinks fit.  
6. Claim to contain full particulars.  —Every such claimant shall, along  with his claim present full 
particulars thereof.  
Documents to be given up. —Every document on which the claimant f ounds his claim, or on which he 
relies in support thereof, shall be delivered to the Manager along  with the claim.  
Entries in Books .—If the document be an entry in any book, the claimant shall produce the book to 
the Manager, together with a copy of the entry on which he relies. The Manager shall mark the book for the 
purpose of identification, and, after examining and comparing the cop y with the original , shall return the 
book to the claimant.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHUTIA NAGPUR ENCUMBERED ESTATES ACT, 1876.pdf - page 5]
5 
 Exclusion of documents not produced. —If any document in the possession or under the control of 
the claimant is not delivered or produced by him to the Manager along with the claim, the Manager may  
refuse to receive such document in evidence on the claimant's behalf at the investigation of the case.  
7. Debt not duly notified to be barred. —Every debt or liability other than debts due, or 
liabilities  incurred, to Government  or (in the case of under -tenures) , the rent due to the superior landlord, 
to which the holder of the property is subject, or with which the property is charged, and which is not duly 
notified to the Manager within the time and in manner hereinbefore mentioned, shall be barred : 
Provi sion for admission of claim within further period of nine months .—Provided that , when proof 
is made to the Manager that the claimant was unable to comply with the provisions of sections five and six , 
the Manager may admit his claim within the further perio d of nine months  from the expiration of the said 
period of three months.  
8. Determination of debts. —The Manager shall, in accordance with the rules to be made under this 
Act, determine the amount of all principal debts and liabilities justly due to the several creditors of the 
holder of the property, and to persons holding mortgages, charges or liens thereon, and the interest (if any) 
due at the date of such determination, in respect of such debts and liabilities.  
9. Power to inquire into consideration f or leases. —If such property or any part thereof be in the 
possession of any person claiming to hold it under a lease,  dated within the three years immediately 
preceding the publication of the order mentioned in section two, the Manager, with the sanction o f the 
Deputy Commissioner and Commissioner (or of the Commissioner only if the Deputy Commissioner be 
himself the Manager), may inquire into the sufficiency of the consideration for which the lease  was given ; 
Power to set a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHUTIA NAGPUR ENCUMBERED ESTATES ACT, 1876.pdf - page 5]
y inquire into the sufficiency of the consideration for which the lease  was given ; 
Power to set aside leases. — and, if such consid eration appears to him insufficient, may by order either 
set aside the lease  or cause the person so in possession to pay such consideration for the said lease  as the 
Manager thinks fit, and in default of such payment the lease  or shall be cancelled . 
10. Ap peal to Deputy Commissioner.  –-An appeal against any refusal , admission, determination or 
order under section six, seven, eight or nine shall lie, if preferred within six weeks from the date thereof to 
the Deputy Commissioner within whose jurisdiction the property is situate , and the decision of the manager, 
if no such appeal has been so preferred,  shall  be final:  
Provided that, if the Deputy Commissioner be himself the Manager, the appeal shall lie to the 
Commissioner.  
Appeal to commissioner .—An appeal shall lie from any decision of the Deputy Commissioner, if 
preferred within six weeks of the date of his decision, to the Commissioner , and the decision of such 
Commissioner, or of the Deputy Commissioner if no such appeal has been so preferred,  shall  be final. 
11. Scheme for settlement of debts. —When the amount due in respect of the debts and liabilities 
mentioned in section eight has been finally determined, the Manager shall prepare and submit to the 
Commissioner a schedule of such debts and liabilities,  and a scheme for the settlement thereof ; and such 
scheme, when approved by the Commissioner, shall be carried into effect.  
Power to return scheme for revision. —Until such approval is given, the Commissioner may, as often 
as he thinks fit, send back such s cheme to the Manager for revision, and direct him to make such further 
inquiry as may be requisite for the proper preparation of the scheme.  
12. Restoration of owner to his property. —When all such debts and liabilities have been discharged,   
or if, within six months after the publicatio
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHUTIA NAGPUR ENCUMBERED ESTATES ACT, 1876.pdf - page 5]
ll such debts and liabilities have been discharged,   
or if, within six months after the publication of the order mentioned in section two, the Commissioner 
thinks that the provisions of this Act should not continue to apply to the case of the holder of the said 
property or his heir,  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHUTIA NAGPUR ENCUMBERED ESTATES ACT, 1876.pdf - page 6]
6 
 such holder or his heir shall be restored to the possession and enjoyment of the property, or of such part 
thereof as has not been sold by the Manager under the power contained in section eighteen,  but subject to 
the leases and mortgages (if any) granted a nd made by the Manager under the powers hereinafter contained . 
Restoration to be notified . Revival of barred proceedings and debts. Reinstatement of 
mortgag ees.—Where the holder of the property or his heir is so restored under the circumstances 
mentioned in the second clause of this section , such restoration shall be notified in the  Calcutta Gazette , and 
thereupon the proceedings, processes, executions, any attachments mentioned in section three  (so far as 
they relate to debts and liabilities which the Man ager has not paid off or compromised), and the debts and 
liabilities barred by section seven , shall be revived; and any mortgag ee or conditional vendee dispossessed 
under section sixteen  shall be reinstated, unless his claim under the mortgage or condition al sale has been 
satisfied;  
Period of limitation as to revived proceedings and debts .—and in calculating the periods of 
limitation applicable to such revived proceedings, and to suits to recover and enforce such revived debts 
and liabilities, the time intervening between such restoration and the publication of the order mentioned in 
section two, shall be excluded.  
V.—POWERS OF MANAGER . 
13. Power to call for further particulars.  —The manager may, from time to time, call for further and 
more detailed particulars of any claim preferred before him under this Act , and may at his discretion refuse 
to proceed with the investigation of the claim until such particulars are supplied.  
14. Power to summon witnesses and compel production of documents. —For the purposes of this 
Act, the Manager may summon and enforce the attendance of witness es and compel th em to give evidence, 
and compel the production of documents by the same m
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHUTIA NAGPUR ENCUMBERED ESTATES ACT, 1876.pdf - page 6]
 witness es and compel th em to give evidence, 
and compel the production of documents by the same means, and, as far as possible, in the same manner, 
as is provided in the case of a Civil Court by the Code of Civil Procedure.  
15. Investigation to be deemed judicial proceeding. —Ever y investigation conducted by the Manager 
with reference to any claim preferred before him under this Act, or to any matter connected with any such 
claim , shall be taken to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of the Indian Penal Code.  
Statements of persons examined to be evidence. —And every statement made by any person 
examined by or before the Manager with reference to such investigation, whether upon oath or otherwise, 
shall be taken to be evidence within the meaning of the same Code.  
16. Manager to have powers of holder of estate. —The Manager shall have , for the purpose of 
realizing and recovering the rents and profits of the said immovable property, the same powers as the holder 
of the property would have had for such purpose if this Act had not been passed.  
Power to remove mortgagee or conditional vendee in possession. —And if such property, or any part 
thereof, be in the possession of any mortgagee or conditional vendee, the Manager may apply to the Court 
of the Deputy Commissioner wi thin whose jurisdiction the property is situate, and such Court shall cause 
the same to be delivered to the Manager as if a decree therefor had been made in his favour, but without 
prejudice to the mortgagee or vendee preferring his claim under the provisi ons hereinbefore contained.  
17. Power to lease. —Subject to the rules made under Section 19, the Manager shall have power to 
demise all or any part of the property under his management for any term of year s not exceeding twenty 
years absolute , to take effec t in possession in consideration of any fine or fines, or without fine and reserving 
such rents and under such conditions as may be agreed upon.  
18. Power 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHUTIA NAGPUR ENCUMBERED ESTATES ACT, 1876.pdf - page 6]
without fine and reserving 
such rents and under such conditions as may be agreed upon.  
18. Power to raise money by mortgage or sale.—The Manager,  with the previous assent of the 
Commissioner, s hall have power to raise  any money which may be  required for the settlement of the debts 
and liabilities (other than  as aforesaid) to  which the holder of the property is subject, or with which such 
property or any part thereof is charged,  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHUTIA NAGPUR ENCUMBERED ESTATES ACT, 1876.pdf - page 7]
7 
 by demising by way of mortgage the whole or any part of such property for a term not exceeding twenty 
years from the said publication,  
or by selling, with the previous consent of the holder of the property and of the person (being of full 
age) who would be his heir if he died intestate, by public auction or by private contract, and upon such 
terms as the Manager thinks fit, such portion of the same property as may appear expedient.  
And no mortgagee advancing money upon any mortgage made under this section, shall be bound to see  
that such money is wanted, or that no more than is wanted is raised.  
Manager’s receipts. —And th e receipt of the Manager for any monies paid to him as such, shall 
discharge the person paying the same therefrom and from being concerned to see to the applica tion thereof.  
The power to mortgage conferred by this section shall not be exercisable until six months have elapsed 
from the publication of the order mentioned in section two.  
VI.—MISCELLANEOUS.  
19. Power to make rules. —The Lieutenant -Governor of Bengal may, from time to time, make rules 
consistent with this Act to regulate the following matter: — 
(a) the security to be required from subordinate officers under this Act , 
(b) the notices to be given under this Act and the publication of such notices , 
(c) the procedure to be followed in determining under section eight  the debts and liabilities due to 
creditors and other persons , and in performing the other duties imposed on any office r by this Act , 
(d) the allowance of interest on each of the principal debts a nd liabilities so determined, from the 
date on which it was incurred down to the date of the determination, and on the aggregate amount of 
such debts and liabilities from the date of the determination down to the date of payment , 
(e) the order of paying de bts and liabilities so determined;  
and generally for the guidance of officers in all matters connected with the enforcement of this Act.  

<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHUTIA NAGPUR ENCUMBERED ESTATES ACT, 1876.pdf - page 7]
generally for the guidance of officers in all matters connected with the enforcement of this Act.  
Such rules, when  approved by the Governor General in Council and published in the  Calcutta  
Gazette , shall have the force of law.  
20. Power to appoint new Managers .—Whenever the Commissioner thinks fit, he may appoint any 
officer to be a Manager instead of any Manager appointed under this Act; and thereupon the property then 
vested under this Act in the former Manager s hall become vested in the new Manager.  
Every such new Manager shall have the same powers as if he had been originally appointed.  
21. Managers to be public servants. —Every Manager appointed under this Act shall be deemed a 
public servant within the meaning of the Indian Penal Code.  
22. Bar of suits. —No suit or other proceeding shall be maintained against any person in respect of 
anything done by him  bona  fide pursuant to this Act.  
23. Saving of jurisdiction of Courts in Ch utia Nagpur in respect of certain su its.—Nothing in this 
Act precludes the Courts in Chutia Nagpur having jurisdiction in suits relating to the succession to, or 
claims of maintenance from , any immoveable property brought under the operation of this Act, from 
entertaining and disposing of such suits; but to all such suits the Manager of such property shall be made a 
party.  
24. Act not to affect powers conferred by Bengal Act II of 1869. —Noth ing in this  Act shall be 
deemed to take away or abridge any power or authority conferred by an Act p assed by the Lieutenant -
Governor of Bengal in Council, entitled “An Act to ascertain, regulate  and record certain tenures in Chutia 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CHUTIA NAGPUR ENCUMBERED ESTATES ACT, 1876.pdf - page 8]
8 
 Nagpur,” on any person a ppointed to be a Special  Commissioner thereunder, or on the Commissioner of 
the division of Chutia Nagpur.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CINE-WORKERS AND CINEMA THEATRE WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE CINE -WORKERS AND CINEMA THEATRE WORKERS (REGULATION OF 
EMPLOYMENT) ACT, 1981  
___________  
ARRANG EMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT OF CINE -WORKERS  
3. Prohibition of employment of cine -worker without agreement . 
4. Conciliation officers . 
5. Duties of conciliation officers . 
6. Settlement to be binding and to be enforced by the competent authority . 
7. Constitution of Tribunals . 
8. Disqualification for the pre siding officers of Tribunals.  
9. Filling of vacancies . 
10. Finality of orders constituting Tribunals, etc . 
11. Reference of disputes to Tribunals.  
12. Procedure and powers of conciliation officers and Tribunals . 
13. Duties of Tribunals . 
14. Publication of awards of Tribunals . 
15. Revision . 
16. Application of Act 19 of 1952 to cine -workers.  
17. Penalties.  
18. Offences by companies . 
19. Cognizance of offences . 
20. Magistrate ’s power to impose enhanced penalties . 
21. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with this Chapter . 
22. Protection of action taken und er this Chapter . 
22A. Delegation of powers . 
23. Power to make rules . 
CHAPTER III  
REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT OF CINEMA THEATRE WORKERS  
24. Application of Act 19 of 1952.  
25. Application of Act 39 of 1972.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CINE-WORKERS AND CINEMA THEATRE WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 2]
2 
  
THE CINE -WORKERS AND CINEMA THEATRE WORKERS (REGULATION OF 
EMPLOYMENT) ACT, 1981  
ACT NO. 50 OF 1981  
[24th December , 1981.]  
An Act to provide for the regulation of the conditions of employment of certain cine -workers 
and cinema theatre workers and for matter s connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -second Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Cine -workers and 
Cinema Theatre Workers (Regul ation of Employment) Act, 1981.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and 
for different areas.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless th e conte xt otherwise requires, — 
(a) “cinema theatre ” means a place which is licensed under Part III of the Cinematograph Act, 
1952 (37 of 1952), or under any other law for the time being in force in a State for the exhi bition 
of a cinematograph film;  
(b) “cinemato graph film ” has the same meaning as in the Cinematograph Act, 1952                     
(37 of 1952);  
(c) “cine-worke r” means an individual — 
(i) who is employed, directly or through any contractor or other person, in or in 
connection with the production of  a feature film to work as an artiste (including actor, 
musician or dancer) or to do any work, skilled, unskilled, manual, supervisory, techni cal, 
artistic or otherwise; and  
(ii) whose remuneration with respect to such employment in or in connection with t he 
production of such feature film does not exceed, where such remuneration is by way of 
monthly wages, a sum of one thousand six hundred rupees per month, and where such 
remuneration is by way of a lump sum, a sum of fifteen thousand rupees;  
(d) “competen t authority ” means any authority authorised by the Cen
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CINE-WORKERS AND CINEMA THEATRE WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 2]
 of fifteen thousand rupees;  
(d) “competen t authority ” means any authority authorised by the Central Government by 
notification in the Official Gazette to perform all or any of the functions of the competent 
authority under th is Act;  
(e) “contractor ” means a person who furnishes or undertakes to f urnish cine -workers for being 
employed in or in connection with the production of a feature film, and incl udes a sub -contractor 
or agent;  
(f) “feature film ” means a full length cinematograph film produced wholly or partly in India 
with a format  and a story woven around a number of characters where the plot is revealed mainly 
through dialogues and not wholly through narration, animation or cartoon depiction, and does not 
include an adver tisement film;  
                                                           
1. 1st October, 1984, vide notification No. G.S.R . 676(E), dated 21st September, 1984, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3( i).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CINE-WORKERS AND CINEMA THEATRE WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 3]
3 
 (g) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(h) “producer ”, in relation to a feature film, means the person by whom the arrangements 
necessary for the making of such film (including the raising of finances and engaging             
cine-workers for the makin g of such film) are un dertaken;  
(i) “production ”, in relation to a feature film, includes any of the activities in  respect of the 
making thereof;  
(j) “Tribunal ” means a Cine -workers Tribun al constituted under section 7;  
(k) “wages ” means all emoluments which are payable to a wo rker in accordance with the 
terms of the contract of employment in cash, but does not include — 
(i) the cas h value of any food concession;  
(ii) any dearness allowance (that is to say, all cash payments, by whatever name called, 
paid to a worker on account o f a rise in the cost of living or on account of his being required 
to work in a place other than the place where he is normally residing), house rent allowance, 
overtime allowance, bonus, commission or any other similar allowance payable to the worker 
in respect of his employment or o f work done in such employment;  
(iii) any contribution paid or payable by the employer to any pension fund or provident 
fund or for the benefit of the worker under any law for the time being in force;  
(iv) any gratuity payable on the termination of his contract.  
CHAPTER II  
REGULATIO N OF EMPLOYMENT OF CINE -WORKERS  
3. Prohibition of employment of  cine-worker without agreement. —(1) No person shall be 
employed as a cine -worker in or in connection with the productio n of any feature film unless, — 
(a) an agreement in writing is entered into with such person by the producer of such film; or, 
where such person is employed through a contractor or other person, by the producer of such film 
and such contractor or other person; and  
(b) such agreement is registered with the competent authorit y by the producer of such film.  
(2) Every agreeme
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CINE-WORKERS AND CINEMA THEATRE WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 3]
eement is registered with the competent authorit y by the producer of such film.  
(2) Every agreement, referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall, — 
(a) be in the prescribed form;  
(b) specify the name of and such other particulars as may be prescribed with respect to, the 
person to whose employment it relates (hereafter in this sub -section referred to as  the employee);  
(c) specify the nature of assignment of the employee, his hours of work, the wages and other 
benefits (including benefits by way of provident  fund, if any), to which he is entitled; the mode of 
payment of such wages and contributions to such provident fund and all other term s and 
conditions of employment;  
(d) include, where such employee is employed through a contractor or other person, a specific 
condition to the effect that in the event of the contractor or other person failing to discharge his 
obligations under the agreement to the employee with respect to  payment of wages or any other 
matter, the producer of the film concerned shall be liable to discharge such obligations and shall 
be entitled to be reimbursed with respect thereto by the contractor or other person.  
(3) A copy of the agreement referred to i n sub -section ( 1) with respect to the employment of any 
person as a cine -worker shall, if such person is entitled to the benefits of provident fund under section 
16, also be forwarded by the producer of the film to the Regional Provident Fund Commissione r 
concerned under the Employees’  Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952                  
(19 of 1952).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CINE-WORKERS AND CINEMA THEATRE WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 4]
4 
 4. Conciliation officers .—The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
appoint such number of persons as it thinks  fit to be conciliation officers charged with the duty of 
mediating and promoting the settlement of any dispute (hereinafter referred to as the dispute) between 
a cine -worker and the producer of the film in, or in connection with, which he has been employe d or 
the contractor or other person through whom he has been so employed, with respect to the terms and 
conditions or termination, of employment of such cine -worker.  
5. Duties of conciliation officers. —(1) Where any dispute exists or is apprehended, the 
conciliation officer may hold conciliation procee dings in the prescribed manner.  
(2) The conciliation officer shall, for the purpose of bringing about a settlement of the dispute, 
without delay, investigate the dispute and all matters affecting the merits a nd the right settlement 
thereof and may do all such things as he thinks fit for the purpose of inducing the parties to come to a 
fair and amic able settlement of the dispute.  
(3) If a settlement of the dispute or of any of the matters in dispute is arrived at in the course of 
the conciliation proceedings, the conciliation officer shall send a report thereof to the Central 
Government together with a memorandum of the settlement signed  by the parties to the dispute.  
(4) If no such settlement is arrived at, the  conciliation officer shall, as soon as practicable, after 
the close of the investigation, send to the Central Government a full report setting forth the steps taken 
by him for ascertaining the facts and circumstances relating to the dispute and for bringi ng about a 
settlement thereof, together with a full statement of such facts and circumstances and the reasons on 
account of which, in his opinion , a sett lement could not be arrived at.  
(5) If, on a consideration of the report referred to in s ub-section ( 4), the Central Government i
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CINE-WORKERS AND CINEMA THEATRE WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 4]

(5) If, on a consideration of the report referred to in s ub-section ( 4), the Central Government is 
satisfied that there is a case for reference to a Tribunal, it may make such reference under section 11 
and where that Government does not make such a reference, it shall record and communicate to the 
parties concerned its reaso ns therefor.  
(6) A report under this section shall be submitted within three months of the commencement of 
the conciliation proceedings or within such shorter period as may be f ixed by the Central 
Government:  
Provided that, subject to the approval of the c onciliation officer, the time for the submission of the 
report may be extended by such period as may be agreed upon in writing by all the parties to the 
dispute.  
6. Settlement to be binding and to be enforced by the competent authority .—Every 
settlement arrived at in the course of a concilation proceeding under this Chapter shall be binding on 
all the parties to the dispute and shall not be called in question in any court and it shall be  the duty of 
the competent authority to enforce the terms of the said settlement.  
7. Constitution of Tribunals. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, constitute one or more Tribunals, to be called the Cine -workers Tribunals, with headquarters 
at such place as may be speci fied in the notification, for the adjudication of disputes relating to any 
matter specified in any agreement of the n ature referred to in section 3.  
(2) A Tribunal shall consist of one person only to be appoi nted by the Central Government.  
(3) A person sha ll not be qualified for appointment as the presiding  officer of a Tribunal unless —  
(a) he is, or has been, or is qualified to be, a Judge of a High Court; or  
(b) he has, for a period of not less than three years, been a District Judge or an  Additional 
District Judge; or  
(c) he has held the office of the presiding officer of an Industrial Tribunal constituted und
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CINE-WORKERS AND CINEMA THEATRE WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 4]
; or  
(c) he has held the office of the presiding officer of an Industrial Tribunal constituted under 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), for a per iod of not less than two years.  
(4) The Central Government may, if it so  thinks fit, appoint two persons as assessors to advice the 
Tribuna l in any proceedings before it.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CINE-WORKERS AND CINEMA THEATRE WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 5]
5 
 8. Disqualification for the presiding officers of Tribunals. —No person shall be appointed to, or 
continue in, the office of the presiding officer of a Tribunal, i f—  
(a) he i s not an independent person; or  
(b) he has attained the age of sixty -five years.  
9. Filling of vacancies. —If, for any reason, a vacancy (other than a temporary absence) occurs in 
the office of the presiding officer of a Tribunal, th e Central Government shall appoint another person 
in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill the vacancy, and the proceeding may be continued 
before the Tribunal from the stage at which the vacancy is filled.  
10. Finality of orders constituting  Tribunals, etc. —(1) No order of the Central Government 
appointing any person as the presiding officer of a Tribunal shall be called in question in any manner; 
and no act or proceeding before any Tribunal shall be called in question in any manner on the gr ound 
merely of any defect in the constitution of such Tribunal.  
(2) No settlement arrived at in the course of a conciliation proceeding shall be invalid by reason 
only of the fact that such settlement was arrived at after the expiry of the period referred to in                
sub-section ( 6) of section 5.  
11. Reference of disputes to Tribunals .—(1) Where, on a consideration of the report referred to 
in sub -section ( 4) of section 5, the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary so to do, it may, 
by order in writing, refer the dispute or any matter appearing to be connected with, or relevant to, the 
dispute, to a Tribunal for adjudication.  
(2) Where in an order referred to in sub -section ( 1) or in a subsequent order, the Central 
Government has spec ified the points of dispute for adjudication, the Tribunal shall confine its 
adjudication to those points and matters incidental thereto.  
12. Procedure and powers of conciliation officers and Tribunals .—(1) Subject to any rules 
that may be made in this be half, a c
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CINE-WORKERS AND CINEMA THEATRE WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 5]
onciliation officers and Tribunals .—(1) Subject to any rules 
that may be made in this be half, a conciliation officer or a Tribunal shall follow such procedure as the 
officer or Tribuna l may think fit.  
(2) A conciliation officer or a Tribunal may, for the purpose of inquiry into any existing or 
apprehended dispute, after giving reasonable notice, enter any premises in the occupati on of any party 
to the dispute.  
(3) Every Tribunal shall have the same powers as are vested in a Civil Court under the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), when trying a suit, in respect of t he following matt ers, namely: — 
(a) enforcing the attendance of any pe rson and examining him on oath;  
(b) compelling the production of documents and material objects;  
(c) issuing commissions for th e examination of witnesses; and  
(d) in respect of such othe r matters as may b e prescribed;  
and every inquiry or investigation by a Tribunal shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) and the Tribunal shall be 
deemed to be a Civil Court for the purpose s of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of 
Crimin al Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
(4) A conciliation officer may call for and inspect any document which he has ground for 
considering to be relevant to the dispute or to be necessary for the purpose of verifying the 
implementation of any award or carrying out any other duty imposed on him under this Chapter, and 
for the aforesaid purposes, the conciliation officer shall have the same powers as are vested in a Civil 
Court under the Code of Civil Procedure , 1908 (5 of 1908), in respect of compelli ng the production of 
documents.  
(5) A Tribunal may, if it so thinks fit, appoint one or more persons having special knowledge of 
the matter under consideration as assessor or assessors to advise it in the proceeding before it.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CINE-WORKERS AND CINEMA THEATRE WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 5]
se it in the proceeding before it.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CINE-WORKERS AND CINEMA THEATRE WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 6]
6 
 (6) A Tribunal may grant to any party to any proceeding before it, such interim or other reliefs 
(whether subject to any conditions or not), including stay of any order, issue of any injunction or 
direction in regard to payment of wag es or other amounts payable under the agreement referred to in 
section 3, setting aside any unilateral termination of contract or the dismissal of a worker or 
reinstating a worker, as it deems just and proper in the circumstances of the case:  
Provided tha t the Tribunal shall not grant any such interim relief unless all the parties to the 
proceeding have been served with a notice on the application for such interim relief and have been 
given a reasona ble opportunity of being heard:  
Provided further that the  Tribunal may, having regard to the nature of the interim relief sought 
and the circumstances of the case, pass appropriate orders granting such interim relief as it deems just 
and proper in the circumstances of the case before the notice referred to in th e preceding proviso is 
served on  the parties to the proceeding:  
Provided also that where the Tribunal makes any order under the proviso immediately preceding, 
it shall record the reasons for making the order before complying with the requirements specified  in 
the first proviso.  
(7) Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, the awarding of damages in, and the costs 
of, and incidental to, any proceeding before a Tribunal shall be in the discretion of that Tribunal and 
the Tribunal shall have full power to determine by and to whom and to what extent and subject to 
what conditions, if any, such damages or costs are to be paid, and to give all necessary directions for 
the purposes aforesaid and such damages or costs may, on an application made to the Central 
Government by the person entitled, be directed to be recovered by that Government in the same 
manner as an arrear of land revenue.  
13. Duties of Tribunals. —Where  a dispute has been re
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CINE-WORKERS AND CINEMA THEATRE WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 6]
 same 
manner as an arrear of land revenue.  
13. Duties of Tribunals. —Where  a dispute has been referred to a Tribunal for adjudication, it 
shall hold its proceedings expeditiously and shall submit its award to the Central Government 
ordinarily within a period of three months from the date on which such indust rial dispute is refer red to 
it: 
Provided that in computing the period of three months under this section, the period for which the 
proceedings before the Tribunal have been stayed by any injunct ion or order shall be excluded.  
14. Publ ication of awards of Tribunals. —(1) Every a ward of a Tribunal shall, within a period of 
thirty days from the date of its receipt by the Central Government, be published in such manner  as that 
Government thinks fit.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of section 15, the award shall be final and binding on  all the parties 
to the dispute and shall not be called in question in any Court in any manner whatsoever.  
(3) The award of a Tribunal shall be executed in the same manner as if it were a decree of a Civil 
Court.  
15. Revision. —(1) The High Court may, on t he application of any person aggrieved by the award 
of a Tribunal, call for and examine the record of the Tribunal, to satisfy itself as to the regularity of 
the proceeding before such Tribunal or the correctness, legality or propriety of any award passed 
therein and if, in any case, it appears to the High Court that any such award should be modified, 
annulled or reversed, it ma y pass such orders accordingly:  
Provided that where the presiding officer of the Tribunal is a Judge of a High Court, such 
applicat ion shall be heard and disposed of by not less tha n two Judges of the High Court:  
Provided further that where the award of the Tribunal provides for the payment by the producer of 
any film or, as the case may be, the contractor or other person of any amoun t either by way of 
compensation to the cine -worker or by way of damages, no such applica
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CINE-WORKERS AND CINEMA THEATRE WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 6]
any amoun t either by way of 
compensation to the cine -worker or by way of damages, no such application by the producer, 
contractor or other person shall be entertained by the High Court unless the applicant deposits with 
the High Court or with such other authority a s may be prescribed  the amount ordered to be paid:  
Provided also that where, in any particular case, the High Court is of opinion that the deposit of 
any amount ordered to be paid would cause undue hardship to the applicant, the High Court may 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CINE-WORKERS AND CINEMA THEATRE WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 7]
7 
 dispense wit h such deposit subject to such conditions as it may deem fit to impose so as to safeguard 
the interests of the cine -worker concerned.  
(2) Every application to the High Court under sub -section ( 1) shall be preferred within ninety 
days from the date on which  the aw ard was passed by the Tribunal:  
Provided that the High Court may, in its discretion, allow further time not exceeding one month 
for the filing of any such application, if it is satisfied that the applicant had sufficient cause for not 
preferring the  application within the time  specified in this sub -section.  
(3) In this section, “High Court ” means the High Court within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction, the headquarters of the Tribunal is situated.   
16. Application of Act 19 of 1952 to cine-workers. —The Employees ’ Provident Funds and 
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952, as in force for the time being, shall apply to every cine -worker 
who has worked in not less than three feature films with one or more producers, as if such                    
cine-worker were an employee within the meaning of that Act.  
17. Penalties .—(1) Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 3 shall be punishable with fine 
which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees but which may extend to fifty thousand rupee s:  
Provided that the Court may, for any adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the 
judgment, impose a fine of  less than ten thousand rupees.  
(2) Where any person convicted of an offence under sub -section ( 1) is again convicted of an 
offence under  the same provision, he shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than twenty 
thousand rupees but which  may extend to one lakh rupees:  
Provided that the Court may, for any adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the 
judgment, impose a f ine of le ss than twenty thousand rupees.  
18. Offences by companies. —(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CINE-WORKERS AND CINEMA THEATRE WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 7]
es by companies. —(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, 
shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such pers on liable to any 
punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had 
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence  under this Act has 
been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent 
or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or 
other officer of the company, such  director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be 
guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body  corporate and includes a firm or other association  of 
individuals; and  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
19. Cognizance of offences. —No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act 
except on a complaint made  by, or with the permission in writing of, the Central Government or an 
officer empowered by it in this behalf and no court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a 
Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall try an off ence punishable under this  Act. 
20. Magistrate ’s power to impose enhanced penalties .—Notwithstanding anything contained in 
section 29 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), it shall be lawful for any 
Metropolitan Magistrate or any Judicial Ma
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CINE-WORKERS AND CINEMA THEATRE WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 7]
 Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), it shall be lawful for any 
Metropolitan Magistrate or any Judicial Magistrate of the first class to pass any sentence authorised 
by th is Act.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CINE-WORKERS AND CINEMA THEATRE WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 8]
8 
 21. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with this Chapter .—The provisions of this 
Chapter shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law 
for the time be ing in force or in the terms of any agreement or contract of service.  
22. Protection of action taken under this Chapter .—(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal 
proceedings shall lie against any competent authority, conciliation officer, or any other emplo yee of 
the Central Government or the presiding officer of a Tribunal, for anything which is in good faith 
done, or intended to be done, in pursuance of this Act or any  rule or order made thereunder.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Central Government for any damage 
caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in 
pursuance of this Act or any rule or notification or order made or issued thereunder.  
1[22A. Delegation of powers .—The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act or rules made thereunder (other than 
the powers conferred by this section and section 23) shall, in relation to such matters and subject  to 
such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the notification , be exercisable also by the State 
Government or by such officer or authority subordinate to the State Government as may be specified 
in the notification.]  
23. Power to make rules .—(1) The  Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Chapter.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the fo llowing matt ers, namely: — 
(a) the form in which an agreement may be entered into by a producer with a cine -worker 
under section 3 and the other conditions of employment ; 
(b) the manner in which proceedings may be hel
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CINE-WORKERS AND CINEMA THEATRE WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 8]
r section 3 and the other conditions of employment ; 
(b) the manner in which proceedings may be held by a conciliation officer under                       
sub-section ( 1) of section 5;  
(c) the procedure to be followed by a conciliation office r or Tribunal under section 12;  
(d) the matters referred to in clause ( d) of sub -section ( 3) of section 12;  
(e) the damages or costs that may be awarded by a Tribunal under sub -section ( 7) of              
section 12;  
(f) any other matter which is require d to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Chapter shall be laid, as soon as may 
be after it is made, before  each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive s essions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case 
may be; so, however, that an y such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
CHAPTER III  
REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT OF CINEMA THEATRE WORKERS  
24. Application of Act 19 of 1952 .—The provisions of the Employees ’ Provident Funds and 
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952, as in force for the time being, shall apply to every cinema theatre 
in which five or more workers are employed on any day, as if such cinema theatre were an 
establishment to which the aforesaid Act h ad been applied by a notification of the Central 
Government under the proviso to sub -section ( 3) of section 1 thereof, and as if each such worker were 
an employee within the meaning of that Act.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 35 of 1988, 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CINE-WORKERS AND CINEMA THEATRE WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 8]
 that Act.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 35 of 1988, s. 2 (w.e.f. 12-4-1988).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CINE-WORKERS AND CINEMA THEATRE WORKERS (REGULATION OF.pdf - page 9]
9 
 25. Application of Act 39 of 1972 .—The provisions of the Paym ent of Gratuity Act, 1972, as in 
force for the time being, shall apply to or in relation to, every worker employed in a cinema theatre in 
which five or more workers are employed or were employed on any day of the preceding twelve 
months, as they apply to, or in relation to, employees within the meaning of that Act . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CINE-WORKERS WELFARE FUND ACT, 1981.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE CINE -WORKERS WELFARE FUND ACT, 1981  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTION  
____________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definition . 
3. Cine -workers Welfare Fund . 
4. Application  of Fund.  
5. Advisory Committees . 
6. Central Adviso ry Com mittee . 
7. Power to co -opt, etc . 
8. Appointment of Welfare Commiss ioners, etc., and their powers . 
9. Annual report of act ivities financed under the Act . 
10. Power to call for information . 
11. Power to make rules . 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CINE-WORKERS WELFARE FUND ACT, 1981.pdf - page 2]
2 
 THE CINE -WORKERS WELFARE FUND ACT, 1981  
ACT NO. 33 OF 1981  
[17th September , 1981.]  
An Act to provide for the financing of activities to promote the welfare of certain                    
cine-workers.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -second Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Cine -workers Welfare 
Fund Act, 1981.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definition .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “cinematograph film ” has the same meaning as in the Cinematogr aph Act, 1952 (37 of 1952);  
(b) “cine-worker ” means an individual — 
(i) who has been employed, directly or through any contractor or in any other manner, in or in 
connection with the production of not less than five feature films to work as an artiste (including 
actor, musician or dancer) or to do any work, skilled, unskilled, manual, supervisory, technical, 
artistic or otherwise; and  
2[(ii) whose remuneration with respect to such employment in or in connection with the 
production of each of any five fe ature films,  not being less than the monthly remuneration or 
lump sum remuneration stipulated prior to the commencement of the Cine -workers Welfare Fund 
(Amendment) Act, 2001  (56 of 2001) , does not exceed such sum, whether monthly or by way of 
lump sum or instalments, as may be specified by the Central Government by notification in the 
Official Gazette ;] 
(c) “feature film ” means a full length cinematograph film produced wholly or partly in India with 
a format  and a story woven around a number of characters where the plot is revealed mainly through 
dialogues and not wholly through narration, animation or cartoon depiction and does not include an 
advertisement film;  
(d) “Fund ” means the Cine -workers Welfare Fund  formed unde
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CINE-WORKERS WELFARE FUND ACT, 1981.pdf - page 2]
 not include an 
advertisement film;  
(d) “Fund ” means the Cine -workers Welfare Fund  formed under section 3;  
(e) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(f) “producer ”, in relation to a feature film, means the person by whom arrangements necessary 
for the making of such film (including the raising of finance and engagi ng cine -workers for such   
filmmaking) are undertaken.  
                                                           
1. 1st November , 1984, vide notification No. G.S.R. 721(E), dated 1 2th October , 198 4, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,  
    Part I, sec. 3  (i). 
2. Subs. by Act 56 of 2001, s. 2, for sub -clause ( ii) (w.e.f. 2-5-2002 ). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CINE-WORKERS WELFARE FUND ACT, 1981.pdf - page 3]
3 
 3. Cine -workers Welfare Fund. —There shall be formed a Fund, to be called the Cine -workers 
Welfare Fund, and t here shall be credited thereto — 
(a) such amounts as the Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by 
law in this behalf, provide from out of the proceeds of the duty of excise credited under section 5 of 
the Cine -workers Welfare Cess Act, 1981 (30 of 1981), after deducting therefrom the cost of 
collection as determined by the Central Government under this Act;  
(b) any grants made to the Fund by the Central Government;  
(c) any money received as donations for the purposes of this Act;  
(d) any income from investment of the amounts in the Fund.  
4. Application  of Fund. —(1) The Fund shall be applied by the Central Government to meet the 
expenditure incurred in connection with measures and facilities which, in the opinion of that Government, 
are necessary or expedient to promote the welfare of cin e-workers; and, in particular, — 
(a) to defray the cost of such welfare measures or facilities for the benefit of cine -workers as may 
be decided by the Central Government;  
(b) to provide assistance in the form of grants or loans to indigent cine -workers;  
(c) to sanction any money in aid  of any scheme for t he welfare of the cine -workers 1[, including 
family welfare, family planning, education and services]  which is approved by the Central 
Government;  
(d) to meet the allowances, if any, of the members of the Advisory Committees and the Cen tral 
Advisory Committee constituted under sections 5 and 6 respectively and the salaries and allowances, 
if any, of persons appointed under section 8;  
(e) any other expenditure which the Central Government may direc t to be defrayed from the 
Fund.  
(2) The C entral Government shall have power to decide whether any particular expenditure is or is 
not debitable to the Fund, and its decision shall be final.  
5. Advisory Committees .—(1) The Central Government may cons
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CINE-WORKERS WELFARE FUND ACT, 1981.pdf - page 3]
und, and its decision shall be final.  
5. Advisory Committees .—(1) The Central Government may constitute as many Advisory 
Committees as it thinks fit to advise the Central Government on such matters arising out of the 
administration of this Act as may be referred to it by that Government, including matters relating to the 
application of the Fund.  
(2) Each Advisory Committee shall consist of such num ber of persons as may be appointed to it by 
the Central Government and the members shall be chosen in such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that each Advisory Committee shall include an equal number of members representing the 
Government, the cine -workers and the producers.  
(3) The Chairman of each Advisory Committee shall be appointed by the Central Government.  
(4) The Central Government shall publish in the Official Gazette the names of the members of every 
Advisory Committee.  
6. Central Adviso ry Com mittee.—(1) The Central Government may constitute a Central Advisory 
Committee to co -ordinate the work of the Advisory Committees constituted under section 5 and to advise 
the Central Government on any matter arising out of the administration of this Act.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 26 of 1987, s. 3 (w.e.f. 10-8-1988). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CINE-WORKERS WELFARE FUND ACT, 1981.pdf - page 4]
4 
 (2) The Central Advis ory Committee shall consist of 1[such number of members as may be appointed] 
by the Central Government and the members shall be chosen in such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the Central Advisory Committee shall include at least three members representing the 
Government, the cine -workers and the producers.  
(3) The Chairman of the Central Advisory Committee shall be appointed by the Central Government.  
(4) The Central Government shall publish in the Official Gazette the names  of the members of the 
Central Advisory Committee.  
7. Power to co -opt, etc .—(1) An Advisory Committee or the Central Advisory Committee may, at 
any time and for such period as it thinks fit, co -opt any person or persons to the Advisory Committee.  
(2) A person co -opted under sub -section ( 1) shall exercise all the powers and functions of a member 
under this Act but  shall not be entitled to vote.  
(3) An Advisory Committee or the Central Advisory Committee may, if it considers it necessary or 
expedient so to  do, invite any person to attend its meeting and when such person attends any meeting, he 
shall not be entitled to vote thereat.  
8. Appointment of Welfare Commiss ioners, etc., and their powers. —(1) The Central Government 
may appoint as many Welfare Commiss ioners, Welfare Administrators, Inspectors and such other officers 
and staff as it thinks necessary for the purposes of this Act and the Cine - workers Welfare Cess                         
Act, 1981 (30 of 1981).  
(2) The Central Government may, by general o r special order, direct a Welfare Commissioner to 
appoint such staff as is considered necessary for the purposes of this Act and the Cine -workers We lfare 
Cess Act, 1981  (30 of 1981) . 
(3) Every person appointed under this section shall be deemed to be a pub lic servant within the 
meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
(4) Any Welfare Commissioner may, — 
(a) with such assistance, if any, 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CINE-WORKERS WELFARE FUND ACT, 1981.pdf - page 4]
n Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
(4) Any Welfare Commissioner may, — 
(a) with such assistance, if any, as he may think fit, enter, at any reasonable time, any place which 
he considers it necessary to enter for carrying out the purposes of this Act and the Cine -workers 
Welfare Cess Act, 1981 (30 of 1981);  
(b) do within such place anything necessary for the proper discharge of his duties; and  
(c) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed.  
9. Annual report of act ivities financed under the Act. —The Central Government shall, as soon as 
may be, after the end of each financial year, cause to be published in the Official Gazette, a report giving 
an account of the activities financed under this Act during t he financial year, together with a statement of 
accounts.  
10. Power to call for information .—The Central Government may require a producer to furnish, for 
the purposes of this Act, such statistical and other information in such form and within such period as 
may be prescribed.  
11. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1987 , s. 4, for “eleven members appointed”  (w.e.f. 10-8-1988). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CINE-WORKERS WELFARE FUND ACT, 1981.pdf - page 5]
5 
 (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing pow er, such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the manner in which the Fund may be applied for the measures and facilities specified in sub -
section ( 1) of section 4;  
(b) the conditions governing the grant of any loan under clause ( b) of s ub-section ( 1) of section 4;  
(c) the composition of the Advisory Committees and the Central Advisory Committee constituted 
under sections 5 and 6 respectively, the manner in which the members thereof shall be chosen, the 
term of office of such members, the allowances, if any, payable to  them, and the manner in which the 
Advisory Committees and the Central Advisory Committee shall conduct their business;  
(d) the recruitment, conditions of service and the duties of all persons appointed under section 8;  
(e) the powers that may be exercised  by a Welfare Commissioner, a Welfare Administrator and 
an Inspector appointed under section 8;  
(f) the furnishing to the Central Government by a producer of such statistical and other 
information as may be required to be furnished under section 10;  
(g) the form in which and the period within which the statistical and other information are to be 
furnished under clause ( f); 
(h) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed by rules under this Act.  
(3) In making any rule under clause ( f) or clause ( g) of sub - section ( 2), the Central Government may 
direct that a breach thereof shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees.  
(4) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions a foresaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Hou
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CINE-WORKERS WELFARE FUND ACT, 1981.pdf - page 5]
uccessive sessions a foresaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such mo dification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
<|CHUNK|>
[The City of Bombay Municipal (Supplementary) Act, 1888.pdf - page 1]
 
The City of Bombay Municipal ( Supplementa ry) Act, 1888  
ACT NO. XII  OF 1888.  
PASSED  BY THE  GOVERNOR  GENERAL OF INDIA IN COUNCIL.  
(Received the assent of the Governor General on the 1 2th October,1888.)  
An Act to supplement certain provisions of the City of Bombay Municipal Act , 1888, and of the 
Calcutta Municipal Consolidation Act,1889.  
WHEREAS  it is expedient to supplement by legi slation  in the Council of the Governor Gener al for  
making Laws and Regulations certain provisions of the Cit y of Bombay Municipal Act, 1888, and of 
the Calcutta Municipal Consolidation Act, 1889; It is hereby enacted as follows :—      
 
 
 1. Confirmation of the City of Bombay Municipal Act, 1888, and the Calcutta Municipal 
Consolidation Act ,1889, so far as regards Benches, Magistrates and Courts of Small Ca uses 
.—The Ci ty of Bombay Municipal Act,1888, and the Calcutta Municipal Consolidation Act,1889, 
shall , so far as regards — 
 (a) the jurisdiction thereby conferred upon Appellate Benches of Municipal Authorities and upon 
Presidency and other Magistrates and Courts of Small Causes or any Judge of such a Court, and  
(b) the decisions, orders and other proceedings of those Benches, Magistrates and Courts or of  
any such Judge,  
be as valid as if they had been passed by the Governor General of India in Council at a meeting 
for the purpose of making Laws  and Regulations.  
2. Reference of questions by the Chief Judge of the Bombay Small Cause Court to the Bombay 
High Court  .— (1) If before or on the hearing of an appeal  under section 217 of the City of Bombay 
Municipal Act, 1888, any question of law or usage having the force of law, or the construction of a 
document, which construction may affect the merits, arises, on which t he Chief Judge of the Court of 
Small Causes of Bombay  entertains reasonable doubt, the  Chief Judge may, either of his own motion or 
on the application o f either or any of the parties, draw up a statement of the facts
<|CHUNK|>
[The City of Bombay Municipal (Supplementary) Act, 1888.pdf - page 1]
own motion or 
on the application o f either or any of the parties, draw up a statement of the facts of the case and the 
point on which doubt is entertained, and refer the statement, with his own opinion on the point, for the 
decision of the High Court of Judicature at Bombay.  
 (2) When a r eference is made to the High Court under sub- section (1), the provisions of sections 
618 to 621, both inclusive, of the Code  of Civil Procedure  (XIV of 1882.)  shall, so far as they can be 
made applicable, apply to the Chief Judge of the Court of Small Causes and to the High Court, 
respectively.   
3. Appeal to the Bombay High Court from certain orders of the Chief Judge of the Bombay 
Small Cause Court .— (1) An appeal shall lie to the High Court of Judicature at Bombay from a 
decision passed by the Chief Judge of the Court of Small Causes of Bombay under section 503 or 
section 504 of the City of Bombay Municipal Act, 1888, when the amount of the claim in respect of 
which the decision is passed exceeds two thousand rupees.  
  (2) The provisions of the Code of Civil Proce dure (XIV of 1882.)  with respect to appe als from 
original decrees shall , so far as they can be mad applicable, apply to appeals under sub- section ( 1), and 
orders passed therein by the High Court may, on application to the Chief Judge of the Court of Small 
Causes, be executed by him as if they were decrees made by himself.  
<|CHUNK|>
[The City of Bombay Municipal (Supplementary) Act, 1888.pdf - page 2]
 (3)  A decision passed by the Chief Judge of the Court of Small Causes of Bombay under section 
503 or section 504 of the City of Bombay Municipal Act, 1888, shall, if an appeal does not lie 
therefrom u nder sub- section (1), be final. 
 4. Appeal to the Bombay High Court from orders of Presidency Magistrates in Bombay. — (1) 
An appeal shall lie to the High Court of Judicature at Bombay from an order passed  by a Preside ncy 
Magistrate under section 515  of the City of Bombay Municipal Act, 1888.  
 (2) The High Court may from time to time make rules for regulating the admission o f appeals under 
sub-section ( 1) and the  procedure to be followed in the adjudication thereof.  
 (3) When an appeal has been preferred to the High Court un der this section, the Municipal 
Commissioner for the City of Bombay shall defer action upon the order of the Presidency Magistrate 
until the appeal has been disposed of .  
(4) But, when the appeal has b een disposed of , he shall forthwith give effect to the order passed 
therein by the High Court , or, if the order of the Presidency Magistrate has not been disturbed by the 
High Court, then to his order.  
(5) When disposing of an appeal under this section the H igh Court may direct by whom the costs of 
the appeal are to be paid, and whether in whole or in what part or proportion.  
 (6) Costs so directed to be paid may, on application to a Presidency Magistrate, be recovered by 
him, in accordance with the direction of the High Court, as if the y were a fine imposed by himself . 
5. Period of limitation for appeals to the Bombay High Court under t he two last foregoing 
sections .— An appeal to the High Court of Judicature at Bombay under either of the two last foregoing 
sections shall, for the purposes of No. 156 of the second schedule to the Indian Limitation Act, 
1877( XV of 1877. ), be deemed to be an appeal under the Code of Civil Procedure (XIV of 1882.)  in a 
case not provided for by No. 151 and No. 153 of that sc
<|CHUNK|>
[The City of Bombay Municipal (Supplementary) Act, 1888.pdf - page 2]
ode of Civil Procedure (XIV of 1882.)  in a 
case not provided for by No. 151 and No. 153 of that schedule.  
  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CIVIL LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE ACT, 2010.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE CIVIL LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE ACT, 2010  
––––––––––  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
––––––––––  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE  
3. Atomic Energy Regulatory Board to notify nuclear incident.  
4. Liability of operator.  
5. Operator not liable in certain circumstances.  
6. Limits of liability.  
7. Liability of Central Government.  
8. Operator to maintain insurance or financial securities.  
 
CHAPTER III  
CLAIMS COMMISSIONER  
9. Compensati on for nuclear damage and its adjudication.  
10. Qualifications for appointment as Claims Commissioner.  
11. Salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Claims Commissioner.  
12. Adjudication procedure and powers of Claims Commissioner.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
CLAIMS AND AWARDS  
13. Inviting application for claims by Claims Commissioner.  
14. Person entitled to make application for nuclear damage.  
15. Procedure for making application before Claims Commissioner.  
16. Award by Claims Commissioner.  
17. Operator's right of recourse.  
18. Extinct ion of right to claim.  
 
CHAPTER V  
NUCLEAR DAMAGE CLAIMS COMMISSION  
19. Establishment of Nuclear Damage Claims Commission.  
20. Composition of Commission.  
21. Term of office.  
22. Salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Chairperson and Members.  
23. Fillin g up of vacancies.  
24. Resignation and removal.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CIVIL LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE ACT, 2010.pdf - page 2]
2 
 SECTIONS  
25. Chairperson or Member deemed to retire from service.  
26. Suspension of pension.  
27. Prohibition of acting as arbitrator.  
28. Prohibition of practice.  
29. Powers of Chairperson.  
30. Officers and other employees of Commission . 
31. Application for compensation before Commission.  
32. Adjudication procedure and powers of Commission.  
33. Transfer of pending cases to Commission.  
34. Proceedings before Claims Commissioner or Commission to be judicial proceedings.  
35. Exclusion of jurisdiction of civil courts.  
36. Enforcement of awards.  
37. Annual report.  
38. Dissolution of Commission in certain circumstances.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
39. Offences and penalties.  
40. Offences by companies.  
41. Offences by Government Departments.  
42. Cognizance of offences.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
43. Power to give directions.  
44. Power to call for information.  
45. Exemption from application of this Act.  
46. Act to be in addition to any other law.  
47. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
48. Power to make rules.  
49. Power to remove difficulties.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CIVIL LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE ACT, 2010.pdf - page 3]
3 
  
THE CIVIL LIA BILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE ACT, 2010  
ACT NO. 38 OF 2010  
[21st September,  2010.]  
An Act to provide for civil liability for nuclear damage and prompt compensation to the victims 
of a nuclear incident through a no -fault liability regime channeling liability to  the operator, 
appointment of Claims Commissioner, establishment of Nuclear Damage Claims 
Commission and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -first Year of the Republic of India as follows: – 
CHAPTE R I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement .–(1) This Act may be called the Civil 
Liability for Nuclear Damage Act, 2010.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It also app lies to nuclear damage suffered – 
(a) in or over the mari time areas beyond the territorial waters of India;  
(b) in or over the exclusive economic zone of India as referred to in section 7 of the Territorial 
Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and Other Maritime Zones Act, 1976  (80 of 
1976) ; 
(c) on board or by a ship registered in India under section 22 of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 
(44 of 1958)  or under any other law for the time being in force;  
(d) on board or by an aircraft registered in India under clause ( d) of sub -section ( 2) of section 5  of 
the Aircraft Act, 1934 (22 of 1934)  or under any other law for the time being in force;  
(e) on or by an artificial island, installation or structure under the jurisdiction of India.  
(4) It applies only to the nuclear installation owned or controlled by  the Central Government either by 
itself or through any authority or corporation established by it or a Government company.  
Explanation. –For the purposes of this sub -section, "Government company" shall have the same 
meaning as assigned to it in clause ( bb) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the Atomic Energy Act, 1962  
(33 of 1962) . 
(5) It shall come into force on such date as
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CIVIL LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE ACT, 2010.pdf - page 3]
tion 2 of the Atomic Energy Act, 1962  
(33 of 1962) . 
(5) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint; and 
different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act, and any reference in any such 
provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force of 
that provision.  
2. Definitions. –In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, - 
(a) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson o f the Commission appointed under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 20;  
(b) "Claims Commissioner" means the Claims Commissioner appointed under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 9;  
(c) "Commission" means the Nuclear Damage Claims Commission established under section 19;  
(d) "environment" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( a) of section 2 of the 
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986  (29 of 1986) ; 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CIVIL LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE ACT, 2010.pdf - page 4]
4 
 (e) "Member" means a Member of the Commission appointed under sub -section ( 1) of section 20;  
(f) "notificati on" means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the term "notify" shall 
be construed accordingly;  
(g) "nuclear damage'' means – 
(i) loss of life or personal injury (including immediate and long term health impact) to a 
person; or  
(ii) loss of , or damage to, property,  
caused by or arising out of a nuclear incident, and includes each of the following to the extent 
notified by the Central Government;  
(iii) any economic loss, arising from the loss or damage referred to in  sub-clauses ( i) or ( ii) 
and not included in the claims made under those  sub-clauses, if incurred by a person entitled to 
claim such loss or damage;  
(iv) costs of measures of reinstatement of impaired environment caused by a nuclear incident, 
unless such impairment is insignifican t, if such measures are actually taken or to be taken and not 
included in the claims made under sub -clause ( ii); 
(v) loss of income derived from an economic interest in any use or enjoyment of the 
environment, incurred as a result of a significant impairme nt of that environment caused by a 
nuclear incident, and not included in the claims under sub -clause ( ii); 
(vi) the costs of preventive measures, and further loss or damage caused by such measures;  
(vii) any other economic loss, other than the one caused b y impairment of the environment 
referred to in sub -clauses ( iv) and ( v), in so far as it is permitted by the general law on civil 
liability in force in India and not claimed under any such law,  
in the case of sub -clauses ( i) to ( v) and ( vii) above, to the extent the loss or damage arises out of, or results 
from, ionizing radiation emitted by any source of radiation inside a nuclear installation, or emitted from 
nuclear fuel or radioactive products or waste in, or of, nuclear material coming from, originatin g in, or 
sent to, a nuclear installation
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CIVIL LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE ACT, 2010.pdf - page 4]
 waste in, or of, nuclear material coming from, originatin g in, or 
sent to, a nuclear installation, whether so arising from the radioactive properties of such matter, or from a 
combination of radioactive properties with toxic, explosive or other hazardous properties of such matter;  
(h) "nuclear fuel" means any ma terial which is capable of producing energy by a self -sustaining chain 
process of nuclear fission;  
(i) "nuclear incident" means any occurrence or series of occurrences having the same origin which 
causes nuclear damage or, but only with respect to preventi ve measures, creates a grave and imminent 
threat of causing such damage;  
(j) "nuclear installation" means – 
(A) any nuclear reactor other than one with which a means of transport is equipped for use as a 
source of power, whether for propulsion thereof or fo r any other purpose;  
(B) any facility using nuclear fuel for the production of nuclear material, or any facility for the 
processing of nuclear material, including re -processing of irradiated nuclear fuel; and  
(C) any facility where nuclear material is st ored (other than storage incidental to the carriage of 
such material).  
Explanation. –For the purpose of this clause, several nuclear installations of one operator which are 
located at the same site shall be considered as a single nuclear installation;  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CIVIL LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE ACT, 2010.pdf - page 5]
5 
 (k) "nuclear material" means and includes – 
(i) nuclear fuel (other than natural uranium or depleted uranium) capable of producing energy by 
a self -sustaining chain process of nuclear fission outside a nuclear reactor, either by itself or in 
combination with so me other material; and  
(ii) radioactive products or waste;  
(l) "nuclear reactor" means any structure containing nuclear fuel in such an arrangement that a self -
sustaining chain process of nuclear fission can occur therein without an additional source of ne utrons;  
(m) "operator", in relation to a nuclear installation, means the Central Government or any authority or 
corporation established by it or a Government company who has been granted a licence pursuant to the 
Atomic Energy Act, 1962 (33 of 1962) for th e operation of that installation;  
(n) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(o) "preventive measures" means any reasonable measures taken by a person after a nuclear incident 
has occurred to prevent or minimise damage referred to in s ub-clauses ( i) to ( v) and ( vii) of clause ( g), 
subject to the approval of the Central Government;  
(p) "radioactive products or waste" means any radioactive material produced in, or any material made 
radioactive by exposure to, the radiation incidental to t he production or utilisation of nuclear fuel, but 
does not include radioisotopes which have reached the final stage of fabrication so as to be usable for any 
scientific, medical, agricultural, commercial or industrial purpose;  
(q) "Special Drawing Rights" means Special Drawing Rights as determined by the International 
Monetary Fund.  
CHAPTER II  
LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE  
3. Atomic Energy Regulatory Board to notify nuclear incident. –(1) The Atomic Energy 
Regulatory Board constituted under the Atomic Energy Act, 1962 (33 of 1962) shall, within a period of 
fifteen days from the date of occurrence of a nuclear incident, notify such nuclear incident:  
Provided
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CIVIL LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE ACT, 2010.pdf - page 5]
een days from the date of occurrence of a nuclear incident, notify such nuclear incident:  
Provided that where the Atomic Energy Regulatory Board is satisfied that the gravity of threat and 
risk involved in a nuclear incident is insignificant, it shall not be required to notify such nuclear incident.  
(2) The Atomic Energy Regulatory Board shall, immediately after the notification under sub -section 
(1) is issued,  cause wide publicity to be given to the occu rrence of such nuclear incident, in such manner 
as it may deem fit.  
4. Liability of operator. –(1) The operator of the nuclear installation shall be liable for nuclear 
damage caused by a nuclear incident – 
(a) in that nuclear installation; or  
(b) involving nuclear material coming from, or originating in, that nuclear installation and 
occurring before – 
(i) the liability for nuclear incident involving such nuclear material has been assumed, 
pursuant to a written agreement, by another operator; or  
(ii) another  operator has taken charge of such nuclear material; or  
(iii) the person duly authorised to operate a nuclear reactor has taken charge of the nuclear 
material intended to be used in that reactor with which means of transport is equipped for use as a 
source  of power, whether for propulsion thereof or for any other purpose; or  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CIVIL LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE ACT, 2010.pdf - page 6]
6 
 (iv) such nuclear material has been unloaded from the means of transport by which it was sent 
to a person within the territory of a foreign State; or  
(c) involving nuclear material sen t to that nuclear installation and occurring after – 
(i) the liability for nuclear incident involving such nuclear material has been transferred to 
that operator, pursuant to a written agreement, by the operator of another nuclear installation; or  
(ii) that  operator has taken charge of such nuclear material; or  
(iii) that operator has taken charge of such nuclear material from a person operating a nuclear 
reactor with which a means of transport is equipped for use as a source of power, whether for 
propulsio n thereof or for any other purpose; or  
(iv) such nuclear material has been loaded, with the written consent of that operator, on the 
means of transport by which it is to be carried from the territory of a foreign State.  
(2) Where more than one operator is liable for nuclear damage, the liability of the operators so 
involved shall, in so far as the damage attributable to each operator is not separable, be joint and several:  
Provided that the total liability of such operators shall not exceed the extent of li ability specified 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 6.  
(3) Where several nuclear installations of one and the same operator are involved in a nuclear 
incident, such operator shall, in respect of each such nuclear installation, be liable to the extent of lia bility 
specified under sub -section ( 2) of section 6.  
(4) The liability of the operator of the nuclear installation shall be strict and shall be based on the 
principle of no -fault liability.  
Explanation .–For the purposes of this section, – 
(a) wh ere nuclear damage is caused by a nuclear incident occurring in a nuclear installation on 
account of temporary storage of material -in-transit in such installation, the person responsible for 
transit of such material shall be deemed to be the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CIVIL LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE ACT, 2010.pdf - page 6]
n such installation, the person responsible for 
transit of such material shall be deemed to be the operator;  
(b) where a nucl ear damage is caused as a result of nuclear incident during the transportation of 
nuclear material, the consignor shall be deemed to be the operator;  
(c) where any written agreement has been entered into between the consignor and the consignee 
or, as the case may be, the consignor and the carrier of nuclear material, the person liable for any 
nuclear damage under such agreement shall be deemed to be the operator;  
(d) where both nuclear damage and damage other than nuclear damage have been caused by a 
nuclear incident or, jointly by a nuclear incident and one or more other occurrences, such other 
damage shall, to the extent it is not separable from the nuclear damage, be deemed to be a nuclear 
damage caused by such nuclear incident.  
5. Operator not liable i n certain circumstances. –(1) An operator shall not be liable for any nuclear 
damage where such damage is caused by a nuclear incident directly due to -  
(i) a grave natural disaster of an exceptional character; or  
(ii) an act of armed conflict, hostility, civil war, insurrection or terrorism.  
(2) An operator shall not be liable for any nuclear damage caused to – 
(i) the nuclear installation itself and any other nuclear installation including a nuclear installation 
under construction, on the site where such i nstallation is located; and  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CIVIL LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE ACT, 2010.pdf - page 7]
7 
 (ii) to any property on the same site which is used or to be used in connection with any such 
installation; or  
(iii) to the means of transport upon which the nuclear material involved was carried at the time of 
nuclear incident:  
Provided that any compensation liable to be paid by an operator for a nuclear damage shall not 
have the effect of reducing the amount of his liability in respect of any other claim for damage under 
any other law for the time being in force.  
(3) Where any nuclear damage is suffered by a person on account of his own negligence or from his 
own acts of commission or omission, the operator shall not be liable to such person.  
6. Limits of liability. –(1) The maximum amount of liability in respect of each nuclear incident shall 
be the rupee equivalent of three hundred million Special Drawing Rights or such higher amount as the 
Central Government may specify by notification:  
Provided that the Central Government may take additional measures, where necessary, if the 
compensation to be awarded under this Act exceeds the amount specified under this sub -section.  
(2) The liability of an operator for each nuclear incident shall be – 
(a) in respect of nuclear reactors having thermal power equal to or above ten MW, rupees one 
thousand five hundred crores;  
(b) in respect of spent fuel reprocessing plants, rupees three hundred crores;  
(c) in respect of the research reactors having thermal power below ten MW, fuel cycle facilities 
other than spent fuel reprocessing plants and tran sportation of nuclear materials, rupees one hundred 
crores:  
Provided that the Central Government may review the amount of operator's liability from time to 
time and specify, by notification, a higher amount under this sub -section:  
Provided further that the  amount of liability shall not include any interest or cost of proceedings.  
7. Liability of Central Government. –(1) The Central Government shall be liable for nuclear damage 
in respect of a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CIVIL LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE ACT, 2010.pdf - page 7]
 Central Government. –(1) The Central Government shall be liable for nuclear damage 
in respect of a nuclear incident, – 
(a) where the liability exceeds the amount of l iability of an operator specified under sub -section 
(2) of section 6, to the extent such liability exceeds such liability of the operator;  
(b) occurring in a nuclear installation owned by it; and  
(c) occurring on account of causes specified in clauses ( i) and ( ii) of sub -section ( 1) of section 5:  
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification, assume full liability for a nuclear 
installation not operated by it if it is of the opinion that it is necessary in public interest.  
(2) For the purpose of  meeting part of its liability under clause ( a) or clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1), the 
Central Government may establish a fund to be called the Nuclear Liability Fund by charging such 
amount of levy from the operators, in such manner, as may be prescribed.  
8. Operator to maintain insurance or financial securities. –(1) The operator shall, before he begins 
operation of his nuclear installation, take out insurance policy or such other financial security or 
combination of both, covering his liability under sub -section ( 2) of section 6, in such manner as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) The operator shall from time to time renew the insurance policy or other financial security 
referred to in sub -section ( 1), before the expiry of the period of validity thereof.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CIVIL LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE ACT, 2010.pdf - page 8]
8 
 (3) The provi sions of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall not apply to a nuclear installation owned by the 
Central Government.  
Explanation. –For the purposes of this section, "financial security" means a contract of indemnity or 
guarantee, or shares or bonds or such instrume nt as may be prescribed or any combination thereof.  
CHAPTER III  
CLAIMS COMMISSIONER  
9. Compensation for nuclear damage and its adjudication. –(1) Whoever suffers nuclear damage 
shall be entitled to claim compensation in accordance with the provisions of thi s Act.  
(2) For the purposes of adjudicating upon claims for compensation in respect of nuclear damage, the 
Central Government shall, by notification, appoint one or more Claims Commissioners for such area, as 
may be specified in that notification.  
10. Qual ifications for appointment as Claims Commissioner. –A person shall not be qualified for 
appointment as a Claims Commissioner unless he – 
(a) is, or has been, a District Judge; or  
(b) in the service of the Central Government and has held the post not below th e rank of 
Additional Secretary to the Government of India or any other equivalent post in the Central 
Government.  
11. Salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Claims Commissioner. –The 
salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of Claims Commissioner shall 
be such as may be prescribed.  
12. Adjudication procedure and powers of Claims Commissioner. –(1) For the purposes of 
adjudication of claims under this Act, the Claims Commissioner shall follow such proc edure as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) For the purpose of holding inquiry, the Claims Commissioner may associate with him such 
persons having expertise in the nuclear field or such other persons and in such manner as may be 
prescribed.  
(3) Where any person is as sociated under sub -section ( 2), he shall be paid such remuneration, fee or 
allowance, as may be prescribed.  
(4) The Claims Commissione
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CIVIL LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE ACT, 2010.pdf - page 8]
all be paid such remuneration, fee or 
allowance, as may be prescribed.  
(4) The Claims Commissioner shall, for the purposes of discharging his functions under this Act, 
have the same powers as are vested in a civil court  under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , 
while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely: – 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) the discovery and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) requisitioning any public record or copies thereof from any court or office;  
(e) issuing of commission for the examination of any witness;  
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
(5) The Claims Commissioner shall  be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and 
Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CIVIL LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE ACT, 2010.pdf - page 9]
9 
 CHAPTER IV  
CLAIMS AND AWARDS  
13. Inviting application for claims by Claims Commissioner. –After the notification of nuclear  
incident under sub -section ( 1) of section 3, the Claims Commissioner, having jurisdiction over the area, 
shall cause wide publicity to be given, in such manner as he deems fit, for inviting applications for 
claiming compensation for nuclear damage.  
14. Pe rson entitled to make application for nuclear damage. –An application for compensation 
before the Claims Commissioner or the Commission, as the case may be, in respect of nuclear damage 
may be made by –  
(a) a person who has sustained injury; or  
(b) the owne r of the property to which damage has been caused; or  
(c) the legal representatives of the deceased; or  
(d) any agent duly authorised by such person or owner or legal representatives.  
15. Procedure for making application before Claims Commissioner. –(1) Every application for 
compensation before the Claims Commissioner for nuclear damage shall be made in such form, 
containing such particulars and accompanied by such documents, as may be prescribed.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of section 18, every applicati on under sub -section ( 1) shall be made 
within a period of three years from the date of knowledge of nuclear damage by the person suffering such 
damage.  
16. Award by Claims Commissioner. –(1) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 15, the Claims Commissioner shall, after giving notice of such application to the operator and 
affording an opportunity of being heard to the parties, dispose of the application within a period of three 
months from the date of such receipt and make an award ac cordingly.  
(2) While making an award under this section, the Claims Commissioner shall not take into 
consideration any benefit, reimbursement or amount received by the applicant in pursuance of contract of 
insurance taken by him or for members of his famil y or otherwise.  
(3) Where an 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CIVIL LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE ACT, 2010.pdf - page 9]
e of contract of 
insurance taken by him or for members of his famil y or otherwise.  
(3) Where an operator is likely to remove or dispose of his property with the object of evading 
payment by him of the amount of the award, the Claims Commissioner may, in accordance with the 
provisions of rules 1 to 4 of Order XXXIX of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 
of 1908) , grant a temporary injunction to restrain such act.  
(4) The Claims Commissioner shall arrange to deliver copies of the award to the parties within a 
period of fifteen days from the date of th e award.  
(5) Every award made under sub -section ( 1) shall be final.  
17. Operator's right of recourse. –The operator of the nuclear installation, after paying the 
compensation for nuclear damage in accordance with section 6, shall have a right of recourse wh ere– 
(a) such right is expressly provided for in a contract in writing;  
(b) the nuclear incident has resulted as a consequence of an act of supplier or his employee, which 
includes supply of equipment or material with patent or latent defects or sub -standa rd services;  
(c) the nuclear incident has resulted from the act of commission or omission of an individual done 
with the intent to cause nuclear damage.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CIVIL LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE ACT, 2010.pdf - page 10]
10 
 18. Extinction of right to claim. –The right to claim compensation for nuclear damage shall 
extinguish,  if such claim is not made within a period of – 
(a) ten years, in the case of damage to property;  
(b) twenty years, in the case of personal injury to any person,  
from the date of occurrence of the incident notified under sub -section ( 1) of section 3:  
Provi ded that where a nuclear damage is caused by a nuclear incident involving nuclear material 
which, prior to such nuclear incident, had been stolen, lost, jettisoned or abandoned, the said period of ten 
years shall be computed from the date of such nuclear i ncident, but, in no case, it shall exceed a period of 
twenty years from the date of such theft, loss, jettison or abandonment.  
CHAPTER V  
NUCLEAR DAMAGE CLAIMS COMMISSION  
19. Establishment of Nuclear Damage Claims Commission. –Where the Central Government, 
having regard to the injury or damage caused by a nuclear incident, is of the opinion that it is expedient in 
public interest that such claims for such damage be adjudicated by the Commission instead of a Claims 
Commissioner, it may, by notification, establ ish a Commission for the purpose of this Act.  
20. Composition of Commission. –(1) The Commission shall consist of a Chairperson and such other 
Members, not exceeding six, as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint.  
(2) The Chairperson and other  Members of the Commission shall be appointed on the 
recommendation of a Selection Committee consisting of three experts from amongst the persons having at 
least thirty years of experience in nuclear science and a retired Supreme Court Judge.  
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Chairperson of the Commission unless he 
has attained the age of fifty -five years and is or has been or qualified to be a Judge of a High Court:  
Provided that no appointment of a sitting judge shall be made exc ept after consultation with the Chief 
Justice of India.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CIVIL LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE ACT, 2010.pdf - page 10]
ment of a sitting judge shall be made exc ept after consultation with the Chief 
Justice of India.  
(4) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Member unless he has attained the age of 
fifty-five years and – 
(a) has held or is holding or qualified to hold, the post of Additional Secretar y to the Government 
of India or any other equivalent post in the Central Government and  possesses special knowledge in 
law relating to nuclear liability arising out of nuclear incident; or  
(b) has been a Claims Commissioner for five years.  
21. Term of offi ce.–The Chairperson or a Member, as the case may be, shall hold office as such for a 
term of three years from the date on which he enters upon his office and shall be eligible for re -
appointment for another term of three years:  
Provided that no person sha ll hold office as such Chairperson or Member after he has attained the age 
of sixty -seven years.  
22. Salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Chairperson and Members. –
The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and condition s of service, including pension, 
gratuity and other retirement benefits, of the Chairperson and other Members shall be such as may be 
prescribed:  
Provided that no salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson or 
other Memb ers shall be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CIVIL LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE ACT, 2010.pdf - page 11]
11 
 23. Filling up of vacancies. –If, for reasons other than temporary absence, any vacancy occurs in the 
office of the Chairperson or Member, as the case may be, the Central Government shall appoin t another 
person in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill such vacancy and the proceedings may be 
continued before the Commission from the stage at which it was, before the vacancy is filled.  
24. Resignation and removal. –(1) The Chairperson or  a Member may, by a notice in writing under 
his hand addressed to the Central Government, resign his office:  
Provided that the Chairperson or the Member shall, unless he is permitted by the Central Government 
to relinquish his office sooner, continue to ho ld office until the expiry of three months from the date of 
receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor enters upon his office or until the 
expiry of his term of office, whichever is earlier.  
(2) The Central Government shall re move from office the Chairperson or a Member who – 
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or  
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves 
moral turpitude; or  
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of a cting as a Member; or  
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as 
a Member; or  
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office detrimental to the public 
interest:  
Provided th at no Member shall be removed under clause ( d) or clause ( e) unless he has been given an 
opportunity of being heard in the matter.  
25. Chairperson or Member deemed to retire from service. –A person who, immediately before 
the date of assuming office as a C hairperson or a Member, was in service of the Government, shall be 
deemed to have retired from service on the date on which he enters upon office as such, but his 
subsequent service as the Chairperson or a Member shall be
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CIVIL LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE ACT, 2010.pdf - page 11]
h he enters upon office as such, but his 
subsequent service as the Chairperson or a Member shall be reckoned as continuing approved se rvice 
counting for pension in service to which he belonged.  
26. Suspension of pension. –If a person who, immediately before the date of assuming office as the 
Chairperson or a Member was in receipt of or being eligible so to do, has opted to draw, a pension , other 
than a disability or wound pension, in respect of any previous service under the Central Government, his 
salary in respect of service as the Chairpers on or a Member shall be reduced – 
(a) by the amount of that pension; and  
(b) if he had, before assu ming office, received, in lieu of a portion of the pension due to him in 
respect of such previous service, the commuted value thereof, by the amount of that portion of the 
pension.  
27. Prohibition of acting as arbitrator. –No person shall, while holding off ice as a Chairperson or a 
Member, act as an arbitrator in any matter.  
28. Prohibition of practice .–On ceasing to hold office, the Chairperson or a Member shall not 
appear, act or plead before the Commission.  
29. Powers of Chairperson. –The Chairperson shall  have the power of superintendence in the general 
administration of the Commission and exercise such powers as may be prescribed.  
30. Officers and other employees of Commission. –(1) The Central Government shall provide the 
Commission with such officers and  other employees as it may deem fit.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CIVIL LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE ACT, 2010.pdf - page 12]
12 
 (2) The salary and allowances payable to and the terms and other conditions of service of officers and 
other employees of the Commission shall be such as may be prescribed.  
31. Application for compensation before Commis sion.–(1) Every application for compensation 
before the Commission for nuclear damage shall be made in such form, containing such particulars and 
accompanied by such documents, as may be prescribed.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of section 18, every applic ation under sub -section ( 1) shall be made 
within a period of three years from the date of knowledge of nuclear damage by the person suffering such 
damage.  
32. Adjudication procedure and powers of Commission. –(1) The Commission shall have original 
jurisdict ion to adjudicate upon every application for compensation filed before it under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 31 or transferred to it under section 33, as the case may be.  
(2) Upon transfer of cases to the Commission under section 33, the Commission shall hea r such 
applications from the stage at which it was before such transfer.  
(3) The Chairperson may constitute benches comprising of not more than three Members of the 
Commission for the purpose of hearing of claims and any decision thereon shall be rendered by a majority 
of the Members hearing such claims.  
(4) The Commission shall not be bound by the procedure laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908  (5 of 1908)  but shall be guided by the principles of natural justice and subject to the other provisions  
of this Act and of any rules made thereunder, the Commission shall have the power to regulate its own 
procedure including the places and the times at which it shall have its sittings.  
(5) The Commission shall have, for the purposes of discharging its func tions under this Act, the same 
powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, (5 of 1908) while trying a 
suit, in respect of the following matters, namely: – 
(a) sum
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CIVIL LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE ACT, 2010.pdf - page 12]
ure, 1908, (5 of 1908) while trying a 
suit, in respect of the following matters, namely: – 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examin ing him on oath;  
(b) the discovery and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) requisitioning any public record or copies thereof from any court or office;  
(e) issuing of commission for the examination of any witness;  
(f) any oth er matter which may be prescribed.  
(6) The Commission shall, after giving notice of application to the operator and after affording an 
opportunity of being heard to the parties, dispose of such application within a period of three months from 
the date of s uch receipt and make an award accordingly.  
(7) While making an award under this section, the Commission shall not take into consideration any 
benefit, reimbursement or amount received by the applicant in pursuance of any contract of insurance or 
otherwise.  
(8) Where an operator is likely to remove or dispose of his property with the object of evading 
payment by him of the amount of the award, the Commission may, in accordance with the provisions of 
rules 1 to 4 of Order XXXIX of the First Schedule to the Co de of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 19 08), grant 
a temporary injunction to restrain such act.  
(9) The Commission shall arrange to deliver copies of the award to the parties concerned within a 
period of fifteen days from the date of such award.  
(10) Every awa rd made under sub -section ( 6) shall be final.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CIVIL LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE ACT, 2010.pdf - page 13]
13 
 33. Transfer of pending cases to Commission. –Every application for compensation pending before 
the Claims Commissioner immediately before the date of establishment of the Commission under section 
19 shall stand  transferred on that date to the Commission.  
34. Proceedings before Claims Commissioner or Commission to be judicial proceedings. –Every 
proceeding before the Claims Commissioner or the Commission under this Act shall be deemed to be 
judicial proceeding wit hin the meaning of sections 193, 219 and 228 of, and for the purposes of section 
196 of , the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
35. Exclusion of jurisdiction of civil courts. –Save as otherwise provided in section 46, no civil court 
(except the Supreme Court a nd a High Court exercising jurisdiction under articles 226 and 227 of the 
Constitution) shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceedings in respect of any matter which the 
Claims Commissioner or the Commission, as the case may be, is empowered to adjudicate under this Act 
and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be 
taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Act.  
36. Enforcement of awards. –(1) When an award is made und er sub -section ( 1) of section 16 or 
under sub-section ( 6) of section 32, – 
(a) the insurer or any person, as the case may be, who under the contract of insurance or financial 
security under section 8 is required to pay any amount in terms of such award and to the extent of his 
liability under such contract, shall deposit that amount within such time and in such manner as the 
Claims Commissioner or the Commission, as the case may be, may direct; and  
(b) the operator shall, subject to the maximum liability spe cified under sub -section ( 2) of section 
6, deposit the remaining amount by which such award exceeds the amount deposited under clause ( a). 
(2) Where any person referred to in sub -section ( 1) fails to depo
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CIVIL LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE ACT, 2010.pdf - page 13]
nt deposited under clause ( a). 
(2) Where any person referred to in sub -section ( 1) fails to deposit the amount of award within the 
period specified in the award, such amount shall be recoverable from such person as arrears of land 
revenue.  
(3) The amount deposited under sub -section ( 1) shall be disbursed to such person as may be specified 
in the award within a period of fifteen days from the date of s uch deposit.  
37. Annual report. –The Commission shall prepare, in such form and at such time in each financial 
year, as may be prescribed, an annual report giving full account of its activities during that financial year 
and submit a copy thereof to the Cen tral Government which shall cause the same to be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
38. Dissolution of Commission in certain circumstances. –(1) Where the Central Government is 
satisfied that the purpose for which the Commission established under section  19 has served its purpose, 
or where the number of cases pending before such Commission is so less that it would not justify the cost 
of its continued function, or where it considers necessary or expedient so to do, the Central Government 
may, by notificat ion, dissolve the Commission.  
(2) With effect from the date of notification of dissolution of Commission under  sub-section ( 1),– 
(a) the proceeding, if any, pending before the Commission as on the date of such notification 
shall be transferred to the Claim s Commissioner to be appointed by the Central Government under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 9;  
(b) the Chairperson and all Members of the Commission shall be deemed to have vacated their 
offices as such and they shall not be entitled to any compensation for premature termination of their 
office;  
(c) officers and other employees of the Commission shall be transferred to such other authority or 
offices of the Central Government, in such manner, as may be prescribed:  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CIVIL LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE ACT, 2010.pdf - page 13]
 in such manner, as may be prescribed:  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CIVIL LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE ACT, 2010.pdf - page 14]
14 
 Provided that the officers and other employee s so transferred, shall be entitled to the same terms 
and conditions of service as would have been held by them in the Commission:  
Provided further that where an officer or an employee of the Commission refuses to join the 
services in such other authority or office, he shall be deemed to have resigned and shall not be entitled 
to any compensation for premature termination of contract of service;  
(d) all assets and liabilities of the Commission shall vest in the Central Government.  
(3) Notwithstanding the di ssolution of the Commission under sub -section ( 1), anything done or any 
action taken or purported to have been done or taken including any order made or notice issued or any 
appointment, confirmation or declaration made or any document or instrument execut ed or any direction 
given by the Commission before such dissolution, shall be deemed to have been validly done or taken.  
(4) Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the Central Government to establish the 
Commission subsequent to the dissolut ion of the Commission in accordance with the provisions of this 
Act. 
CHAPTER VI  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
39. Offences and penalties. –(1) Whoever –  
(a) contravenes any rule made or any direction issued under this Act; or  
(b) fails to comply with the provisio ns of section 8; or  
(c) fails to deposit the amount under section 36,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years or with fine or with 
both.  
(2) Whoever fails to comply with any direction issued under section 43 or obst ructs any authority or 
person in the exercise of his powers under this Act shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to one year or with fine or with both.  
40. Offences by companies. –(1) Where an offence under this Act has been comm itted by a company, 
every person who at the time the offence was committed, was directly in charge of, and was r
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CIVIL LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE ACT, 2010.pdf - page 14]
mpany, 
every person who at the time the offence was committed, was directly in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence a nd shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment under this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge  or that he 
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been commit ted with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. –For the purposes of this section, – 
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals;  
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, mea ns a partner in the firm.  
41. Offences by Government Departments. –Where an offence under this Act has been committed 
by any Department of the Government, the Head of the Department shall be deemed to be guilty of the 
offence and shall be liable to be proce eded against and punished accordingly:  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CIVIL LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE ACT, 2010.pdf - page 15]
15 
 Provided that nothing contained in this section shall render such Head of the Department liable to any 
punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all 
due diligenc e to prevent the commission of such offence.  
42. Cognizance of offences. –No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial 
Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence under this Act:  
Provided that cognizance of such offence shal l not be taken except on a complaint made by the 
Central Government or any authority or officer authorised in this behalf by that Government.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
43. Power to give directions. –The Central Government may, in exercise of its powers and 
performance of its functions under this Act, issue such directions, as it may deem fit, for the purposes of 
this Act, to any operator, person, officer, authority or body and such operator, person, officer, authority or 
body shall be bound to comply with su ch directions.  
44. Power to call for information. –The Central Government may call for such information from an 
operator as it may deem necessary.  
45. Exemption from application of this Act. –The Central Government may, by notification, exempt 
any nuclear in stallation from the application of this Act where, having regard to small quantity of nuclear 
material, it is of the opinion that the risk involved is insignificant.  
46. Act to be in addition to any other law. –The provisions of this Act shall be in additio n to, and 
not in derogation of, any other law for the time being in force, and nothing contained herein shall exempt 
the operator from any proceeding which might, apart from this Act, be instituted against such operator.  
47. Protection of action taken in g ood faith. –No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie against the Central Government or the person, officer or authority in respect of anything done by it or 
him in good faith in pursu
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CIVIL LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE ACT, 2010.pdf - page 15]
or the person, officer or authority in respect of anything done by it or 
him in good faith in pursuance of this Act or of any rule or order made, or directi on issued, thereunder.  
48. Power to make rules. –(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers such rules may 
provide  for –  
(a) the other financial security and the manner thereof under sub -section ( 1) of section 8;  
(b) the salary and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of service of Claims 
Commissioner under section 11;  
(c) the procedure to be fol lowed by Claims Commissioner under sub -section ( 1) of section 12;  
(d) the person to be associated by Claims Commissioner and the manner thereof, under sub -
section ( 2) of section 12;  
(e) the remuneration, fee or allowances of associated person under sub -section ( 3) of section 12;  
(f) any other matter under clause ( f) of sub -section ( 4) of section 12;  
(g) the form of application, the particulars it shall contain and the documents it shall accompany, 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 15;  
(h) the salary and all owances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of Chairperson 
and other Members, under section 22;  
(i) the powers of Chairperson under section 29;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CIVIL LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE ACT, 2010.pdf - page 16]
16 
 (j) the salary and allowances payable to and the terms and other conditions of service of offi cers 
and other employees of the Commission, under sub -section ( 2) of section 30;  
(k) the form of application, the particulars it shall contain and the documents it shall accompany, 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 31;  
(l) any other matter under clause ( f) of sub -section ( 5) of section 32;  
(m) the form and the time for preparing annual report by the Commission under section 37;  
(n) the manner of transfer of officers and other employees of the Commission under clause ( c) of 
sub-section ( 2) of section 38.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more s uccessive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making 
any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
49. Power to remove diffi culties.–(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be nece ssary or expedient for removing the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be  laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CIVIL LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE ACT, 2010.pdf - page 16]
oon as may be after it is made, be  laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COASTING-VESSELS ACT, 1838.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE COASTING -VESSELS ACT, 1838  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
SECTIONS  
1. Extent.  
2. Rules as to coasting and other vessels belonging to any citizen of                  
India.  
3. Marking or branding vessels with name of place and number . 
Owner to paint name and number . 
4. Registry of name, number and burthen.  
Registry by whom to be made, Fresh registration.  
5. Owners to apply for registry.  
Information of registry at subordinate port . 
6. Officers to perform duty of marking and branding . 
7. Owner to obtain certificate of regist ry. Replacing lost certificate . 
8. Sealing certificate . 
9. [Repealed .]. 
10. Fees for certificates . 
11. Fees to be credited to Government . 
12. Production of certificate on demand . 
13. Penalty for neglect to comply with rules . 
Recovery of penalties.  
14. Power to direct compensation for trouble in seizing . 
15. [Repealed .]. 
SCHEDULE.  
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COASTING-VESSELS ACT, 1838.pdf - page 2]
2 
 1[THE 2*** COASTING -VESSELS ACT, 1838]  
ACT NO. 19 OF 1838  
[27th August, 1838.]  
3[1. Extent. —This  Act extends in the first instance4[to the territories which, 
immediately before the 1st November, 1956, were comprised in the States] of Bombay, 
Saurashtra and Kutch, but the Central Government may, by notification in the Offici al 
Gazette, e xten d it to any other State 5[or part of a State] which has a sea -coast.]  
2. Rules as to coasting and o ther vessels bel onging to any citizen of India. —
6***The following rules shall be in force with respect to vessels belonging to 7[any citizen 
of India] 8***, and employed on the coasts of 9[any State] 5[or part of a State] to which this 
Act extends] or in trading coastwise, as also with respect to fishing -vessels and harbour -
craft belonging to 10[any such citizen].  
3. Marking or branding vessels with name of place and number. —11*** Every such 
vessel employ ed a s aforesaid, fishing -vessel and harbour -craft shall be marked or branded 
with the name  of the place to which she belongs, and also with a number assigned for the 
same by the officer authorised to make such regis try as is hereinafter mentioned.  
 
Owner t o paint name and number —and the owner or owners of such vessel employed s aforesaid, 
fishing -vessel and harbour -craft shall cause such name and number to be pa nted in black paint upon a 
white ground on each quarter of such vessel employed or aforesaid  fishing -vessel and harbour -craft, in 
English figures and letters, each figure anti letter being six inches in length.  
4. Registry of name, number and burthen. —11*** The name and number  of every 
such vessels employed as aforesaid, fishing -vessel and harbour -craft, and her burth en, 
and also the name or names of the owner or owners thereof, shall be registered in a took 
to be kept for that purpose by the person hereinafter directed to make such registry.  
Registry by  whom to be made, Fresh registra tion.—At Bombay such  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COASTING-VESSELS ACT, 1838.pdf - page 2]
irected to make such registry.  
Registry by  whom to be made, Fresh registra tion.—At Bombay such  registry 
shall be made by the 12[Principal Officer, Mercantile Marine Department], and at 
other places13*** by the 14[Commissioner of Customs]  at such places respectively, or by such other  
person as sha 11 be appointed by the 15[Central Government] to act at such places respectively, in the 
execution of this Act; and whenever any change shall take place in the burthen of such vessel employed 
                                                      
1. Short title given by the Bombay Short Titles Act, 1921 (Born. Act 2 of 1921).  
This Act was declared by the Laws Local Extent Act, 1874 (15 of 1874),  s. 5, to be in force in the whole of the Bombay 
Presidency, except the Scheduled Districts.  
This Act has been repealed in so far as it applies to sea -going ships fitted with mechanical means of propulsion and to 
sailing vessels by the Merchant Shipping Ac t, 1958 (44 of 1958), s. 461 and Sch.  
The Act came into force in Pondicherry vide Reg. 7 of 1963, s. 3 and Sch. I (w.e.f. 1 -10-1963).  
The Act has been extended to Goa, Daman and Diu with modifications by Reg. 12 of 1962 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1965) and 
to La ccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands by Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1968).  
2. The word “Bombay ” omitted by Act 22 of 1952, s. 3.  
3. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. Original s. 1 was rep. by Act 14 of 1870, s. 1 and Sch., Pt. II.  
4. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956, for “to the States ”. 
5. Ins., ibid. 
6. The words and figures “And it is hereby enacted, that from the said first day of November, 1838 ” rep. by Act 16 of 1874, s. 1 
and Sch., Pt. I.  
7. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “any of Her Majesty ’s subjects ”. 
8. The words “residing within the State of Bombay ” omitted by Act 22 of 1952, s. 5.  
9. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “the said State ”. 
10. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “any of the same Her Majesty ’s subjects
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COASTING-VESSELS ACT, 1838.pdf - page 2]
., for “the said State ”. 
10. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “any of the same Her Majesty ’s subjects”. 
11. The words “And it is hereby enacted, that ” rep. by Act. 16 of 1874, s. 1 and Sch., Pt. I.  
12. Subs. by the A. O. 1950 (as amended by C. O. 29, dated 4 -4-1951), for “Master -Attendant ” (w.e.f. 26 -1-1950).  
13. The words “within the said State ” omitted by Act 22 of 1952, s. 6.  
14. Subs. by Act 22 of 1995, s. 82.  
15. Subs. by the A. 0. 1937, for “Government of Bombay ”. 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COASTING-VESSELS ACT, 1838.pdf - page 3]
3 
 as aforesaid, fishing -vessel or harbour -craft, or in the name or names of the owner or ow ners thereof, 
such registry shall be made again:  
Provided, however, that it shall not be lawful to give any name to such vessel employed as 
aforesaid, fishing -vessel or harbour -craft, other than that by which she was first registered.  
5. Owners to apply fo r registry. —1*** The owner or owners of every such vessel employed 
as aforesaid, fishing -vessel and harbour -craft shall apply to the person authorised  to make such 
registry in respect of the same, in order to have such registry as aforesaid made, or in order to 
have such registry made again as aforesaid.  
Information of registry at subordinate port. —And whenever such vessel employed as 
aforesaid, fishing -vessel or harbour -craft is registered at a subordinate port, information thereof, 
and of the number there assigned to her, shall immediately be given by the registering officer to 
the 2[Principal Officer, Mercantile Marine Department] at Bombay.  
6. Office rs to perfor m duty of marking and branding. —1*** The duty  of marking or branding and 
of ascertaining the burthen of such vessels e mployed as aforesaid, fishing -vessels and harbour -craft, at 
Bombay, shall be performed by the 2[Principal Officer, Mercantile Marine Department]; and at all other 
places 3***the duty of marking or branding and of ascertaining the burthen of such vessels employed as 
aforesaid, fishing -vessels and harbour -craft shall be performed by the 4[Commissioner of Customs]                     
at such places respectively, or by such other persons as shall be appointed by the 5[Central Government] 
to act at such places respectively, in the execution of this Act.  
7. Owner to obtain certificate of regist ry. Replacing lost certifi cate.—1***The owner  or 
owners of every such vessel employed as aforesaid, fishing -vessel and harbour -craft shall apply for 
and obtain a certificate of registry from the person authorise
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COASTING-VESSELS ACT, 1838.pdf - page 3]
l and harbour -craft shall apply for 
and obtain a certificate of registry from the person authorised to make such registry as aforesaid, and 
such certifica te shall be in the form specifie d in the Schedule appended to this Act; and in the case of 
any certificate being lost or destroyed, a renewed certificate may be obtained in the same manner and 
on payment of the fees hereinafter mentioned.  
8. Sealing certificate. —1*** Such certificate of registry shall be scaled with the seal of the 
6[Government of India], - and shall be signed by the person authorised to make such registry.  
9. [Dates for commencement of certificate and registration. ] Rep. by the Repealing A ct 1876 (12 of 
1876), s. 1 and Sch., Pt. I.  
7[10. Fees  for certificates. —The owner or owners of such v essels employed as aforesaid fi shing -
vessels and harbour -craft being excepted) on being registered as aforesaid, shall pay —  
for each certificate of registry for a vessel not exceeding 5 tons burthen, the fee of .  .    .1 rupee;  
for each certificate for a vessel exceeding 5 tons burthen and not exceeding 25 tons burthen,  
the fee of  .       .    .  .   .       .    .      .       .    .       .    .         .     . .5 rupees;  
for each certificate for a vessel exceeding 25 tons burthen and not exceeding 100 tons burthen,  
the fee of .    .    .     .     .      .      .      .     .        .      .       .      .        .      .       .      .  . 7 rupees ; 
and for each certificate for a vessel of 100 tons or greater burthen, per ton, the fee of    .     .    2 annas.]  
11. Fees to be credited  to Government. —1*** The person  or persons so authorised to make such 
registry as aforesaid shall receive the fees payable for the sa me, and shall pay such fees to such oilier as 
                                                      
1. The words “And it is hereby enacted, that ” rep. by Act 16 of 1874, s. 1 and Sch., Pt. I.  
2. Subs. by A.O. 1950 (as amended by  C. O. 29, dated 4 -
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COASTING-VESSELS ACT, 1838.pdf - page 3]
by Act 16 of 1874, s. 1 and Sch., Pt. I.  
2. Subs. by A.O. 1950 (as amended by  C. O. 29, dated 4 -4-1951), for “Master -Attendent ” (w.e.f.  26-1-1952) . 
3. The words “within the State of Bombay ” omitted by Act 22 of 1952, s. 7. 
4. Subs. by Act 22 of 1995, s. 82.  
5. Subs. by the A. O. 1937, for “Government of Bombay ”. 
6. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “East India Company ”. 
7. Subs. by Act 22 of 1952, s. 8,  for section  10. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COASTING-VESSELS ACT, 1838.pdf - page 4]
4 
 1[the Central Government] shall appoint; the same to be carried to  the credit of2[the Central 
Government]:  
3[Provided that any such fees as immediately before the commencement of 4[the Constitu tion] 
were, under this Act as then in force to be carried to the credit of the 5[Provincial Government] 
shall be paid to such officer as the State Government may appoint and be carried to the credit of 
that Government.]  
12. Produ ction of certificate on dem and.—6*** The owner or owners or com mander 
of every such vessel employed as aforesaid, fishing -vessel and harbour -craft shall 
produce, on demand thereof by any officer of the Customs 7*** or by any officer of the 
8*** Na vy, the certificate so directed to be applied for and obtained, in respect of such 
vessel employed as aforesaid, fishing -vessel or harbour -craft, as above mentioned.  
13. Penalty  for neglect to comply with rules. —6*** Incase any such vessel employed as 
aforesaid, fishing -vessel or harbour -craft shall not be so marked or branded in all respects as hereinbefore 
directed, or in case the name and number of any such vessel employed as afford  said, fishing -vessel or 
harbour -craft shall not be so painted, or shall not continue so painted on such vessel employed as 
aforesaid, fishing -vessel or harbour -craft, in all respects as herein -before directed;  
 
or in case any such vessel employe d as aforesaid, fishing -vessel o r harbour -craft shall not be furnished 
with such ce rtificate as hereinbefore specified, or in case the owner or owners or commander of any such 
vessel employed as aforesaid, fishing -vessel or harbour -craft shall not produce such certificate on demand 
thereof as hereinbefore directed;  
 
the owner or owners o f every such vessel employed as aforesaid shall be subject to a fine of ten times 
the amount of the fees payable in respect of the certificate of registry of such vessel, the same being a 
vessel for the certificate of the registration of which an
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COASTING-VESSELS ACT, 1838.pdf - page 4]
egistry of such vessel, the same being a 
vessel for the certificate of the registration of which any fee is p ayable; and the owner or owners of any 
such fishing -vessel or harbour -craft shall be subject to a fine of ten rupees;  
Recovery of penalties —which fine s may be recovered on convictio n before any 
Magistrate9*** hiving jurisdiction, 7*** by sale of such vessel, fishing -vessel or harbour -craft,  
her furniture, ammunition, tackle and apparel; 
Penalty on repetition of default —and such fines shall be payable as often as the owner or 
owners or commander of any such vessel employed as aforesa id, fishing -vessel or harbour -craft 
shall make such default as aforesaid: Provided every such subsequent default be made after the 
expiration of one month from the date of the last conviction.  
14. Power to direct compe nsation for trouble in seizing. —6*** The 10[Central  
Government] may direct compensation for trouble and diligence in seizing such vessel 
employed as aforesaid, fishing -vessel or h arbour -craft, guns, furniture, tackle, ammunition 
and apparel, as last mentioned, to be made, out of the proceeds of such seizure to the person 
or persons who shall have seized the same, to such amount, in such manner and in such 
shares or proportions, as to the  said 11[Central Government] shall seem meet.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A. O. 1937, for “the Governor of Bombay in Council ”. 
2. Subs., ibid., for “the Government of Bombay ”. 
3. Ins., ibid. 
4. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “Part III of the Government of India Act, 1935 ”. 
5. Subs. ibid., for “Local Government ”. 
6. The words “And it is hereby enacted, that ” rep. by Act 16 of 1874, s. 1 and Sch., Pt. I.  
7. The words “within the said State ” omitted by Act 22 of 1952, s. 6.  
8. The word “Indian” rep. by Act 12 of 1876, s. 1 and Sch., Pt. I.  
9. The words “Justice of the Peace, or person exercising the powers of a Magistrate ” rep. by Act 12 of 1
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COASTING-VESSELS ACT, 1838.pdf - page 4]
e words “Justice of the Peace, or person exercising the powers of a Magistrate ” rep. by Act 12 of 1876, s. 1 and Sch., Pt. I.  
10. Subs. by the A. O. 1937, for “Governor of Bombay in Counci l”. 
11. Subs., ibid., for “Governor in Council ”. 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COASTING-VESSELS ACT, 1838.pdf - page 5]
5 
 15. [Port -clearance .] Rep. partly by the Repealing Act, 1874 (16 of1874),  s. 1 and Sch., 
Pt. I, and partly by the Repealing Act, 1876 (12 of 1876), s. 1 and Sch., Pt. I.  
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COASTING-VESSELS ACT, 1838.pdf - page 6]
6 
 SCHEDULE  
This is to  certify that (here insert the names, occupation and residence of the owners) 
having declared that (he or they) are sole owner or owners of the vessel (fishing -vessel or 
harbour -craft) called (the name) which is of the burthen of (number of  1[tons])and that the said 
vessel (fishing -vessel or harbour -craft) was (where and when built), the said vessel (fishing -
vessel or harbour -craft) has been duly registered at the  port of (name of port).  
Certified under my hand . 
(Signature of Officer ) 
_________  
 
                                                      
1. Subs.  by Act 22 of 1952, s. 9, for “Bombay khandls ”. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COCONUT DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1979.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE COCONUT DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT,  1979  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
Last updated: 1 -9-2021  
____ _____  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Declaration as to expediency of control by the Union . 
3. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
THE COCONUT DEVELOPMENT BOARD  
4. Establishment and constitution of the Board.  
5. Allowances payable to Chairman and members . 
6. Resignation of members . 
7. Officers of the Board and other staff . 
8. Special provision for transfer of employees to the Board . 
9. Committees of the Board . 
10. Func tions of the Board.  
11. Dissolution of the Board . 
CHAPTER III  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
12. Grants and loans by the Central Government . 
13. Constitution of Coconut Development Fund . 
14. Borrowing powers of the Board . 
15. Accounts and audit . 
CHAPTER IV  
CONTROL BY CENTRAL GOVERNMENT  
16. Directions by Central Government . 
17. Returns and reports.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
18. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
19. Power to make rules . 
20. Power to make regulations . 
21. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament . 
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COCONUT DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1979.pdf - page 2]
2 
 THE COCONUT DEVELOPMEN T BOARD ACT,1979  
ACT NO. 5 OF 1979  
[17th March, 1979.]  
An Act to provide for the development under the control of the Union of the coconut industry 
and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirtieth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title , extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Coconut Development 
Board Act, 1979.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government  may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Declaration as to expediency of control by the Union .—It is hereby declared that it is expedient 
in the public interest that the Union should take under its control the coconut industry.  
3. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Board ” means the Coconut Development Board established under section 4;  
2[(b) “Chairman ” means the non -executive Chairman of the Board appointed under clause ( a) of 
sub-section ( 4) of s ection 4;  
(ba) “Chief Executive Officer” means the Chief Executive Officer of the Board appointed under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 7;]  
(c) “coconut ” means the fruit of coconut palm and includes green coconut, ripe coconut and 
copra.  
Explanation. —“Coconut p alm” means the coconut tree, CocosNucifera Linn;  
(d) “coco nut industry ” does not include — 
(i) coir industry; or  
(ii) an industry from which products (including by -products) out of coconut oil are 
manufactured;  
(e) “member ” means a member of the Board and i ncludes the Chairman;  
(f) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.  
CHAPTER II  
THE COCONUT DEVELOPMENT BOARD  
4. Establishment and constitution of the Board .—(1) With effect from such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette appoint in this behalf, there shall be established 
for the purposes of this Act, a Board
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COCONUT DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1979.pdf - page 2]
al Gazette appoint in this behalf, there shall be established 
for the purposes of this Act, a Board to be called the Coconut Development Board.  
(2)The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and 
common s eal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to 
contract, and shall by the said name sue and be sued.  
                                                           
1. 12th January, 1981, vide notification No. G.S.R. 13(E), dated 12th January, 1981, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3(i). 
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 2021, s. 2, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 1 -9-2021).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COCONUT DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1979.pdf - page 3]
3 
 (3)The head office of the Board shall be at such place as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, specify.  
(4)The Board shall consist of  the following members, namely: — 
1[(a) anon -executive Chairman, to be appointed by the Central Government ; 
(aa) the Chief Executive Officer, to be  appointed by the Central  Government;  
(ab) the Joint S ecretary to the Government of India, in -charge of Mission for Integrated 
Development of Horticulture, ex officio ;] 
(b)2[the Horticulture Commissioner] to the Government of India, ex officio ; 
(c)the Director, Central Plantation Crops Research Institute (Ind ian Council of Agricultural 
Research), ex officio ; 
(d)the Chairman of the Coir Board constituted under section 4 of the Coir Industry Act, 1953 (45 
of 1953) ,ex officio ; 
(e)three members of Parliament of whom two shall be elected by the House of the P eople and one 
by the Council of S tates;  
(f)two members to be appointed by the Central Government to represent respectively the 
Ministries of the C entral Government dealing with — 
(i)Revenue; and  
3[(ii)Consumer Affairs ;] 
4[(g) four members to be appointed by the C entral Government one each to represent the 
Governments of the States of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala and Tamil Nadu, being States where 
coconut is grown on a large scale;  
(h) four members to be appointed by the Central Government by rotation in the a lphabetical order 
to represent the States of Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Nagaland, Odisha, 
Telengana, Tripura, West Bengal and the Union territories of Andaman and Nicobar Islands, 
Lakshadweep and Puducherry;  
(i) six members to b e appointed by the Central Government, two to represent the coconut growers 
of the State of Kerala and one each to represent the coconut growers of the States of Andhra Pradesh, 
Gujarat Karnataka and Tamil Nadu;]  
(j)one member to be appointed by the Centra l Government to represent the coconut
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COCONUT DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1979.pdf - page 3]
and Tamil Nadu;]  
(j)one member to be appointed by the Centra l Government to represent the coconut processing 
industry;  
(k)two members to be appointed by the Central Government to represent such other interests 
connected with the coconut industry as, in the opinion of that Government, ought to be represented:  
Provided that every appointment under clauses ( g) and ( h) shall be made on there  commendation 
of the State Government or, as the case may be, of the Union territory concerned.  
(5)The Board shall elect, from am ongst its members, a Vice -Chair man who shall exercise such of the 
powers and perform such of the functions of the Chairman as may be prescribed or as may be delegated to 
him by the Chairman.  
(6)The term of office of the members and the manner of filling vacancies among, and the procedure 
to be follow ed in the discharge of their functions by, the members shall be such as may be prescribed.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 2021, s. 3, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 1 -9-2021).  
2. Subs. by Act 21 of 1987, s. 2 , for “the Agriculture Commissioner” (w.e.f. 5 -8-1987).  
3. Subs. by Act 22 of 2021, s. 3, for sub -clause ( ii) (w.e.f. 1 -9-2021).  
4. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for clauses ( g), (h) and ( i) (w.e.f. 1 -9-2021).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COCONUT DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1979.pdf - page 4]
4 
 (7)Any officer of the Central Government, not being a member of the Board, when deputed by that 
Government in this behalf, shall have the right to attend the meeting s of the Board and take part in the 
proceedings thereof but shall not be entitled to vote.  
(8)The Board may associate with itself in such manner, subject to such conditions and for such 
purposes as may be prescribed, any person whose assistance or advice i t may desire in complying with 
any of the provisions of this Act and a person so associated shall have the right to take part in the 
discussions of the Board relevant to the purposes for which he has been associated but shall not have the 
right to vote and  shall be entitled to receive such allowances or fees as may be fixed by the Central 
Government.  
(9)No act or proceeding of the Board or any committee appointed by it under section9 shall be 
invalidated merely by reason of — 
(a)any vacancy in, or any defect  in the constitution of, the Board or such committee; or  
(b)any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the Board or such committee; 
or 
(c)any irregularity in the procedure of the Board or such committee not affecting the merits of the 
case.  
(10)The Board shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard 
to the transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum at meetings) as may be provided by 
regulations made by the Board under this Act . 
1[5. Allowances payable to Chairman and members .—The Chairman and members of the Board 
shall receive such allowances as may be fixed by the Central Government.]  
6. Resignation of members .—A member, other than an ex officio  member, may resign his office by 
giving notice thereof in writing to the Central Government and on such resignation being accepted, he 
shall be deemed to have vacated his office.  
7. Officers of the Board and other staff .—2[(1) The re shall be a Chief Execu tive Officer of the 
Board, n
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COCONUT DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1979.pdf - page 4]
ers of the Board and other staff .—2[(1) The re shall be a Chief Execu tive Officer of the 
Board, not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India, to be appointed by the Central 
Government . 
(1A) The Chief Executive Officer shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be 
prescribed.  
(1B) The salar ies and allowances payable to, and other conditions of service of, the Chief Executive 
Officer shall be such as may be prescribed.]  
(2) The Central Government shall appoint a Chief Coconut Development Officer to exercise such 
powers and perform such duties  as may be prescribed or as may be delegated to him by the 3[Chief 
Executive Officer] . 
(3) The Chief Coconut Development Officer appointed under sub -section ( 2) shall have the right to 
attend the meetings of the Board and its committees appointed under sec tion 9 and take part in the 
proceedings thereof but shall not be entitled to vote.  
(4) The Central Government shall appoint a Secretary to the Board who shall exercise such powers 
and perform such duties as may be prescribed or as may be delegated to him b y the Board or the 
Chairman  4[or the Chief Executive Officer] . 
(5) 5[The Chief  Executive Officer, the Chief Coconut Development Officer ] and the Secretary shall 
be entitled to such salary and allowances and shall be subject to such conditions of service in respect of 
leave, pension, provident fund and other matters as may, from time to time, be fixed by the Central 
Government.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 2021, s. 4, for section 5 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2021).  
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -9-2021).  
3. Subs. by  s. 5, ibid., for “Chairman” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2021).  
4. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -9-2021).  
5. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “The Chief Coconut Development Officer” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2021).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COCONUT DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1979.pdf - page 4]
2021).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COCONUT DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1979.pdf - page 5]
5 
 (6) Subject to such control and restrictions as may be prescribed, the Board may appoint such other 
officers and employees as may be necessary for the efficient performance of its functions and the method 
of appointment , the conditions of service and the scales of pay  and allowances of such other officers and 
employees of the Board shall be such as may be provided by the Board by regulations made under this 
Act. 
(7) 1[The Chief Executive Officer ], the Chief Coconut Development Officer, the Secretary and other 
officers and employees of the Board shall not undertake any work unconnected with their duties under 
this Act except with the permission of the Central Government.  
8. Special provision for transfer of employees to the Board .—(1) On the establishment of the 
Board, i t shall be lawful for the Central Government to transfer to the Board, by order , and with effect 
from such date or dates as may be specified in the order, any officer or other employee holding office as 
such in the Directorate of Coconut Development immedi ately before the date on  which the Board is 
established:  
Provided that the scale of pay of the post to which such officer or other employee is transferred shall 
not be lower than the scale of pay of the post he was holding immediately before such transfer and the 
other te rms and conditions of service ( including pension, leave, provident fund and medical benefits) of 
the post to which he is transferred shall not be less favourable than the terms and conditions of service in 
relation to the post held by him i mmediately before such transfer:  
Provided further that if, immediately before the date of his transfer , any such officer or other 
employee is officiating in a higher post under the Central Government either in a leave vacancy or in any 
vacancy of specified duration , his pay and other allowances, if any , on transfer, shall be protected for the 
unexpired period of such vacancy and thereafter he shall be entit
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COCONUT DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1979.pdf - page 5]
nsfer, shall be protected for the 
unexpired period of such vacancy and thereafter he shall be entitled to the scale of pay applicable to the 
post under the Central Government to which he would have reverted.  
(2) Before any order is issued under sub -section ( 1), all officers and other employees of the 
Directorate of Coconut Development shall be give an option in such forms as may be prescribed, and 
within such time as may be specified in that behalf by the Central Government, to express their 
willingn ess or otherwise to become employees of the Board and such optio n once exercised shall be final:  
Provided that no order under sub -section ( 1) shall be made in relation to any officer or other 
employee of the Directorate of Coconut Development who has intim ated his intention of not becoming an 
employee of the Board within the time specified in that behalf:  
Provided further that such  of the persons employed by the  Central Government in the said 
Directorate, who do not express, within the time specified in tha t behalf, their intention of becoming the 
employees of the Board, shall be dealt with in the same manner and in accordance with the same rules as 
would apply to the employees of the Central Government in the even t of the reduction of the strength of 
the De partment in which such persons have been employed.  
(3) An officer or other employee transferred by an order made under sub -section ( 1) shall, on and 
from the date of transfer, cease to be an employee of the Central Government and become an officer or 
other  employee of the Board with such designation as the Board may determine and shall, subject to the 
provisions of  the first and second provisos  to sub -section ( 1), be governed by the regulations made by the 
Board under this Act in respect of remuneration and  other conditions of service (including pension, leave, 
provident fund and medical benefits) and shall continue to be an officer or other employee of the Board 
unless and
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COCONUT DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1979.pdf - page 5]
and medical benefits) and shall continue to be an officer or other employee of the Board 
unless and until his employment is duly terminated by the Board:  
Provided that till such time as  the regulations referred to above governing the conditions of service of 
its officers or other employees are framed by the Board, the relevant rules and orders framed by the 
Central Government shall continue to be applicable to such officers or other empl oyees.  
(4) If a question arises whether the terms and conditions of service prescribed in the regulations 
framed  by the Board in respect of any matter, including remuneration, pension , leave, provident fund and 
medical benefits, are less favourable than th ose attached to the post held by an officer or other employee 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 2021, s. 5, for “the Chairman” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2021).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COCONUT DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1979.pdf - page 6]
6 
 immediately before his transfer to the Board, the decision of the Central Government in the matter shall 
be final.  
9. Committees of the Board .—(1) The Board may appoint such committees as may be  necessary for 
the efficient discharge of its duties and performance of its functions under this Act.  
(2) The Board shall have the power to co -opt as members of any committee appointed under sub -
section ( 1) such number of persons who are not members of the  Board as it may think fit and the persons 
so co -opted shall have the right to attend meetings of the committee and take part in its proceedings but 
shall not have the right to vote.  
(3) The persons co -opted as member of a committee under sub -section ( 2) shall be entitled to re ceive 
such allowances or fees for attending meetings of the committee as may be fixed by the Central 
Government.  
10. Function s of the Board .—(1) It shall be the duty of the Board to promote, by such measures as it 
thinks fit , the deve lopment under the control of the Central Government of the coconut industry.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the measures referred to 
therein may provide for — 
(a) adopting measures for the development of coconu t industry so that farmers , particularly small 
farmers, may become participants in, and beneficiaries of, the development  and growth of coconut 
industry;  
(b) recommending measures for improving the marketing of coconut and its products 1[within or 
outside India ]; 
(c) imparting technical adv ice to any person who is engaged  in the cultivation of coconut or the 
processing or marketing of coconut and its products;  
(d) providing financial or other assistance for the development of high yielding coconut hybrids, 
adoption of improved methods of cultivation of coconut, modern technology for processing of 
coconut and extension of areas under coconut cultivation (including replanting) with a view to 
improving  the growth o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COCONUT DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1979.pdf - page 6]
on of areas under coconut cultivation (including replanting) with a view to 
improving  the growth of coconut industry;  
(e) adopting such measures as may be practicable for assisting coconut growers to get incentive 
prices including recommending as and when necessary, minimum and maximum prices for coconut 
and its products;  
(f) recommending measures for regulating import and export of coconut and its  products;  
(g) collecting statistics from growers of coconut, dealers in coconut , manufacturers of coconut 
products and such other persons and institutions as may be prescribed , on any matter relating to 
coconut industry and publishing the statistics so co llected or portions thereof or extracts therefrom;  
(h) fixing grades, specifications and standards for coconut and its products;  
(i) financing suitable schemes in consultation with the Central Government and the Governments 
of the States where coconut is g rown 2***, so as to increase the production of coconut and to improve 
its quality and yield; and for this purpose evolving schemes for award of prizes or grant of incentives 
to growers of coconut and the manufacturers of its products and for providing mark eting facilities for 
coconut and its products;  
(j) assisting, encouraging , promoting or financing agricultural , technological, industrial or 
economic research on coconut and its products in such manner as the Board may deem fit by making 
use of available institutions;  
(k) undertaking such publicity and publishing such periodicals, books or bulletins , on the researc h 
and development of coconut and its products , as may be found necessary;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 2021, s. 6, for “in India” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2021).  
2. The words “on a large scale” omitted by s. 6 , ibid . (w.e.f. 1 -9-2021).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COCONUT DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1979.pdf - page 7]
7 
 (l) setting up of regional offices and other agencies for the promotion and development of 
production , grading and marketing of coconut and its products in coconut growing States and  Union 
territories for the efficient discharge of the functions and objectives of the Board;  
(m) such other measures as may , having regard to the purposes of this Act, be prescribed by the 
Central Government in consultation with the Governments of the States where coconut is grown on a 
large scale;  
(3) The Board shall perform its functions under this section in accordance with , and subject to , such 
rules as may be made by the Central Government.  
11. Dissolution of the Board .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette and for reasons to be specified therein, direct that the Board shall be dissolved fr om such date and 
for such period as may b e specified in the notification:  
Provided that before issuing any such notification, the Central Government shall give a reasonable 
opportunity to the Board to make representations against the proposed dissolution a nd shall consider the 
representations, if any, of the Board.  
(2) When the Board is dissolved under th e provisions of sub -section ( 1)— 
(a) all members , notwithstanding that their term of office has not expired , shall , from the date of 
dissolution, vacate th eir offices as such member;  
(b) all powers and duties of the Board shall, d uring the period of dissolution, be exercised and 
performed by such person or persons as the Central Government may appoint in this behalf and their 
remuneration shall be such as ma y be prescribed;  
(c) all funds and other properties vested in the Board shall, during the period of dissolution, vest 
in the Central Government; and  
(d) as soon as the period of dissolution expires, the Board shall be reconstituted in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act.  
CHAPTER III  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
12. Grants and loans by the Central 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COCONUT DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1979.pdf - page 7]
ions of this Act.  
CHAPTER III  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
12. Grants and loans by the Central Government .—The Central Government may, after due 
appropriation made my Parliament by law in this behalf , pay to the Board by way of grants or loans such 
sums of money as the Central Government may think fit for being utilised for the purpose s of this Act.  
13. Constitution of Coconut Development Fund .—(1) There shall be formed a Fund to be called 
the Coconut Development Fund and there shall be credited theret o— 
1*                                *                              *                              *                             *  
(b) any grants or loans granted by the Central Government for the purposes of this Act;  
(c) any grants or loans that may be made by any person for the purposes of this Act including 
loans under section 14;  
(d) any grants or donations from State Government s, voluntary organisations or other institutions:  
Provided that no such grant, loan or donation shall be credited to the Fund  except with prior approval 
of the Central Government . 
(2) The Fund shall be applied — 
(a) for meeting the cost of the measures referred to in section 10;  
(b) for meeting the salaries , allowances and other remuneration of the members, officers and 
other emp loyees, as the case may be , of the Board;  
                                                           
1. Clause ( a) omitted by Act 4 of 1987, s. 10 (w.e.f. 21 -3-1987).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COCONUT DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1979.pdf - page 8]
8 
 (c) for meeting the other administrative expenses of the Board and any other expenses authorised 
by or under this Act;  
(d) for repayment of any loans . 
14. Borrowing powers of the Board .—(1) The Board may , for the p urposes of carrying out its 
functions under this Act, and with the previous approval of, and subject to the directions of the Central 
Government, borrow money from — 
(a) the public by the issue or sale of bonds or debentures or both , carrying interest at such rates as 
may be specified therein;  
(b) any bank or other institution;  
(c) such other authority, organisation or institution as may be approved by the Central 
Government in this behalf.  
(2) The Central Government may guarantee the  repayment  of the monies  borrowed by the B oard 
under sub -section ( 1) and the payment of interest thereon and other incidental charges.  
15. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Board shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
and prepare an annual sta tement of accounts , in such form as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government in consultation with the Controller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Board shall be audited by the Controller and Auditor -General of India at such 
interval s as may be specified by his and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be 
payable by the Board to the Comptroller and Auditor -General.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the Board shall have the same rights and privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General generally has in connection with the 
audit of the Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of 
books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of 
the Board.  
(4) The accounts of the Board as certified by the Co
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COCONUT DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1979.pdf - page 8]
 to inspect any of the offices of 
the Board.  
(4) The accounts of the Board as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India o r any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
CHAPTER IV  
CONTROL BY CENTR AL GOVERNMENT  
16. Directions by Central Government .—The Board shall carry out such directions as may be 
issued to it from time to time by the Central Government for the efficient administration of this Act.  
17. Returns and reports .—(1) The Board shall furnish to the Central Government at such time and 
in such form and manner as may be prescribed or as the Central Government may direct, such returns and 
statements and such particulars in regard to any proposed or existing programme for the promotion and 
development of the coconut industry, as the Central Government may, from time to time , require.  
(2) The Board shall furnish a programme of its activities for each financial year to the Central 
Government for their information and directio ns, if any.  
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Board shall , as soon as possible, after 
the end of each financial year, submit to the Central Government a report in such form and before such 
date, as may be prescribed , giving a true and full account of its activities, policy and programmes during 
the previous financial year.  
(4) A copy of the report received under sub -section ( 3) shall be laid , as soon as may be , after it is 
received , before each House of Parliament.  
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COCONUT DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1979.pdf - page 9]
9 
 CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
18. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie against the Central Government, or the Board or any committee appointed by it, or any member of the 
Board or such committee, or any office r or other employee of the Central Government or of the Board or 
any other person authorised by the Central Government or the Board, for anything which is in good faith 
done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules made thereunder.  
19. Power to m ake rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely :— 
(a) the powers which may be exercised and functions which may be performed by the Vice -
Chairman of the Board under sub -section (5) of section 4; 
(b) the term of office of the members, the manner of filling vacancies among , and the procedure 
to be followed in the discharge of their functions by, the members , under sub -section ( 6) of section 4;  
(c) the manner in which and the purposes for which any person may be associated by the Board 
under sub -section ( 8) of section 4;  
1[(d) the powers  to be exercised and the duties to be performed by the Chief Executive Officer 
under sub -section ( 1A) of section 7 ; 
(da) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other conditions of service of, the Chief 
Executive Officer under sub -section (1B) of section 7; ] 
(e) the powers which may be exercised and the duties which may be performed by the Chief 
Coconut Development Officer of the Board under sub -section ( 2) of section 7;  
(f) the powers which may be exercised and the duties which may be perf ormed by the Secretary 
of the Board under sub -section ( 4) of section 7;  
(g) the control and restrictions subject which officers and other
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COCONUT DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1979.pdf - page 9]
 sub -section ( 4) of section 7;  
(g) the control and restrictions subject which officers and other employees may be appointed by 
the Board under sub -section ( 6) of section 7 ; 
(h) the form in which option may be given by the officers and other employees of the Directorate 
of Coconut Development under sub -section ( 2) of section 8 ; 
(i) the collection of statistics in respect of any matter relating to coconut industry under clause ( g) 
of sub -section ( 2) of section 10;  
(j) the matters in respect of which the Board may undertake measures in the discharge of its 
functions under clause( m) of sub -section ( 2) of section 10;  
(k) the remuneration and other allowances payable to the person or persons referred to in clause 
(b) of sub -section ( 2) of section 11;  
(l) the form in which the accounts of the Board shall be maintained under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 15;  
(m) the form and manner in which  and the time at which the Board may furnish returns and 
reports to the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) of section 17;  
(n) the form in which and the date before which the Board shall furnish to the Central 
Government the report of its activities a nd programmes under sub -section ( 3) of section 17;  
(o) any other matter which has to be , or may be, prescribed by rules under this Act.  
20. Power to make regulat ions.—(1) The Board may, with the previous sanction of the Central 
Government , by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations no t inconsistent with the provisions  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 2021, s. 7, for clause ( d) (w.e.f. 1 -9-2021).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COCONUT DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1979.pdf - page 10]
10 
 of this Act and the rules made thereunder , to provide for all matters for which provision is necessary or 
expedient for the purpose s of giving effect to the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers , such regulations 
may provide for all or any of the following matters , namely:— 
(a) the time s and places at which meetings o f the Board or any committee thereof, shall be held 
and the procedure to be followed thereat, and the number of members which shall form a quorum at a 
meeting under sub -section ( 10) of section 4;  
(b) the method of appointment, the conditions of service and  the scales of pay and allowances of 
any of the officers and other employees of the Board under sub -section( 6) of section 7;  
(c) generally , for the efficient conduct of the affairs of the Board.  
(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Offici al Gazette, modify or rescind any 
regulation sanctioned by it and the regulation so modified or rescinded shall have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or rescission 
shall be wit hout prejudice to the validity of anything done under the regulation before its modification or 
rescission.  
21. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament .—Every rule and every regulation made 
under this Act shall be laid , as soon as may be after i t is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in session , for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session  or in two or more 
successive sessions , and if , before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or  the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in maki ng any modification in the rule  or regulation , as 
the case may be,  or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation, as the case may be,  should not be made, 
the rule or regulation shall thereafte r have effect onl
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COCONUT DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1979.pdf - page 10]
, as the case may be,  should not be made, 
the rule or regulation shall thereafte r have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case 
may be; so , however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule or regulation.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020  
__________________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title extent , commencement and application.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Registration and cancellation of an establishment.  
CHAPTER II  
SOCIAL  SECURITY  ORGANISATIONS  
4. Constitution of Board of Trustees of Employees’ Provident Fund.  
5. Constitution of Employees’ State Insurance Corporation.  
6. National Social Security Board and State Unorganised Workers’ Board.  
7. Constitution of State Building Workers’ Welfare Boards.  
8. Disqualification and removal of a member of any Social Security Organisation.  
9. Procedure for transaction of business of Social Security Organisation , etc. 
10. Executive Heads of Central Board and Corporation.  
11. Supersession of Corporation, Central  Board, National Social Security Board or State 
Unorganised Workers’ Board or the Building Workers’ Welfare Board.  
12. State Board, Regional Boards, local committees, etc.  
13. Entrustment of additional functions to Social Security Organisations.  
CHAPTER III  
EMPLOY EES’ PROVIDENT  FUND 
14. Appointment of officers of Central Board.  
15. Schemes.  
16. Funds.  
17. Contribution in respect of employees and contractors.  
18. Fund to be recogni sed under Act 43 of 1961.  
19. Priority of payment of contributions over other debts.  
20. Chapter not to apply to certain establishments.  
21. Authorising certain employers to maintain provident fund accounts.  
22. Transfer of accounts.  
23. Appeal to Tribunal.  
CHAPTER IV  
EMPLOYEES  STATE  INSURANCE  CORPORATION  
24. Principal Officers and other staff.  
25. Employees’ State Insurance Fund.  
26. Purposes for which Employees’ State Insurance Fund may be expended.  
27. Holding of property, etc.  
28. All employees to be insured.  
29. Contributions.  
30. Administrative expenses.  
31. Provisions as to payment of contributions by employer , etc. 
32. Benefits.  
33. Corporation’s 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 1]
31. Provisions as to payment of contributions by employer , etc. 
32. Benefits.  
33. Corporation’s power to promote measures for health, etc., of Insured Persons.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 2]
2 
 SECTIONS  
34. Presumption as to accident arising in course of employment.  
35. Accidents happening while acting in breach of law, etc.  
36. Occupational disease.  
37. References to medical board.  
38. Dependants’ benefit.  
39. Medical benefit.  
40. Provision of medical treatment by State Government or by Corporation.  
41. General provisions as to benefits.  
42. Corporation’s rights when an employer fails to register, etc.  
43. Liability of owner or occupier of factories, etc, for excessive sickness  benefit.  
44. Scheme for other beneficiaries.  
45. Scheme for unorgani sed workers, gig workers and platform workers.  
46. Exemption of factories or other establishments belonging to Government or any local 
authority.  
47. Contributions, etc., due to corporation to have prior ity over other debts.  
48. Constitution of Employees Insurance Court.  
49. Matters to be decided by Employees Insurance court.  
50. Powers of Employees Insurance court.  
51. Proceedings of Employees Insurance courts.  
52. Appeal to High Court.  
CHAPTER V  
GRATUITY  
53. Payment of gratuity.  
54. Continuous service.  
55. Nomination.  
56. Determination of amount of gratuity.  
57. Compulsory Insurance.  
58. Competent authority.  
CHAPTER VI  
METERNITY BENEFIT  
59. Employment of, or work by, women prohibited during certain period.  
60. Right to payment of maternity benefit.  
61. Continuance of payment of maternity benefit in certain cases.  
62. Notice of claim for maternity benefit and payment thereof.  
63. Payment of maternity benefit in case of death of a woman.  
64. Payment of medical bonus.  
65. Leave for miscarriage, etc.  
66. Nursing breaks.  
67. Creche  facility.  
68. Dismissal for absence during pregnancy.  
69. No deduction of wages in certain cases.  
70. Forfeiture of maternity benefit.  
71. Duties of employer.  
72. Power of Inspector -cum-facilitator to direct payments to be made.  
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 2]
 to direct payments to be made.  
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 3]
3 
 CHAPTER VII  
EMPLOYEES’ COMPENSATION  
SECTIONS  
73. Reports of fatal accidents and serious bodily injuries.  
74. Employer’s liability for compensation.  
75. Compensation in case of death of or injury in plantation.  
76. Amount of compensation . 
77. Compensation to be paid when due and damages for default.  
78. Method of calculating monthly wages for purposes of compensation.  
79. Review.  
80. Commutation of half -monthly payments.  
81. Distribution of compensation.  
82. Notice and claim.  
83. Special provisions relating to accidents occurring outside Indian Territory.  
84. Medical examination.  
85. Contracting.  
86. Remedies of employer against stranger.  
87. Insolvency of employer.  
88. Power to require from employers statements regarding fatal accidents.  
89. Registration of agreements.  
90. Reference to competent authority.  
91. Appointment of competent authority.  
92. Venue of pro ceedings and transfer.  
93. Form of application.  
94. Power of competent authority to require further deposit in cases of fatal accident.  
95. Powers and procedure of competent authority.  
96. Appearance of parties.  
97. Method of recording evidence.  
98. Power to submit cases.  
99. Appeal against order of competent authority.  
CHAPTER VIII  
SOCIAL SECURITY AND CESS IN RESPECT OF BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS  
100. Levy and collection of cess.  
101. Interest payable on delay in payment of cess.  
102. Power to exempt from cess.  
103. Self-assessment of cess.  
104. Penalty for non -payment of cess within the specified time.  
105. Appeal to appellate authority.  
106. Registration of building workers as beneficiaries.  
107. Cessation as a beneficiary.  
108. Building and other construction worker’s welfare Fund and its applications.  
CHAPTER IX  
SOCIAL SECURITY FOR UNORGANISED WORKERS, GIG WORKERS AND PLANTFORM WORKERS  
109. Framing of schemes for unorgani sed workers.  
110. Funding of state government schemes.  
111. Record keeping.
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 3]
schemes for unorgani sed workers.  
110. Funding of state government schemes.  
111. Record keeping.  
112. Helpline, facilitation centre, etc., for unorgani sed workers, gig workers and platform 
workers.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 4]
4 
 SECTIONS  
113. Registration of unorgani sed workers, gig workers and platform workers.  
114. Schemes for gig workers and platform workers.  
CHAPTER X  
FINANCE AND ACCOUNTS  
115. Accounts.  
116. Audit.  
117. Budget estimates.  
118. Annual report.  
119. Valuation of assets and liabilities.  
120. Holding of property, etc., by social security organi sation.  
121. Writing off of losses.  
CHAPTER XI  
AUTHORITIES, ASSESSMENT, COMPLIANCE AND RECOVERY  
122. Appointment of Inspector -cum-Facilitators and their powers.  
123. Maintenance of records, registers, returns, etc.  
124. Employer not to reduce wages, etc.  
125. Assessment and determination of dues from employer.  
126. Appeal against order of Authori sed officer relating to chapter IV.  
127. Interest on amount due.  
128. Power to recover damages.  
129. Recovery of amount due.  
130. Validity of ce rtificate and amendment thereof.  
131. Other modes of recovery.  
132. Application of certain provisions of Income -tax act.  
CHAPTER XII  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
133. Penalty for failure to pay contributions, etc.  
134. Enhanced punishment in certain cases after previous conviction.  
135. Offences by companies.  
136. Cognizance of offences.  
137. Prior opportunity before prosecution.  
138. Compounding of offences.  
CHAPTER XIII  
EMPLOYMENT INFORMATION AND MONITORING  
139. Reporting of vacancies to career centres.  
140. Exclusions from application of this chapter.  
CHAPTER  XIV 
MISCELLANEOUS  
141. Social Security Fund.  
142. Application of Aadhaar.  
143. Power to exempt establishment.  
144. Power to defer or reduce.  
145. Liability in case of transfer of establishm ent. 
146. Members, officers and staff to be public servants.  
147. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 5]
5 
 SECTIONS  
148. Misuse of benefits.  
149. Power of central Government to give directions to state government and social security 
organizations.  
150. Power to frame schemes.  
151. Protection against attachment, etc.  
152. Power to amend schedule.  
153. Transitional provisions.  
154. Power of  appropriate Government to make rules.  
155. Power of central Government to make rules.  
156. Power of state Government to make rules.  
157. Power of corporation to make regulations.  
158. Prior publication of rules, regulations,  etc. 
159. Rules to give effect to arrangements with oth er countries for the transfer of money paid 
as compensation.  
160. Laying of rules, regulations and schemes, etc.  
161. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with this code.  
162. Delegation of powers.  
163. Power to remove difficulties.  
164. Repeal and savings.  
THE FIRST SCHEDUL E 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE  
THE FIFTH SCHEUDLE  
THE SIXTH SCHEDUEL  
THE SEVEN SCHEDULE  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 6]
6 
  
THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY, 2020  
ACT N O. 36 OF 2020  
[28th September, 2020.]  
An Act to amend and consolidate the laws relating to social security with the  goal to extend social 
security to all employees and workers either in the  organised or unorganised or any other 
sectors and for matters connected  therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -first Year of the Republic of India as  follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application .—(1) This Act may be called the Code on 
Social Security, 2020.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Code and any 
reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Code shall b e construed as a reference to the 
coming into force of that provision.  
(4) The applicability of the Chapters specified in columns ( 1) and ( 2) of the First Schedule shall, without 
prejudice to the applicability of the other provisions of this Code, be such as is specified in corresponding 
entry in column ( 3) of that Schedule.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 4), where it appears to the Central Provident 
Fund Commissioner, whether on an application made to him by the employer of an estab lishment or 
otherwise, that the employer and majority of employees of that establishment have agreed that the 
provisions of Chapter III should be made applicable to that establishment, the Central Provident Fund 
Commissioner, may, by notification, apply th e provisions of the said Chapter to that establishment on and 
from the date of such agreement or from any subsequent date specified in the agreement:  
Provided that where the employer of an establishment to which the provisions of Chapter III applied 
under this sub -section desires to come ou
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 6]
blishment to which the provisions of Chapter III applied 
under this sub -section desires to come out of such applicability, he may make an application to the Central 
Provident Fund Commissioner and the Central Provident Fund Commissioner shall, if satisfied that there 
is an agreement between the employer and majority o f the employees to this effect, make the provisions of 
that Chapter inapplicable to such establishment, in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government.  
(6) The Central Government may, after giving not less than  two months' notice of its intention so to do, 
by notification, apply the provisions of this Code to any establishment employing not less than such number 
of persons as may be specified in the notification.  
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 4), where it appears to the Director General of 
the Corporation, whether on an application made to him by the employer of an establishment or otherwise, 
that the employer and majority of employees of that establishment have agreed that the pro visions of 
Chapter IV should be made applicable to that establishment, the Director General of the Corporation, may, 
by notification, apply the provisions of the said Chapter to that establishment on and from the date of such 
agreement or from any subseque nt date specified in the agreement:  
Provided that where the employer of an establishment to which the provisions of Chapter IV applied 
under this sub -section desires to come out of such applicability, he may make an application to the Director 
General of t he Corporation and Director General of the Corporation shall, if satisfied that there is an 
                                                           
1. 3rd May, 2021 - S. 142 , vide notification No. S.O. 1730(E), dated 30th April, 2021, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( ii). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 6]
rt II, 
sec. 3( ii). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 7]
7 
 agreement between the employer and majority of the employees to this effect, make the provisions of that 
Chapter inapplicable to such establishment, in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government.  
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 4), an establishment to which any Chapter 
applies at the first instance shall continue to be applied thereafter even if th e number of employees therein 
at any subsequent time falls below the threshold specified in the First Schedule in respect of that Chapter.  
2. Definitions. — In this Code, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(1) “agent ” when used in relation to an establishment, means every person, whether appointed as such 
or not, who acting or purporting to act on behalf of the owner, takes part in the management, control, 
supervision or direction of such establishment or part thereof;  
(2) “aggregator ” means a digital intermediary or a market place for a buyer or user of a service to 
connect with the seller or the service provider;  
(3) “appropriate Government ” means — 
(a) in relation to, an establishment carried on by or under the author ity of the Central Government 
or concerning any such controlled industry as may  be specified by notification in this behalf, by the 
Central Government or the  establishment of railways including metro railways, mines, oil field, major  
ports, air transport s ervice, telecommunication, banking and insurance company  or a corporation or 
other authority established by a Central Act or the central  public sector undertaking or subsidiary 
companies set up by the central public  sector undertakings, subsidiary companies set up by the principal 
undertakings  or autonomous bodies owned or controlled by the Central Government,  including 
establishment of contractors for the purposes of such establishment,  corporation or other authority, 
central public sector undertak ings, subsidiary  companies or autono
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 7]
orporation or other authority, 
central public sector undertak ings, subsidiary  companies or autonomous bodies or any company in 
which not less than fifty -one per cent. of the paid up share capital is held by the Central Government, 
as the case may be, or in relation to an establishment having departments or  branches in more than one 
State, as the case may be, the Central Government;  and 
(b) in relation to any other establishment, the State Government.  
Explanation 1.—For the purposes of this clause, the expression “metro railway ” means the metro 
railway as defined in s ub-clause ( i) of clause ( 1) of section 2 of the Metro  Railways (Operation and 
Maintenance ) Act, 2002  (60 of 2002) . 
Explanation 2.—For the purposes of this clause, the Central Government shall  continue to be the 
appropriate Government for the central public sector undertakings even  if the holding of the Central 
Government reduces to less than fifty per cent. equity in that  public sector undertaking after the 
commencement of this Code;  
(4) “audio -visual production ” means audio -visual produced wholly or partly in India  and includes — 
(i) animation, cartoon depiction, audio -visual advertisement;  
(ii) digital production or any of the activities in respect of making thereof; and  
(iii) features films, non -feature films, television, web -based serials, talk show s, reality shows and 
sport shows;  
(5) “Authorised Officer ” means such officer of the Central Board, or as the case may  be, of the 
Corporation notified by the Central Government;  
(6) “building or other construction work ” means the construction, alteration, repairs,  maintenance or 
demolition in relation to buildings, streets, roads, railways, tramways,  airfields, irrigation, drainage, 
embankment and navigation works, flood control works  (including storm water drainage works), 
generation, transmission and dist ribution of power,  water works (including channels for distribution of 
water), oil and gas
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 7]
nd dist ribution of power,  water works (including channels for distribution of 
water), oil and gas installations, electric  lines, internet towers, wireless, radio, television, telephone, 
telegraph and overseas  communications, dams, canals, reservoirs, watercourses , tunnels, bridges, viaducts, 
aquaducts,  pipelines, towers, cooling towers, transmission towers and such other work as may  be specified 
in this behalf by the Central Government, by notification, but does not include  any building or other 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 8]
8 
 construction work which is related to any factory or mine or any  building or other construction work 
employing less than ten workers in the preceding  twelve months or where such work is related to own 
residential purposes of an individual or  group of individuals for their o wn residence and the total cost of 
such work does not exceed  fifty lakhs rupees or such higher amount and employing more than such number 
of workers  as may be notified by the appropriate Government;  
(7) “building worker ” means a person who is employed to do any skilled, semi -skilled  or unskilled, 
manual, technical or clerical work for hire or reward, whether the terms of such  employment are express or 
implied, in connection with any building or other construction  work, bu t does not include any such person 
who is employed mainly in a managerial or  supervisory or administrative capacity;  
(8) “Building Workers' Welfare Board ” means the State Building and other Construction  Workers' 
Welfare Board constituted under sub -section (1) of section 7;  
(9) “career centre ” means any office (including employment exchange, place or portal)  established and 
maintained in the manner prescribed by the Central Government for  providing such career services 
(including registration, collection and  furnishing of  information, either by the keeping of registers or 
otherwise, manually, digitally, virtually  or through any other mode) as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government, which may,  inter alia , relate generally or specifically to — 
(i) persons w ho seek to employ employees;  
(ii) persons who seek employment;  
(iii) occurrence of vacancies; and  
(iv) persons who seek vocational guidance and career counselling or guidance  to start self -
employment;  
(10) “Central Board ” means the Board of Trustees of the Employees' Provident Fund  constituted under 
section 4;  
(11) “Central Provident Fund Commissioner ” means the Central Provident Fund  Commissioner of the 
Centra
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 8]
“Central Provident Fund Commissioner ” means the Central Provident Fund  Commissioner of the 
Central Board appointed under sub -section ( 1) of section 14;  
(12) “child ”, for the purposes of Chapter VI, includes a stillborn child;  
(13) “Commissioning mother ” means a biological mother who uses her egg to create  an embryo 
implanted in any other woman;  
(14) “company ” means a company as defined in clause ( 20) of section  2 of the  Companies Act, 2013  
(18 of 2013) ; 
(15) “compensation ” means compensation as provided under Chapter VII;  
(16) “competent authority ” means any authority appointed under section 58 for the  purposes of Chapter 
V or notified for the purposes of Chapte r VI or appointed under  section 91 for the purposes of Chapter VII, 
as the case may be, as competent authority by  the appropriate Government or the State Government, as the 
case may be;  
(17) “completed year of service ” means continuous service for twelve months;  
(18) “confinement ” means labour resulting in the issue of a living child, or labour  after twenty -six 
weeks of pregnancy resulting in the issue of a child whether alive or dead;  
(19) “contract labour ” means a wor ker who shall be deemed to be employed in or in  connection with 
the work of an establishment when he is hired in or in connection with  such work by or through a contractor, 
with or without the knowledge of the principal  employer and includes inter -State mi grant worker but does 
not include an employee (other  than part time employee) who is regularly employed by the contractor for 
any activity of  his establishment and his employment is governed by mutually accepted standards of the  
conditions of employment (i ncluding engagement on permanent basis), and gets periodical  increment in the 
pay, social security coverage and other welfare benefits in accordance  with the law for the time being in 
force in such employment;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 8]
 in 
force in such employment;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 9]
9 
 (20) “contractor ”, in relation to an establish ment means a person, who — 
(i) undertakes to produce a given result for the establishment, other than a  mere supply of goods or 
articles of manufacture to such establishment through contract  labour; or  
(ii) supplies contract labour for any work of the estab lishment as mere human  resource,  and includes 
a sub -contractor;  
(21) “contribution ” means the sum of money payable by the employer, under this  Code, to the Central 
Board and to the Corporation, as the case may be, and includes any  amount payable by or on behalf of the 
employee in accordance with the provisions of this  Code;  
(22) “Corporation ” means the Employees' State Insurance Corporation constituted  under section 5;  
(23) “delivery ” means the birth of a child;  
(24) “dependant ” means any of the following relatives of deceased employee,  namely: — 
(a) a widow, a minor legitimate or adopted son, an unmarried legitimate or  adopted daughter or a 
widowed mother:  
Provided that for the purposes of Chapter IV, a legitimate adopted son,  who has not attained the age of 
twenty -five years, shall be dependant of the  deceased employee;  
(b) if wholly dependant on the earnings of the employee at the time of his death,  a legitimate or adopted 
son or a daughter who has attained the age of eighteen years  and who is infirm; exc ept for the purposes of 
Chapter IV wherein the word “eighteen ” occurring in this sub -clause shall be deemed to have been 
substituted by the word  “twenty -five”; 
(c) if wholly or in part dependent on the earnings of the employee at the time of  his death, — 
(i) a widower;  
(ii) a parent other than a widowed mother;  
(iii) a minor illegitimate son, an unmarried illegitimate daughter or a  daughter legitimate or 
illegitimate or adopted if married and a minor or if  widowed and a minor;  
(iv) a minor brother or an unma rried sister or a widowed sister if a minor;  
(v) a widowed daughter -in-law; 
(vi) a mino
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 9]
 an unma rried sister or a widowed sister if a minor;  
(v) a widowed daughter -in-law; 
(vi) a minor child of a pre -deceased son;  
(vii) a minor child of a pre -deceased daughter where no parent of the  child is alive, or;  
(viii) a grandparent if no parent of the employe e is alive.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of sub -clause ( b) and items ( vi) and ( vii) of sub-clause ( c), references 
to a son, daughter or child include an adopted son, daughter  or child, respectively;  
(25) “dock work ” means any work in or within the vicinit y of any port in connection  with, or required 
for, or incidental to, the loading, unloading, movement or storage of  cargoes into or from ship or other 
vessel, port, dock, storage place or landing place, and  includes — 
(i) work in connection with the prepara tion of ships or other vessels for receipt  or discharge of 
cargoes or leaving port;  
(ii) all repairing and maintenance processes connected with any hold, tank  structure or lifting 
machinery or any other storage area on board the ship or in the  docks; and  
(iii) chipping, painting or cleaning of any hold, tank, structure or lifting machinery  or any other 
storage area in board the ship or in the docks;  
(26) “employee ” means any person (other than an apprentice engaged under the  Apprentices Act, 1961)  
(52 of 1961 ) employed on wages by an establishment, either directly or through  a contractor, to do any 
skilled, semi -skilled or unskilled, manual, operational, supervisory,  managerial, administrative, technical, 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 10]
10 
 clerical or any other work, whether the ter ms of  employment be express or implied, and also includes a 
person declared to be an employee  by the appropriate Government, but does not include any member of the 
Armed Forces of  the Union:  
Provided that for the purposes of Chapter III, except in case of the Employees’ Provident  Fund Scheme 
and Chapter IV, the term “employee ” shall mean such employee drawing  wages less than or equal to the 
wage ceiling notified by the Central Government and  includes such other persons or class of persons as the 
Central Gov ernment may by  notification, specify to be employee, for the purposes of those Chapters:  
Provided further that for the purposes of counting of employees for the coverage of  an establishment 
under Chapter III and Chapter IV, as the case may be, the employee s, whose wages are more than the wage 
ceiling so notified by the Central Government, shall  also be taken into account:  
Provided also that for the purposes of Chapter VII, the term “employee ” shall mean  only such persons 
as specified in the Second Schedule and such other persons or class of  persons as the Central Government, 
or as the case may be, the State Government may add  to the said Schedule, by notification, for the purposes 
of that Government;  
(27) “employer ” means a person who employs, whether directly or through any person,  or on his behalf, 
or on behalf of any person, one or more employees in his establishment  and where the establishment is 
carried on by any department of the Central Government or  the State  Government, the authority specified, 
by the head of such department, in this  behalf or where no authority is so specified, the head of the 
department and in relation to  an establishment carried on by a local authority, the chief executive of that 
authorit y, and  includes, — 
(a) in relation to an establishment which is a factory, the occupier of the factory;  
(b) in relation to mine, the owner of the mine 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 10]
t which is a factory, the occupier of the factory;  
(b) in relation to mine, the owner of the mine or agent or manager having  requisite qualification 
under the law for the time being in force and appointed  by the  owner or agent of the mine as such;  
(c) in relation to any other establishment, the person who, or the authority  which has ultimate 
control over the affairs of the establishment and where the said  affairs are entrusted to a manager or 
managing director, such manager or managing  director;  
(d) contractor; and  
(e) legal representative of a deceased employer;  
(28) “employment injury ” means a personal injury to an employee, caused by accident  or an 
occupational disease, as the case may be, arising ou t of and in the course of his  employment, — 
(i) for the purposes of Chapter IV, if the employee is an insured or insurable  employee under section 
28 whether such accident occurs or the occupational disease  is contracted within or outside the 
territorial lim its of India; and  
(ii) for the purposes of Chapter VII, whether such accident occurs or the  occupational disease is 
contracted within or outside the territorial limits of India;  
(29) “establishment ” means — 
(a) a place where any industry, trade, business, m anufacture or occupation is  carried on; or  
(b) a factory, motor transport undertaking, newspaper establishment, audiovisual  production, 
building and other construction work or plantation; or  
(c) a mine, port or vicinity of port where dock work is carried o ut. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of Chapter III, where an establishment consists of  different 
departments or has branches, whether situate in the same place or in different  places, all such departments 
or branches shall be treated as parts of the same est ablishment;  
(30) “executive officer ” means such officer of the appropriate Government as may be  notified by that 
Government for the purposes of Chapter XIII or an officer authorised in  writing by such e
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 10]
 by that 
Government for the purposes of Chapter XIII or an officer authorised in  writing by such executive officer 
to discharge his duties under that Chapter;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 11]
11 
 (31) “exempted employee ” for the purposes of Chapter III, means an employee to  whom any of the 
schemes referred to in section 15, but for the exemption granted under  this Code, would have applied and 
for the purposes of Chapter IV, means an employ ee, whose wage is specified in the notification by the 
Central Government and who is not  liable to pay employee's contribution;  
(32) “factory ” means any premises including the precincts thereof — 
(a) whereon ten or more employees are working, or were working on any day  of the preceding 
twelve months, and in any part of which a manufacturing process is  being carried on with the aid of 
power, or is ordinarily so carried on, or  
(b) whereon twenty or more employees are working, or were working on any  day o f the preceding 
twelve months, and in any part of which a manufacturing process  is being carried on without the aid of 
power, or is ordinarily so carried on,  but does not include a mine, or a mobile unit belonging to the 
Armed Forces of the Union,  railways  running shed or a hotel, restaurant or eating place.  
Explanation 1.—For computing the number of employees for the purposes of this  clause, all the 
employees in (different groups and relays) a day shall be taken into account.  
Explanation 2.—For the purpose s of this clause, the mere fact that an Electronic  Data Processing Unit 
or a Computer Unit is installed in any premises or part thereof, shall  not be construed as factory if no 
manufacturing process is being carried on in such premises  or part thereof;  
(33) “family ” means all or any of the following relatives of an employee or an  unorganised worker, as 
the case may be, namely: — 
(a) a spouse;  
(b) a minor legitimate or adopted child dependent upon the employee or an  unorganised worker, as 
the case may be;  
(c) a child who is wholly dependent on the earnings of the employee or an  unorganised worker, as 
the case may be, and who is — 
(i) receiving education, till he attai
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 11]
or an  unorganised worker, as 
the case may be, and who is — 
(i) receiving education, till he attains the age of twenty -one years; and  
(ii) an unmarried daughter;  
(d) a child who is infirm by re ason of any physical or mental abnormality or  injury and is wholly 
dependent on the earnings of the employee or an unorganized worker, as the case may be, so long as 
the infirmity continues;  
(e) dependent parents (including father -in-law and mother -in-law of a woman  employee), whose 
income from all sources does not exceed such income as may be  prescribed by the Central Government;  
(f) in case the employee or an unorganised worker, as the case may be, is  unmarried and his parents 
are not alive, a minor broth er or sister wholly dependent  upon the earnings of the Insured Person;  
(34) “fixed term employment ” means the engagement of an employee on the basis of  a written contract 
of employment for a fixed period:  
Provided that — 
(a) his hours of work, wages, allowances and other benefits shall not be less  than that of a permanent 
employee doing the same work or work of a similar nature;  and 
(b) he shall be eligible for all benefits, under any law for the time being in  force, available to a 
permanent employee p roportionately according to the period of  service rendered by him even if his 
period of employment does not extend to the  required qualifying period of employment;  
(35) “gig worker ” means a person who performs work or participates in a work  arrangement and  earns 
from such activities outside of traditional employer -employee  relationship;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 12]
12 
 (36) “home -based worker ” means a person engaged in, the production of goods or  services for an 
employer in his home or other premises of his choice other than the workplace  of the employer, for 
remuneration, irrespective of whether or not the employer provides  the equipment, materials or other inputs;  
(37) “Inspector -cum-Facilitator ” means an Inspector -cum-Facilitator appointed under  section 122;  
(38) “Insurance Fund ” means t he Deposit -Linked Insurance Fund established under  clause ( c) of  
sub-section ( 1) of section 16;  
(39) “Insured Person ” means the Insured Person referred to in section 28;  
(40) “Insurance Scheme ” means the Deposit -Linked Insurance Scheme framed under  clause  (c) of sub -
section ( 1) of section 15;  
(41) “inter-State migrant worker ” means a person who is employed in an establishment  and who — 
(i) has been recruited directly by the employer or indirectly through contractor  in one State for 
employment in such establ ishment situated in another State; or  
(ii) has come on his own from one State and obtained employment in an  establishment of another 
State (hereinafter called destination State) or has  subsequently changed the establishment within the 
destination State,  under an agreement or other arrangement for such employment and drawing wages 
not exceeding eighteen thousand rupees per month or such higher amount as may be notified  by the 
Central Government from time to time;  
(42) “manufacturing process ” means any proces s for —(i) making, altering, repairing, ornamenting, 
finishing, oiling, washing, cleaning,  breaking up, demolishing, refining, or otherwise treating or adapting 
any article or  substance with a view to its use, sale, transport, delivery or disposal; or  
(ii) pumping oil, water, sewage or any other substance; or  
(iii) generating, transforming or transmitting power; or  
(iv) composing, offset printing, printing by letter press, lithography,  photogravure screen printing, 
thr
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 12]
mposing, offset printing, printing by letter press, lithography,  photogravure screen printing, 
three or four dimensional printing, prototyping,  flexography or other types of printing process or book 
binding; or  
(v) constructing, reconstructing, repairing, refitting, finishing or breaking up  ships or vessels; or  
(vi) preserving or storing any article in cold storage; or  
(vii) such othe r activities as the Central Government may notify;  
(43) “maternity benefit ”, in respect of Chapter VI, means the payment referred to in  sub-section ( 1) of 
section 60;  
(44) “medical practitioner ” means a person registered under any law for the time  being in  force, or, any 
person declared by the State Government, by notification, to be  qualified as medical practitioner for the 
purposes of this Code:  
Provided that different class or classes of medical practitioner having specific  qualification may be 
notified by the Central Government for the purposes of Chapter IV  and by the appropriate Government for 
other Chapters of this Code;  
(45) “medical termination of pregnancy ” means the termination of pregnancy  permissible under the 
provisions of the Medical Terminati on of Pregnancy Act, 1971  (34 of 1971) ; 
(46) “mine ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( j) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the 
Mines Act, 1952  (35 of 1952) ; 
(47) “minor ” means a person who has not attained the age of eighteen years;  
(48) “miscarriage ” means expulsion of the contents of a pregnant uterus at any period  prior to or during 
the twenty -sixth week of pregnancy, but does not include any miscarriage,  the causing of which is 
punishable under the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) ; 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 13]
13 
 (49) “National Social Security Board ” means the National Social Security Board for  Unorganised 
Workers constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 6;  
(50) “notification ” means a notification published in the Gazette of India or the Official  Gazette of a 
State, as the case may be, and the expression “notify ” with its grammatical  variations and cognate 
expressions shall be construed accordingly;  
(51) “occupational disease ” means a disease specified in the Third Schedule as a  disease peculiar to the 
employment of the employee;  
(52) “occupier ” in respect of a factory means the person who has ultimate control  over the affairs of 
the factory:  
Provided that — 
(a) in the case of a firm or other association of individuals, any one of the  individual partners or 
members the reof;  
(b) in the case of a company, any one of the directors, except any independent  director within the 
meaning of sub -section ( 6) of section 149 of the Companies  Act, 2013  (18 of 2013) ; 
(c) in the case of a factory owned or controlled by the Central Gove rnment or  any State 
Government, or any local authority, the person or persons appointed to  manage the affairs of the factory 
by the Central Government, the State Government  or the local authority or such other authority as may 
be prescribed by the Central  Government,   
shall be deemed to be the occupier:  
Provided further that in the case of a ship which is being repaired, or on which  maintenance work is 
being carried out, in a dry dock which is available for hire, the owner  of the dock shall be deemed to be the 
occupier for all purposes except the matters as may  be prescribed by the Central Government which are 
directly related to the condition of  ship for which the owner of ship shall be deemed to be the occupier;  
(53) “oilfield ” shall have the meaning assig ned to it in clause ( e) of section 3 of the  Oilfields (Regulation 
and Development) Act, 1948  (53 of 1948) ; 
(54) “organised sector
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 13]
 3 of the  Oilfields (Regulation 
and Development) Act, 1948  (53 of 1948) ; 
(54) “organised sector ” means an enterprise which is not an unorganised sector;  
(55) “permanent partial disablement ” means, where the disablement is of a permanent  nature, such 
disablement as reduces the earning capacity of an employee in every  employment which he was capable of 
undertaking at the time of the accident resulting in  the disablement:  
Provided that every injury specified in Part II of the Fourth Schedule shall be deemed  to result in 
permanent partial disablement;  
(56) “permanent total disablement ” means such disablement of a permanent nature as  incapacitates an 
employee for all work which he was capable of performing at the time of the  accident resulting in such 
disablement:  
Provided that permanent total disablement shall be deemed to result from every injury  specified in Part 
I of the Fourth Schedule or from any combination of injuries specified in  Part II thereof where the aggregate 
percentage of the loss of earning capacity, as specified  in the said Part II against those injuries, amounts to 
one hundred per cent.;  
(57) “Pension Fund ” means the Pension Fund established under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of section 
16; 
(58) “Pension S cheme ” means the Employees' Pension Scheme framed under  clause ( b) of sub -section 
(1) of section 15;  
(59) “plantation ” means — 
(a) any land used or intended to be used for — 
(i) growing tea, coffee, rubber, cinchona or cardamom which admeasures  five hectares  or more;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 14]
14 
 (ii) growing any other plant, which admeasures five hectares or more  and in which ten or more 
persons are employed or were employed on any day  of the preceding twelve months, if, after 
obtaining the approval of the Central  Government, the State G overnment, by notification, so 
directs.  
Explanation .—Where any piece of land used for growing any plant referred to  in this sub -clause 
admeasures less than five hectares and is contiguous to any other  piece of land not being so used, but 
capable of being s o used, and both such pieces of  land are under the management of the same employer, 
then, for the purposes of this  sub-clause, the piece of land first mentioned shall be deemed to be a plantation, 
if the total area of both such pieces of land admeasures fi ve hectares or more;  
(b) any land which the State Government may, by notification, declare  and which is used or 
intended to be used for growing any plant referred to in  sub-clause ( a), notwithstanding that it 
admeasures less than five hectares:  
Provided that no such declaration shall be made in respect of such land which  admeasures less than five 
hectares immediately before the commencement of this  Code; and  
(c) offices, hospitals, dispensaries, schools and any other premises used for  any purpose connecte d with 
any plantation within the meaning of sub -clause ( a) and  sub-clause ( b); but does not include factory on the 
premises;  
(60) “platform work ” means a work arrangement outside of a traditional employer employee 
relationship in which organisations or ind ividuals use an online platform to  access other organisations or 
individuals to solve specific problems or to provide specific  services or any such other activities which may 
be notified by the Central Government, in  exchange for payment;  
(61) “platform wo rker” means a person engaged in or undertaking platform work;  
(62) “port” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( 4) of section 3 of the  Indian Po
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 14]
k;  
(62) “port” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( 4) of section 3 of the  Indian Ports Act, 1908  
(15 of 1908) ; 
(63) “Provident Fund ” means the Employees' Provident Fund established under  clause ( a) of  
sub-section ( 1) of section 16;  
(64) “Provident Fund Scheme ” means the Employees' Provident Fund Scheme framed  under clause ( a) 
of sub -section ( 1) of section 15;  
(65) “prescribed ” means p rescribed by rules made under this Code;  
(66) “railway ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( 31) of section 2 of the  Railways Act, 
1989  (24 of 1989) ; 
(67) “railway company ” includes any persons whether incorporated or not, who are  owners or lessees 
of a railway or parties to an agreement for working a railway;  
(68) “Recovery Officer ” means any officer of the Central Government, the State  Government, the 
Central Board or the Corporation, who may be authorised by the Central  Government or the S tate 
Government, as the case may be, by notification, to discharge the  functions and to exercise the powers of a 
Recovery Officer under this Code;  
(69) “regulations ” means regulations made by the Corporation under this Code;  
(70) “retirement ” means termina tion of the service of an employee otherwise than on  superannuation;  
(71) “sales promotion employees ” means the sales promotion employees as defined  in clause ( d) of 
section 2 of the Sales Promotion Employees (Conditions of Service)  Act, 1976  (11 of 1976) ; 
(72) “Schedule ” means a Schedule to this Code;  
(73) “seamen ” means any person forming part of the crew of any ship, but does not  include the master 
of the ship;  
(74) “seasonal factory “ means a factory which is exclusively engaged in one or more  of the following 
manufacturing processes, namely, cotton ginning, cotton or jute pressing,  decortication of ground -nuts, the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 15]
15 
 manufacture of indigo, lac, sugar (including gur) or any  manufacturing process which is incidental to or 
connected with any of the aforesa id processes and includes a factory which is engaged for a period not 
exceeding seven months  in a year in a manufacturing process as the Central Government may, by 
notification, specify;  
(75) “self-employed worker ” means any person who is not employed by a n employer,  but engages 
himself in any occupation in the unorganised sector subject to a monthly  earning of an amount as may be 
notified by the Central Government or the State  Government, as the case may be, from time to time or holds 
cultivable land subje ct to such  ceiling as may be notified by the State Government;  
(76) “shop ”, in respect of a State, means a shop as defined in any law for the time  being in force dealing 
with the shop in that State;  
(77) “sickness ” means a condition which requires medical treatment and attendance  and necessitates 
abstention from work on medical ground;  
(78) “social security ” means the measures of protection afforded to employees,  unorganised workers, 
gig workers and platform workers to ensure access to health care  and to pr ovide income security, 
particularly in cases of old age, unemployment, sickness,  invalidity, work injury, maternity or loss of a 
breadwinner by means of rights conferred on  them and schemes framed, under this Code;  
(79) “Social Security Organisation ” means any of the following organisations  established under this 
Code, namely: — 
(a) the Central Board of Trustees of Employees' Provident Fund constituted  under section 4;  
(b) the Employees' State Insurance Corporation constituted under section 5;  
(c) the National Social Security Board for Unorganised Workers constituted  under section 6;  
(d) the State Unorganised Workers' Social Security Board constituted under  section 6;  
(e) the State Building and other Construction Workers' Welfare Boards  constituted unde r section 
7
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 15]
(e) the State Building and other Construction Workers' Welfare Boards  constituted unde r section 
7; and  
(f) any other organisation or special purpose vehicle declared to be the social  security organisation 
by the Central Government;  
(80) “State Government ” includes — 
(a) in relation to a Union territory with legislature, the Government of the  Union  territory; and  
(b) in relation to a Union territory without legislature, the administrator appointed  under article 239 
of the Constitution as an administrator thereof;  
(81) “State Unorganised Workers' Board ” means the State Unorganised Workers'  Social Security Board 
constituted under sub -section ( 9) of section 6;  
(82) “superannuation ”, in relation to an employee, means the attainment by the  employee of such age 
as is fixed in the contract or conditions of service, as the age on the  attainment of which the employee shall 
vacate the employment:  
Provided that for the purposes of Chapter III, the age of superannuation shall be  fifty-eight years;  
(83) “temporary disablement ” means a condition resulting from an employment injury  which requires 
medical t reatment and renders an employee, as a result of such injury,  temporarily incapable of doing the 
work which he was doing prior to or at the time of the  injury;  
(84) “Tribunal ” means the Industrial Tribunal constituted by the appropriate  Government under se ction 
7A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947  (14 of 1947) ; 
(85) “unorganised sector ” means an enterprise owned by individuals or self -employed  workers and 
engaged in the production or sale of goods or providing service of any kind  whatsoever, and where th e 
enterprise employs workers, the number of such workers is less  than ten;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 16]
16 
 (86) “unorganised worker ” means a home -based worker, self -employed worker or a  wage worker in 
the unorganised sector and includes a worker in the organised sector who  is not covered  by the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947 or Chapters III to VII of this Code;  
(87) “vacancy ”, for the purposes of Chapter XIII, means an unoccupied post (including  newly created 
post, post of trainee, post to be filled through apprentice or any unoccupied  post created in an establishment 
by any other means) in a cadre or occupation for the  purpose of employing a person and carrying 
remuneration;  
(88) “wages ” means all remuneration, whether by way of salaries, allowances or  otherwise, expressed 
in terms of m oney or capable of being so expressed which would, if  the terms of employment, express or 
implied, were fulfilled, be payable to a person employed  in respect of his employment or of work done in 
such employment, and includes, — 
(a) basic pay;  
(b) dearness a llowance; and  
(c) retaining allowance, if any,  
but does not include — 
(a) any bonus payable under any law for the time being in force, which does not  form part of the 
remuneration payable under the terms of employment;  
(b) the value of any house -accommodati on, or of the supply of light, water,  medical attendance or other 
amenity or of any service excluded from the computation  of wages by a general or special order of the 
appropriate Government;  
(c) any contribution paid by the employer to any pension or prov ident fund,  and the interest which may 
have accrued thereon;  
(d) any conveyance allowance or the value of any travelling concession;  
(e) any sum paid to the employed person to defray special expenses entailed  on him by the nature of 
his employment;  
(f) house rent allowance;  
(g) remuneration payable under any award or settlement between the parties  or order of a court or 
Tribunal;  
(h) any overtime allowance;  
(i) any commission payable to the employee;  
(j) any gra
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 16]

Tribunal;  
(h) any overtime allowance;  
(i) any commission payable to the employee;  
(j) any gratuity payable on the termination of employm ent; 
(k) any retrenchment compensation or other retirement benefit payable to the  employee or any  
ex gratia payment made to him on the termination of employment,  under any law for the time being in 
force:  
Provided that for calculating the wages under this  clause, if payments made by the  employer to the 
employee under sub -clauses ( a) to ( i) exceeds one -half, or such other  per cent. as may be notified by the 
Central Government, of the all remuneration calculated  under this clause, the amount which exceeds su ch 
one-half, or the per cent. so notified,  shall be deemed as remuneration and shall be accordingly added in 
wages under this clause:  
Provided further that for the purpose of equal wages to all genders and for the purpose  of payment of 
wages, the emolument s specified in sub -clauses ( d), (f), (g) and ( h) shall be  taken for computation of wage.  
Explanation .—Where an employee is given in lieu of the whole or part of the wages  payable to him, 
any remuneration in kind by his employer, the value of such remunerat ion in kind which does not exceed 
fifteen per cent. of the total wages payable to him, shall be  deemed to form part of the wages of such 
employee;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 17]
17 
 (89) “wage ceiling ” means such amount of wages as may be notified by the Central  Government, for 
the purposes  of becoming a member under Chapter III and Chapter IV;  
(90) “wage worker ” means a person employed for remuneration in the unorganized sector, directly by 
an employer or through any contractor, irrespective of place of work,  whether exclusively for one emp loyer 
or for one or more employers, whether in cash or in  kind, whether as a home -based worker, or as a temporary 
or casual worker, or as a migrant  worker, or workers employed by households including domestic workers, 
with a monthly  wage of an amount as ma y be notified by the Central Government and the State Government,  
as the case may be;  
(91) “woman ” means a woman employed, whether directly or through any contractor,  for wages in any 
establishment:  
Provided that for the purposes of Chapter IV, a woman who  is or was an employee in  respect of whom 
contribution is or were payable under the said Chapter and who is by reason thereof, entitled to any of the 
benefits provided under the said Chapter shall be  called “insured woman ” and shall include — 
(i) a commissi oning mother who as biological mother wishes to have a child and  prefers to get 
embryo implanted in any other woman;  
(ii) a woman who legally adopts a child of up to three months of age.  
3. Registration and cancellation of an establishment .—(1) Every establishment to which this Code 
applies shall be electronically or  otherwise, registered within such time and in such manner as may be 
prescribed by the  Central Government:  
Provided that the establishment which is already registered under any other Centra l labour law for the 
time being in force shall not be required to obtain registration again under  this Code and such registration 
shall be deemed to be registration for the purposes of this  Code:  
(2) Any establishment to which Chapter III or Chapter IV app lies, and whose business  activities are i
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 17]
 Any establishment to which Chapter III or Chapter IV app lies, and whose business  activities are in 
the process of closure, may make an application for cancellation of registration  granted under this section.  
(3) The manner of making application for cancellation of the registration under  sub-section ( 2), the 
conditions subject to which the registration shall be cancelled and the  procedure of cancellation and other 
matters relating thereto, shall be such as may be  prescribed by the Central Government.  
 
CHAPTER II  
SOCIAL SECURITY ORGANISATIONS  
4. Constitution of Board of Trustees of Employees’ Provident Fund .—(1) The Central Government 
may, by notification, constitute, with effect from such  date as may be specified therein, a Board of Trustees 
of the Employees' Provident Fund to  be called the Cent ral Board, for the purposes of Chapter III and the 
provisions of this Code  relating to that Chapter, for the administration of the funds vested in it in such 
manner as  may be prescribed by the Central Government, consisting of the following members, namely :— 
(a) a Chairperson and a Vice -Chairperson to be appointed by the Central  Government;  
(b) not more than five persons appointed by the Central Government from  amongst its officials;  
(c) not more than fifteen persons representing Governments of such States as the Central Government 
may specify in this behalf, to be appointed by the Central  Government;  
(d) ten persons representing employers of the establishments to which the  schemes referred to in sub 
section ( 1) of section 15 applies, to be appointed by the  Central Government after consultation with such 
organisations of employers as may  be recognised by the Central Government in this behalf;  
(e) ten persons representing employees in the establishments to which schemes  referred to in sub -
section ( 1) of sectio n 15 applies, who shall be appointed by the  Central Government after consultation 
with such organisations of empl
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 17]
ho shall be appointed by the  Central Government after consultation 
with such organisations of employees as may  be recognised by that Government in this behalf; and  
(f) the Central Provident Fund Commissioner, ex officio.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 18]
18 
 (2) The Central Board shall be a body corporate by the name of Board of Trustees of  the Employees' 
Provident Fund, having perpetual succession and a common seal and shall  by the said name sue and be 
sued.  
(3) The Central Government may, by notification, constitute, with e ffect from such  date as may be 
specified therein, an Executive Committee from amongst the members of the  Central Board to assist the 
Central Board in performance of its functions in such manner as  may be prescribed by the Central 
Government.  
(4) The Centra l Board may, by order, constitute one or more committees of such  composition as may be 
specified in the order to assist it in the discharge of its functions.  
(5) The Central Board may, by order, delegate to its Chairperson or to its Executive  Committee or to 
any of its officers and a State Board constituted under section 12 may, by  order, delegate to its Chairperson 
or to any of its officers, subject to such conditions and  limitations, if any, as it may specify in such order, 
such of its powers and function s under  this Code as it may deem necessary for efficient administration of 
the schemes referred to  in sub -section ( 1) of section 15.  
(6) The terms and conditions, including tenure of office, subject to which a member  of the Central Board 
and Executive Comm ittee shall discharge their respective duties may  be such as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government:  
Provided that a member of the Central Board shall, notwithstanding the expiry of the  tenure of his office, 
continue to hold office until his successor  is appointed.  
(7) The Central Board, apart from the functions specified in this Code, shall also  perform such other 
functions in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central  Government.  
5. Constitution of Employees’ State Insurance Corporation. — (1) The Central Government may, by 
notification, constitute with effect from such  date as may be specified therein, the Employees' State 
I
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 18]
ication, constitute with effect from such  date as may be specified therein, the Employees' State 
Insurance Corporation to be called  the Corporation, for the purposes of Chapter IV and the provisions of 
this Code relating t o that Chapter and the administration thereof, in such manner as may be prescribed by 
the Central Government, consisting of the following members, namely: — 
(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government;  
(b) a Vice -Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government;  
(c) not more than five persons to be appointed by the Central Government  from amongst its officials;  
(d) one person representing each of such States in such manner, as may be  prescribed by the Central 
Government;  
(e) one person to be appointed by the Central Government to represent the  Union territories;  
(f) ten persons representing employers to be appointed by the Central  Government in consultation 
with such organisations of employers as may be  recognised for the purpose by the Central Government;  
(g) ten persons representing employees to be appointed by the Central  Government in consultation 
with such organisations of employees as may be  recognised for the purpose by the Central Government;  
(h) two persons representing the medic al profession to be appointed by the  Central Government in 
consultation with such organisations of medical practitioners  as may be recognised for the purpose by 
the Central Government;  
(i) three members of Parliament of whom two shall be members of the Hou se of the People (Lok 
Sabha) and one shall be a member of the Council of States  (Rajya Sabha) elected respectively by the 
members of the House of the People and  the members of the Council of States; and  
(j) the Director General of the Corporation, ex offic io. 
(2) The Corporation shall be a body corporate by the name of Employees' State  Insurance Corporation, 
having perpetual succession and a common seal and shall by the  said name sue and be su
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 18]
orporation, 
having perpetual succession and a common seal and shall by the  said name sue and be sued.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 19]
19 
 (3) The Central Government may, by notification, constitute, with effect from such  date as may be 
specified therein, a Standing Committee from amongst the members of the  Corporation, in such manner 
as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(4) Subject to the general superintendence and control of the Corporati on, the Standing  Committee — 
(a) shall administer the affairs of the Corporation and may exercise any of the  powers and perform 
any of the functions of the Corporation in such manner as may  be prescribed by the Central Government;  
(b) shall submit for the c onsideration and decision of the Corporation all such  cases and matters as 
may be specified in the regulations made in this behalf; and  
(c) may, in its discretion, submit any other case or matter for the decision of  the Corporation.  
(5) (a) The Central Gov ernment may, by notification, constitute, with effect from  such date as may be 
specified therein, a Medical Benefit Committee of such composition  as may be specified therein, to assist 
the Corporation and the Standing Committee in  performance of its functi ons relating to administration of 
medical benefits.  
(b) the Medical Benefit Committee shall perform such duties and exercise such powers  as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government.  
(6) The Corporation may, by order, constitute one or more committees of  such composition as may be 
specified in the regulations to assist it in the discharge of its functions.  
(7) The terms and conditions, including tenure of office, subject to which a member  of the Corporation 
and Standing Committee shall discharge their res pective duties may be  such as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government:  
Provided that a member of the Corporation shall, notwithstanding the expiry of the  tenure of his office, 
continue to hold office until his successor is appointed.  
6. National Social Security Board and State Unorganised Workers’ Board. —(1) The Central 
Government shall, 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 19]
nal Social Security Board and State Unorganised Workers’ Board. —(1) The Central 
Government shall, by notification, constitute a National Social  Security Board for unorganised workers to 
exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform  the functions a ssigned to, it under this Code, in such 
manner as may be prescribed by the  Central Government.  
(2) The National Social Security Board shall consist of the following members,  namely: — 
(a) Union Minister for Labour and Employment as Chairperson;  
(b) Secretary, Ministry of Labour and Employment as Vice -Chairperson;  
(c) forty members to be nominated by the Central Government, out of whom — 
(i) seven members representing unorganised sector workers;  
(ii) seven members representing employers of unorganised sector;  
(iii) seven members representing eminent persons from civil society;  
(iv) two members representing the Lok Sabha and one from the Rajya  Sabha;  
(v) ten members representing Central Government Ministries and  Departments concerned;  
(vi) five members r epresenting State Governments;  
(vii) one member representing the Union territories; and  
(d) the Director General Labour Welfare, as Member -Secretary, ex officio.  
(3) All members except Chairperson of the National Social Security Board shall be  from amongst  
persons of eminence in the fields of labour welfare, management, finance,  law and administration.  
(4) The manner in which members shall be nominated from each of the categories  specified in clause 
(c) of sub -section ( 2), the term of office and other condi tions of service  of members, the procedure to be 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 20]
20 
 followed in the discharge of their functions by, and the  manner of filling vacancies among the members of, 
the National Social Security Board shall  be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government:  
Provided that adequate representation shall be given to persons belonging to the  Scheduled Castes, the 
Scheduled Tribes, the minorities and women.  
(5) The term of the National Social Security Board shall be three years.  
(6) The National Social Security Board shall meet at least thrice a year, at such time  and place and shall 
observe such rules of procedure relating to the transaction of business  at its meetings, as may be prescribed 
by the Central Government.  
(7) The National Social Security Board shall perfor m the following functions,  namely: — 
(a) recommend to the Central Government for framing suitable schemes for  different sections of 
unorganised workers, gig workers and platform workers;  
(b) advise the Central Government on such matters arising out of the  administration of this Code as 
may be referred to it;  
(c) monitor such social welfare schemes for unorganised workers, gig workers  and platform workers 
as are administered by the Central Government;  
(d) review the record keeping functions performed at the State level;  
(e) review the expenditure from the fund and account; and  
(f) undertake such other functions as are assigned to it by the Central  Government from time to time.  
(8) The Central Government may, by notification, constitute with effect from such  date as may be 
specified therein one or more advisory committee to advise the Central  Government upon such matters 
arising out of the administration of this Code relating to  unorganised workers and such other matters as the 
Central Government may refer to it for  advice.  
(9) Every State Government shall, by notification, constitute a State Board to be  known as (name of the 
State) Unorganised Workers' Social Security Board to exercise the  powers conferred 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 20]
s (name of the 
State) Unorganised Workers' Social Security Board to exercise the  powers conferred on, and to perform the 
functions assigned to, it under  this Code, in such  manner as may be prescribed by the State Government.  
(10) Every State Unorganised Workers' Board shall consist of the following members,  namely: — 
(a) Minister of Labour and Employment of the concerned State as Chairperson,  ex officio;  
(b) Principal Secretary or Secretary (Labour) as Vice -Chairperson;  
(c) one member representing the Central Government in the Ministry of Labour  and Employment;  
(d) thirty -one members to be nominated by the State Government, out of  whom — 
(i) seven representi ng the unorganised workers;  
(ii) seven representing employers of unorganised workers;  
(iii) two members representing the Legislative Assembly of the concerned  State;  
(iv) five members representing eminent persons from civil society;  
(v) ten members representing the State Government Departments  concerned; and  
(e) Member -Secretary as notified by the State Government.  
(11) All members except Chairperson of the State Unorganised Workers' Board shall  be from amongst 
persons of eminence in the fields of labour welfare, management, finance,  law and administration.  
(12) The manner in which members shall be nominated from each of the categories  specified in clause 
(d) of sub -section ( 10), the term of office and other conditions of service  of members, the pro cedure to be 
followed in the discharge of their functions by, and the  manner of filling vacancies among the members of, 
the State Unorganised Workers' Board  shall be such as may be prescribed by the State Government:  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 21]
21 
 Provided that adequate representation s hall be given to persons belonging to the  Scheduled Castes, the 
Scheduled Tribes, the minorities and women.  
(13) The term of the State Unorganised Workers' Board shall be three years.  
(14) The State Unorganised Workers' Board shall meet at least once in a quarter at  such time and place 
and shall observe such rules of procedure relating to the transaction of  business at its meetings, as may be 
prescribed by the State Government.  
(15) The State Board shall perform the following functions, namely: — 
(a) recommend the State Government for framing suitable schemes for different  sections of the 
unorganised sector workers;  
(b) advise the State Government on such matters arising out of the administration  of this Code as 
may be referred to it;  
(c) monitor such social welfare schemes for unorganised workers as are  administered by the State 
Government;  
(d) review the record keeping functions performed at the district level;  
(e) review the progress of registration and issue of cards to unorganised sector  workers;  
(f) review the expenditure from the funds under various schemes; and  
(g) undertake such other functions as are assigned to it by the State Government  from time to time.  
(16) The State Government may, by notification, constitute with effect from such  date as  may be 
specified therein, one or more advisory committee to advise the State  Government upon such matters arising 
out of the administration of this Code relating to  unorganised workers and such other matters as the State 
Government may refer to it for  advice. 
7. Constitution of State Building Workers’ Welfare Boards. —(1) Every State Government shall, 
with effect from such date as it may, by  notification, appoint, constitute a Board to be known as 
the................(name of the State)  Building and Other Construction Workers' Welfare Board to exercise the 
powers conferred  on, and perform the functions assigned to, it under
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 21]
Welfare Board to exercise the 
powers conferred  on, and perform the functions assigned to, it under this section and Chapter VIII.  
(2) The Building Workers' Welfare Board shall be a body corporate by the name  aforesaid, having 
perpetua l succession and a common seal and shall by the said name sue  and be sued.  
(3) The Building Workers' Welfare Board shall consist of a chairperson to be  nominated by the State 
Government, one member to be nominated by the Central  Government and such number of other members, 
not exceeding fifteen, as may be appointed  to it by the State Government:  
Provided that the Building Workers' Welfare Board shall include an equal number of  members 
representing the State Government, the employers and the building workers  and that at least one member 
of the Board shall be a woman.  
(4) The terms and conditions of appointment and the salaries and other allowances  payable to the 
chairperson and the other members of the Building Workers' Welfare Board,  and the manner of filling of 
casual vacancies of the members of the Building Workers'  Welfare Board, shall be such as may be 
prescribed by the State Government.  
(5) (a) The Building Workers' Welfare Board shall appoint a Secretary and such  officers and employees 
as it considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions  under this Code.  
(b) The Secretary of the Building Workers' Welfare Board shall be its chief executive  officer.  
(c) The terms and conditions of appointment and the salary and allowances payab le to the Secretary and 
the other officers and employees of the Building Workers' Welfare  Board shall be such as may be prescribed 
by the State Government.  
(6) The Building Workers' Welfare Board shall perform the following functions,  namely: — 
(a) provide death and disability benefits to a beneficiary or his dependants;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 22]
22 
 (b) make payment of pension to the beneficiaries who have completed the age  of sixty years;  
(c) pay such amount in connection with premium for Group Insurance Scheme  of the beneficiaries 
as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government;  
(d) frame educational schemes for the benefit of children of the beneficiaries  as may be prescribed 
by the appropriate Government;  
(e) meet such medical expenses for treatment of major ailments of a beneficiary  or, such dependant, 
as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government;  
(f) make payment of maternity benefit to the beneficiaries;  
(g) frame skill development and awareness schemes for the beneficiaries;  
(h) provide transit accommodation or ho stel facility to the beneficiaries;  
(i) formulation of any other welfare scheme for the building worker beneficiaries  by State 
Government in concurrence with the Central Government; and  
(j) make provision and improvement of such other welfare measures and  facilities as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government.  
(7) The State Government may, by notification, constitute with effect from such date  as may be specified 
therein one or more advisory committee to advise the State Government  upon such matters aris ing out of 
the administration of this Code relating to building workers  and such other matters as the State Government 
may refer to it for advice.  
8. Disqualification and remov al of a member of any Social Security Organisation. —(1) No person 
shall be chosen as, or continue to be, a member of a Social Security  Organisation, or any Committee thereof 
who, — 
(a) is or at any time has been adjudged an insolvent; or  
(b) is found to be a lunatic or becomes of unsound mind; or  
(c) is or has been convicted of an y offence involving moral turpitude; or  
(d) is an employer in an establishment and has defaulted in the payment of any  dues under this Code;  
(e) is a member of a Social Security Organisation being a member of the  Parliament o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 22]
r this Code;  
(e) is a member of a Social Security Organisation being a member of the  Parliament or a member of 
a State Legislative Assembly, when he ceases to be such  member of the Parliament or State Legislative 
Assembly, as the case may be; or  
(f) is a member of Social Security Organisation being a member of the  Parliament or a member of a 
State Legislative Assembly, and  he becomes a — 
(i) Minister of Central or State Government; or  
(ii) Speaker or Deputy Speaker of House of the People or a State  Legislative Assembly; or  
(iii) Deputy Chairman of the Council of States.  
Explanation 1.—If any question arises whether any person is disqualified under  clause ( d), it shall be 
referred to the appropriate Government and the decision of the  appropriate Government on any such 
question shall be final.  
Explanation 2.—Clause ( f) shall not apply in case of persons who are members of the Social Security 
Organisation ex officio , by virtue of being a Minister.  
(2) The Central Government, in case of the Central Board, the Corporation and the  National Social 
Security Board and the State Government in case of the State Unorganised  Workers' Board and the Building 
Workers' Welfare Board, may remove any member of  such Social Security Organisation from his office, 
who, — 
(a) is or has become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in  sub-section ( 1); or 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 23]
23 
 (b) is absent without leave of the Social Security Organisation of which he is a  member for more 
than three consecutive meetings of the Social Security Organisation  or a Committee thereof;  
(c) in the opinion of such Government, has so abused the position of his office  as to render that 
member's continuation in the office detrimental to the public interest  or is otherwise unfit or unsuitable 
to continue as such member in the opinion of such  Government:  
Provided that no person shall be removed under clauses ( b) and ( c), unless that person  has been given 
an opportunity to show cause as to why he should not be removed:  
Provided further that a member of the Executive Committee of the Central Board or  the Standing 
Committee of the Corporation shall cease to hold office if he ceases to be a  memb er of the Central Board 
or the Corporation, as the case may be.  
(3) Any member of a Social Security Organisation or a Committee thereof may at  any time resign from 
his office in writing under his hand addressed to the Central  Government or the State Govern ment, as the 
case may be, which had made his appointment  and on acceptance of such resignation, his office shall 
become vacant.  
(4) If in a Social Security Organisation or a Committee thereof, the Central  Government or the State 
Government, as the case may  be, is of the opinion that — 
(a) any member thereof representing employers or the employees or the  unorganised workers, as the 
case may be, ceases to adequately represent so; or  
(b) any member thereof representing to be an expert in a specified area, is la ter on found not to 
possess sufficient expertise in that area; or  
(c) having regard to exigencies of circumstances or services in such  Government, the member thereof 
representing such Government cannot continue to  represent the Government,  then, such Gover nment 
may, by order, remove such member from his office:  
Provided that no person shall be removed under clause ( a) o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 23]
, remove such member from his office:  
Provided that no person shall be removed under clause ( a) or clause ( b), unless that  person has been 
given an opportunity to show cause as to why he should not be removed.  
(5) If any member of a Social Security Organisation or a Committee thereof, who is  a director of a 
company and who as such director, has any direct or indirect pecuniary  interest in any matter coming up 
for consideration of the Social Security Organisation or a  Committee thereof , then, he shall, as soon as may 
be possible after such fact of interest has  come to his knowledge, disclose the nature of the interest and such 
disclosure shall be  recorded in the proceedings of the Social Security Organisation or the Committee 
thereof,  as the case may be, and such member, thereafter, shall not take part in any proceeding or  decision 
of the Social Security Organisation, or a Committee thereof relating to that matter.  
9. Procedure for transaction of business of Social Security Organisation,  etc. (1) A Social Security 
Organisation or any Committee thereof shall meet at such  intervals and observe such procedure in regard 
to the transaction of business at its meetings  (including the quorum at such meetings) as may be prescribed 
by the Central G overnment.  
(2) All orders and decisions of the Social Security Organisation shall be authenticated  by the Central 
Provident Fund Commissioner, Director General, Director General Labour  Welfare, State Principal 
Secretary or Secretary (Labour) of the respect ive Social Security  Organisations or such other officer as may 
be notified by the appropriate Government and  all other instruments issued by the Social Security 
Organisation shall be authenticated by  the signature of such officer as may be authorised by an  order by the 
respective Social  Security Organisations.  
(3) No act done or proceeding taken by a Social Security Organisation or any Committee  thereof shall 
be questioned on the gro
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 23]
ng taken by a Social Security Organisation or any Committee  thereof shall 
be questioned on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or any  defect in the constit ution of 
the Social Security Organisation or the Committee thereof, as  the case may be.  
(4) Such members of a Social Security Organisation or any Committee thereof shall be  entitled for such 
fee and allowances as may be prescribed by the Central Government . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 24]
24 
 10. Executive Heads of Central Board and Corporation. —The Central Provident Fund 
Commissioner and the Director General shall be the  whole -time officer of the Central Board and the 
Corporation, respectively, and such officer  shall not undertake any work u nconnected with his office 
without the prior approval of the  Central Government.  
11. Supersession of Corporation, Central Board National Social Security Board or State 
Unorganised Workers’ Board or the Building Workers’ Welfare Board. — (1) If the Central 
Government in case of the Central Board, the Corporation or the  National Social Security Board and the 
State Government, in case of the State Unorganised  Workers' Board or the Building Workers' Welfare 
Board, is of the opinion that the Corporation  or the C entral Board or the National Social Security Board or 
the State Unorganised Workers’  Board or the Building Workers' Welfare Board or any of the Committee 
thereof, as the case  may be, is unable to perform its functions, or, has persistently made delay in th e 
discharge  of its functions or has exceeded or abused its powers or jurisdiction, then such Government  may, 
by notification, supersede the Corporation or the Central Board or the National Social  Security Board or 
the State Unorganised Workers' Board or th e Building Workers’ Welfare  Board, or any of the Committees 
thereof, as the case may be, and reconstitute it in such  manner as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government:  
Provided that, before issuing a notification under this sub -section on any of the  grounds specified 
herein, such Government shall give an opportunity to the Corporation or  the Central Board or the National 
Social Security Board or the State Unorganised Workers’  Board or the Building Workers' Welfare Board 
or any Committee thereof, as the case may  be, to show cause as to why it should not be superseded and 
shall consider the explanations  and objections raised by it and take appropriate action t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 24]
eded and 
shall consider the explanations  and objections raised by it and take appropriate action thereon.  
(2) After the supersession of the Corporation, or the Central Board or the National  Social  Security 
Board, the State Unorganised Workers’ Board or the Building Workers’  Welfare Board, or any of the 
Committee thereof, as the case may be, and until it is  reconstituted, the Central Government or the State 
Government, as the case may be, shall  make  such alternate arrangements for the purpose of administration 
of the relevant  provisions of this Code, as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(3) The Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, shall  cause, a full report of 
any action taken by it under this section and the circumstances  leading to such action, to be laid before each 
House of Parliament or the State Legislature,  as the case may be, at the earliest opportunity and in any case 
not later than three months  from the date of the notification of supersession issued under sub -section ( 1). 
12. State Board, Regional Boards, local committees etc. — (1) The Central Government may, by 
notification, — 
(i) after consultation with the Government of any State, constitute for that  State, a Board of Trustees 
(hereinafter in this Code referred to as a State Board) which  shall exercise such powers and perform 
such functions as may be assigned by  notification, to it by the Central Government from time to time;  
(ii) specify the manner of  constitution of a State Board, the terms and conditions  of the appointment 
of its members and the procedure of its meeting and other  proceedings relating thereto.  
(2) The Corporation may, by order, appoint Regional Boards and local committees in  such area  and in 
such manner to perform such functions and to exercise such powers as  may be specified in the regulations.  
13. Entrustment of additional functions to Social Security Organisations. —Notwithstanding 
anything cont
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 24]
ntrustment of additional functions to Social Security Organisations. —Notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Code, the Central Government may,  by notification, — 
(i) assign additional functions to a Social Security Organisation including  administration of any 
other Act or scheme relating to social security subject to such  provisions as may be specified in this 
behalf in the notific ation:  
Provided that while the additional function of administering the Act or scheme  are assigned under 
this clause to a Social Security Organisation, the officer or authority  of such organisation, to whom 
such function has been assigned, shall exercise t he powers under the enactment or scheme required for 
discharging such function in the  manner as may be specified in the notification:  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 25]
25 
 Provided further that the Social Security Organisations may assign such  additional functions to 
existing officers or appoi nt or engage new officers necessary  for such purpose, if such functions may 
not be performed and completed with the  assistance of its personnel as existing immediately before the 
assignment of the  additional functions;  
(ii) specify the terms and conditions  of discharging the functions under clause ( i) by the Social 
Security Organisation;  
(iii) provide that the expenditure incurred in discharging the functions specified  in clause ( i) 
including appointment or engagement of personnel necessary for proper  disch arge of such functions 
shall be borne by the Central Government;  
(iv) specify the powers which the Social Security Organisation shall exercise  while discharging the 
functions specified in clause ( i); and  
(v) provide that any expenditure referred to in clause ( iii) shall be made by the  Social Security 
Organisation after prior approval of the Central Government.  
CHAPTER III  
EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUND  
14. Appointment of officers of Central Board. —(1) The Central Government may appoint a Central 
Provident Fund Commissioner  who shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the Central Board and shall also 
function as  head of the Employees’ Provident Fund Organisation.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this Code, the expression “Employees’ Provident  Fund 
Organisation ” means the organisation consisting of officers and employees of the  Central Board.  
(2) The Central Provident Fund Commissioner shall be subject to the general control  and 
superintendence of the Central Board in the discharge of his functions u nder this Code.  
(3) The Central Government shall also appoint a Financial Advisor and Chief Accounts  Officer to assist 
the Central Provident Fund Commissioner in the discharge of his duties.  
(4) The Central Board may appoint, as many Additional Central Pro vident Fund  Commissioners, 
Deputy P
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 25]
 The Central Board may appoint, as many Additional Central Pro vident Fund  Commissioners, 
Deputy Provident Fund Commissioners, Regional Provident Fund  Commissioners, Assistant Provident 
Fund Commissioners and such other officers and  employees as it may consider necessary for the efficient 
administration of the Provide nt Fund Scheme, the Pension Scheme and the Insurance Scheme or other 
responsibilities  assigned to the Central Board from time to time by the Central Government.  
(5) No appointment to the post of the Central Provident Fund Commissioner or an  Additional Cent ral 
Provident Fund Commissioner or a Financial Adviser and Chief Accounts  Officer or any other post under 
the Central Board carrying a scale of pay equivalent to the  scale of pay of any Group 'A' or Group 'B' post 
under the Central Government shall be  made  except after consultation with the Union Public Service 
Commission:  
Provided that no such consultation shall be necessary in regard to any such  appointment — 
(a) for a period not exceeding one year; or  
(b) if the person to be appointed is, at the time of h is appointment, — 
(i) a member of the Indian Administrative Service, or  
(ii) in the service of the Central Government or the Central Board in a  Group 'A' or Group 'B' 
post.  
(6) The method of recruitment, salary and allowances, discipline and other condition s of service of the 
Central Provident Fund Commissioner and the Financial Adviser and  Chief Accounts Officer shall be such 
as may be specified by the Central Government and  such salary and allowances shall be paid out of the 
Provident Fund.  
(7) (a) The method of recruitment, salary and allowances, discipline and other  conditions of service of 
the Additional Central Provident Fund Commissioners, Deputy  Provident Fund Commissioners, Regional 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 26]
26 
 Provident Fund Commissioners, Assistant  Provident Fund Commission ers and other officers and 
employees of the Central Board  shall be such as may be specified by the Central Board in accordance with 
the rules and  orders applicable to the officers and employees of the Central Government drawing  
corresponding scales of pay:  
Provided that where the Central Board is of the opinion that it is necessary to make  a departure from 
the said rules or orders in respect of any of the matters aforesaid, it shall  obtain the prior approval of the 
Central Government:  
Provided further that the salary and allowances of the officers specified in this clause  shall not exceed 
the scale of pay respectively provided in the Provident Fund Scheme.  
(b) In determining the corresponding scales of pay of officers and employees under  clause ( a), the 
Cent ral Board shall have regard to the educational qualifications, method of  recruitment, duties and 
responsibilities of such officers and employees under the Central  Government and in case of any doubt, the 
Central Board shall refer the matter to the  Central Government whose decision thereon shall be final.  
15. Schemes. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification — 
(a) frame a scheme to be called the Employees' Provident Fund Scheme for  which the provident 
funds shall be established under this Chapter for employees or  for any class of employees and specify 
the establishments or class of establishments  to which the said scheme shall apply;  
(b) frame a scheme to be called the Employees' Pension Scheme for the purpose  of providing for — 
(i) superannuation pensi on, retiring pension or permanent total  disablement pension to the 
employees of any establishment or class of  establishments to which this Chapter applies;  
(ii) widow or widower's pension, children pension or orphan pension  payable to the beneficiaries 
of such employees; and  
(iii) nominee pension;  
(c) frame a scheme to be called the Empl
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 26]
iciaries 
of such employees; and  
(iii) nominee pension;  
(c) frame a scheme to be called the Employees' Deposit Linked Insurance  Scheme for the purpose 
of providing life insurance benefits to the employees of any  establishment or class of establishments to 
which this Ch apter applies;  
(d) frame any other scheme or schemes for the purposes of providing social  security benefits under 
this Code to self -employed workers or any other class of  persons; and  
(e) modify any scheme referred to in clauses ( a), (b), (c) and ( d) by adding  thereto, amending or 
varying therein, either prospectively or retrospectively.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, the schemes referred to in clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) of  
sub-section ( 1) may provide for all or any of the matters respectiv ely specified in  Part A, Part B and Part C 
of the Fifth Schedule.  
(3) The schemes may provide that all or any of its provisions shall take effect either  prospectively or 
retrospectively on and from such date as may be specified in that behalf  in the scheme . 
16.  Funds .—(1) The Central Government may, for the purposes of — 
(a) the Provident Fund Scheme, establish a Provident Fund where the  contributions paid by the 
employer to the fund shall be ten per cent. of the wages for  the time being payable to each of the 
employees (whether employed by him directly  or by or through a contactor), and the employee's 
contribution shall be equal to the  contribution payable by the employer in respect of him and may, if 
any employee so  desires, be an amount exceeding ten per cent. of the wages, subject to the condition  
that the employer shall not be under an obligation to pay any contribution over and  above his 
contribution payable under this section:  
Provided that in its application to any establishment or class of establishm ents which the Central 
Government, after making such inquiry as it deems fit, may, by  notification, specify, this section shall 
be subject
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 26]
 making such inquiry as it deems fit, may, by  notification, specify, this section shall 
be subject to the modification that for the  words “ten per cent. ” at both the places where they occur, the 
words “twelve  per cen t.” shall be substituted:  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 27]
27 
 Provided further that the Central Government, after making such inquiry as it  deems fit, may, by 
notification, specify rates of employees’ contributions and the  period for which such rates shall apply 
for any class of employee;  
(b) the Pension Scheme, establish a Pension Fund in the manner specified in  that scheme by that 
Government into which there shall be paid, from time to time, in  respect of every employee who is a 
member of the Pension Scheme, — 
(i) such sums from the employer's contribution under clause ( a) not  exceeding eight and one -
third per cent. of the wages or such per cent. of wages  as may be notified by the Central 
Government;  
(ii) such sums payable as contribution to the Pension Fund, as may be  specified in th e Pension 
Scheme, by the employers of the exempted  establishments under section 143 to which the pension 
scheme applies;  
(iii) such sums as the Central Government after due appropriation by  Parliament by law in this 
behalf, specify;  
(c) the Insurance Schem e, establish a Deposit -Linked Insurance Fund in the  manner specified in 
that scheme by that Government into which there shall be paid  by the employer from time to time in 
respect of every such employee in relation to  whom he is the employer, such amount, n ot being more 
than one per cent. of the  wages or such per cent. of wages as may be notified by the Central Government 
for the time being payable in relation to such employee:  
Provided that the employer shall pay into the Insurance Fund such further  sums of  money, not 
exceeding one -fourth of the contribution which he is required to  make under this clause, as the Central 
Government may, from time to time, determine  to meet all the expenses in connection with the 
administration of the Insurance Scheme  other th an the expenses towards the cost of any benefits 
provided by or under the  Insurance Scheme.  
(2) The Provident Fund, the Pension Fund and the Insurance Fund shall vest in, and  be 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 27]
ce Scheme.  
(2) The Provident Fund, the Pension Fund and the Insurance Fund shall vest in, and  be administered 
by, the Central Board in such manner as may be specified in the r espective  schemes.  
17. Contribution in respect of employees and contractors. —(1) The amount of contribution (that is 
to say, the employer's contribution as well  as the employee's contribution in pursuance of any scheme and 
the employer's contribution  in pursuance of the Insurance Scheme) and any charge for meeting the cost of 
administering  the fund paid or payable by an employer in respect of an employee employed by or through  
a contractor may be recovered by such employer from the contractor, either by d eduction  from any amount 
payable to the contractor under any contract or as a debt payable by the  contractor.  
(2) A contractor from whom the amounts mentioned in sub -section ( 1) may be  recovered in respect of 
any employee employed by or through him may rec over from such  employee, the employee's contribution 
under any scheme by deduction from the wages  payable to such employee.  
(3) Notwithstanding any contract to the contrary, no contractor shall be entitled to  deduct the employer's 
contribution or the charg es referred to in sub -section ( 1) from the  wages payable to an employee employed 
by or through him or otherwise to recover such  contribution or charges from such employee.  
18. Fund to be recognized under Act 43 of 1961. — For the purposes of the Income -tax Act, 1961, 
the Provident Fund shall be deemed  to be a recognised provident fund within the meaning of clause ( 38) of 
section 2 of that  Act: 
Provided that nothing contained in the said Act shall operate to render ineffective  any provision of the 
Provident F und Scheme (under which the Provident Fund is established)  which is repugnant to any of the 
provisions of that Act or of the rules made thereunder.  
19. Priority of payment of contributions over other debts. —Notwithstanding anything 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 27]
 thereunder.  
19. Priority of payment of contributions over other debts. —Notwithstanding anything contained in 
any other l aw for the time being in force,  any amount due under this Chapter shall be the charge on the 
assets of the establishment to  which it relates and shall be paid in priority in accordance with the provisions 
of the  Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016  (31 of 2016) . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 28]
28 
 20. Chapter not to apply to certain establishments. —(1) This Chapter shall not apply — 
(a) to any establishment registered under the Co -operative Societies Act, 1912  (2 of 1912)  or under 
any other law for the time being in force in any State relating to co -operative  societies employing less 
than fifty persons and working without the aid of power; or  
(b) to any other establishment belonging to or under the control of the Central  Government or a State 
Government and whose employees are entitled to the benefit  of contributory provident fund or old age 
pension in accordance with any scheme or  rule framed by the Central Government or the State 
Government governing such  benefits; or  
(c) to any other establishment set up under any Central or State or any other  law for the time being in 
force and whose employees are entitled to the benefits of  contributory provident fund or old age pension 
in accordance with any scheme or  rule framed under that law governing such benefits; or  
(d) to the employees who, immediately before the commencement of this Code,  were receiving 
benefits of Provident Fund under any Central or State enactment.  
(2) If the Central Government is of the opinion that having regard to the financial  position of any class 
of establishment or other circumstances of the case, it is necessary or  expedient so to do, it may, by 
notification and subject to such conditions, as may be specified  in the notification, exempt, whether 
prospectively or retrospectively, that class of  establishments from the  operation of this Chapter for such 
period as may be specified in  the notification.  
21. Authorising certain employer to maintain provident fund accounts. — (1) The Central 
Government may, on an application made to it in this behalf by the  employer and the m ajority of employees 
in relation to an establishment employing one  hundred or more persons, authorise the employer by an order 
in writing, to maintain a  provident fund
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 28]
ndred or more persons, authorise the employer by an order 
in writing, to maintain a  provident fund account in relation to the establishment, in such manner as may be 
prescribed  by the Cen tral Government and subject to such terms and conditions as may be specified in  the 
Provident Fund Scheme:  
Provided that no authorisation shall be made under this sub -section if the employer  of such 
establishment had committed any default in the payment of  provident fund  contribution or had committed 
any other offence under this Code during the three years  immediately preceding the date of such 
authorisation.  
(2) Where an establishment is authorised to maintain a provident fund account under  sub-section ( 1), 
the employer in relation to such establishment shall maintain such account,  submit such return, deposit the 
contribution in such manner, provide for such facilities for  inspection, pay such administrative charges, and 
abide by such other terms and condi tions,  as may be specified in the Provident Fund Scheme.  
(3) Any authorisation made under this section may be cancelled by the Central  Government by order 
in writing if the employer fails to comply with any of the terms and  conditions of the authorisation or where 
he commits any offence under any provision of  this Code:  
Provided that before cancelling the authorisation, the Central Government shall give  the employer a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard.  
22. Transfer of accounts. — Where an employee, — 
(a) employed in an establishment to which this Chapter applies, relinquishes  his employment 
therefrom and obtains employment in any other establishment to  which this Chapter applies or not; or  
(b) employed in an establishment to which this Chapter does not app ly, relinquishes his 
employment therefrom and obtains employment in an establishment  to which this Chapter applies,  then, 
his accumulated amount in provident fund account or pension account, as the case  may be, shall be 
tr
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 28]
s accumulated amount in provident fund account or pension account, as the case  may be, shall be 
transferred or dealt with in the manner as may be specified in the Provident  Fund Scheme or the Pension 
Scheme, as the case may be.  
23. Appeal to Tribunal. —(1) Any person aggrieved by an order passed by any authority in regard to 
the following matters may prefer an appeal to the Tribunal constituted by the Central  Government, 
namely: — 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 29]
29 
 (a) determination and assessment of dues under section 125 relating to  Chapter III; and  
(b) levy of damages under section 128 relating to Chapter III.  
(2) Every appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be filed in such form and manner, within  such time and 
accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(3) No appeal under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) by the employer shall be entertained  by the Tribunal 
unless he has deposited with Social S ecurity Organisation concerned  twenty -five per cent. of the amount 
due from him as determined by an officer under  section 125.  
(4) The Tribunal shall endeavour to decide the appeal within a period of one year from  the date on 
which the appeal has been preferred.  
CHAPTER IV  
EMPLOYEES STATE INSURANCE CORPORATION  
24. Principal Officers and other staff. —(1) The Central Government may appoint a Director General 
of the Corporation  and a Financial Commissioner, who shall be the Principal Officers of the Corpor ation.  
(2) The Director General and the Financial Commissioner shall hold office for such  period, not 
exceeding five years, as may be specified in the order of appointment:  
Provided that outgoing Director General or Financial Commissioner, as the case may  be, shall be 
eligible for re -appointment if he is otherwise qualified.  
(3) The Director General or the Financial Commissioner shall receive such salary and  allowances as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(4) The Director General and the Financial Commissioner shall exercise such powers  and discharge 
such duties as may be prescribed by the Central Government and shall perform  such other functions as may 
be specified in the regulations.  
(5) A person shall be disqualified from being appointe d as or for being the Director  General of the 
Corporation or the Financial Commissioner if he is subject to any of the  disqualifications specified in 
section 8.  
(6) The Central Government may at any t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 29]
 to any of the  disqualifications specified in 
section 8.  
(6) The Central Government may at any time remove the Director General of the  Corporation or th e 
Financial Commissioner from office and shall do so if such removal is  recommended by a resolution of the 
Corporation passed at a special meeting called for the  purpose and supported by the votes of not less than 
two-third of the total strength of the  Corporation.  
(7) The Corporation may employ such other officers and employees as may be  necessary for the 
efficient transaction of its business and for discharge of any other  responsibilities assigned to the 
Corporation from time to time by the Central Govern ment:  
Provided that the sanction of the Central Government shall be obtained for the creation  of any post the 
maximum monthly salary of which exceeds such salary as may be prescribed  by the Central Government.  
(8) (a) The method of recruitment, salary and allowances, discipline and other  conditions of service of 
the officers and employees of the Corporation shall be such as  may be specified in the regulations in 
accordance with the rules and orders applicable to  the officers and employees of the Central Gov ernment 
drawing corresponding scales of  pay: 
Provided that the terms and conditions of service including pay and allowances of  such posts of medical 
specialists and super specialists in the Corporation possessing  comparable qualifications and expertise, as  
may be notified by the Central Government,  with the equivalent posts of the specialists and super specialists 
in the All India Institute of  Medical Sciences or in the Post Graduate Institutes of Medical Sciences and 
Research or  other similar institutions established by the Central Government, shall respectively be  similar:  
Provided further that where the Corporation is of the opinion that it is necessary to  make a departure 
from the said rules or orders in respect of any of the matters aforesaid, it  shall obtai
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 29]
departure 
from the said rules or orders in respect of any of the matters aforesaid, it  shall obtain the prior approval of 
the Central Government:  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 30]
30 
 Provided also that this sub -section shall not apply to appointment of consultants and  specialists in 
various fields appointed on contract basis.  
(b) In determining the corresponding scales of pay of officers and employees under  clause ( a), the 
Corporation shall have regard to the educational qualifications, method of  recruitment, duties and 
responsibilities of such officers and employees under the Central  Government and in case of any doubt, the 
Corpo ration shall refer the matter to the Central  Government whose decision thereon shall be final.  
(9) Every appointment to posts (other than medical, nursing or para -medical posts)  corresponding to 
Group 'A' and Group 'B' Gazetted posts under the Central Gove rnment  shall be made in consultation with 
the Union Public Service Commission:  
Provided that the provisions of this sub -section shall not apply to an officiating or  temporary 
appointment for a period not exceeding one year:  
Provided further that any such o fficiating or temporary appointment shall not confer  any claim for 
regular appointment and the services rendered in that capacity shall not  count towards seniority or minimum 
qualifying service specified in the regulations for  promotion to next higher grad e. 
(10) If any question arises whether a post corresponds to a Group 'A' and Group 'B'  posts under the 
Central Government, the question shall be referred to that Government  whose decision thereon shall be 
final.  
25. Employees’ State Insurance Fund. —(1) All  contributions and user charges paid under this 
Chapter and all other moneys  received on behalf of the Corporation shall be paid into a fund (hereinafter 
referred to as the  Employees' State Insurance Fund) which shall be held and administered by the 
Corpor ation  for the purposes of this Code:  
Provided that the user charges collected from the other beneficiaries referred to in  section 44 shall be 
deemed to be contribution and shall form part of Employees' St
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 30]
 referred to in  section 44 shall be 
deemed to be contribution and shall form part of Employees' State  Insurance Corporation.  
(2) The Corporation may a ccept grants, donations, Corporate Social Responsibility  Fund and gifts from 
the Central or any State Government, local authority, or any individual  or body whether incorporated or 
not, for all or any of the purposes of this Chapter.  
(3) Subject to the oth er provisions contained in this Code and to any rules or  regulations made in this 
behalf, all moneys accruing or payable to the said Fund shall be  deposited in such bank or banks as may be 
approved by the Central Government to the  credit of an account styl ed the account of the Employees' State 
Insurance Fund.  
(4) The Employees State Insurance Fund or any other money which is held by the  Corporation shall be 
deposited or invested in the manner prescribed by the Central  Government and the account referred to in 
sub-section ( 3) shall be operated by such officers  as may be authorised by the Committee constituted under 
sub-section ( 3) of section 5  (hereinafter referred to as the Standing Committee) with the approval of the 
Corporation.  
26. Purposes for which Employees’ State Insurance Fund may be expended. — Subject to the 
provisions of this Chapter and the rules and regulations relating  thereto, made under this Code, the 
Employees' State Insurance Fund shall be expended  only for the following purposes, namely: — 
(a) payment of benefits and provision of medical treatment and attendance to  Insured Persons referred 
to in section 28 and, where the medical benefit is extended  to their families, the provision of such 
medical benefit to their families, in accordance  with the provisions of this Chapter and the rules and 
regulations relating thereto and  defraying the charges and costs in connection therewith;  
(b) payment of fees and allowances to members of the Corporation, the Standing  Committee, the 
Medical Benefit Comm ittee or 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 30]
lowances to members of the Corporation, the Standing  Committee, the 
Medical Benefit Comm ittee or other Committees thereof;  
(c) payment of salaries, leave and joining time allowances, travelling and  compensatory allowances, 
gratuities and compassionate allowances, pensions,  contributions to provident or other benefit fund of 
officers and staff  of the Corporation  and meeting the expenditure in respect of offices and other services 
set up for the  purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Code relating to this Chapter;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 31]
31 
 (d) establishment and maintenance of hospitals, dispensaries and other  institutions and the provision 
of medical and other ancillary services for the benefit  of Insured Persons referred to in section 28 and, 
where the medical benefit is extended  to their families;  
(e) payment of contributions to any State Government, local a uthority or any  private body or 
individual, towards the cost of medical treatment and attendance  provided to Insured Persons referred 
to in section 28 and, where the medical benefit  is extended to their families, their families, including 
the cost of any b uilding and  equipment, in accordance with any agreement entered into by the 
Corporation;  
(f) defraying the cost (including all expenses) of auditing the accounts of the  Corporation and of the 
valuation of its assets and liabilities;  
(g) defraying the cost (including all expenses) of the Employees' Insurance  Courts set up under this 
Chapter;  
(h) payment of any sums under any contract entered into for the purposes of  this Code by Corporation 
or the Standing Committee or by any officer duly authorised  by the C orporation or the Standing 
Committee in that behalf;  
(i) payment of sums under any decree, order or award of any Court or Tribunal  against the 
Corporation or any of its officers or staff for any act done in the execution  of his duty or under a 
compromise or settlement of any suit or other legal proceeding  or claim instituted or made against the 
Corporation;  
(j) defraying the cost and other charges of instituting or defending any civil or  criminal proceedings 
arising out of any action taken under this Code relating to this  Chapter;  
(k) defraying expenditure, within the limits prescribed by the Central  Government after consultation 
with the Corporation, on measures for the improvement  of the health and welfare of Insured Persons 
and for the rehabilitation and  re-employment of Insured Persons referred to in section 28 who have 
been disable
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 31]
ehabilitation and  re-employment of Insured Persons referred to in section 28 who have 
been disabled  or injured; and  
(l) such other purposes as may be authorised by the Corporation with the  previous approval of the 
Central Government.  
27. Holding of property, etc. . — (1) The Corporation may, subject to such conditions as may be 
prescribed by the  Central Government, acquire and hold property, both movable and immovable, sell or  
otherwise transfer any movable or immovable property which may have become vested in  or have been  
acquired by it and do all things necessary for the purposes for which the  Corporation is established.  
(2) Subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Central Government, the  Corporation may 
from time to time invest any moneys which are not imme diately required  for expenses properly defrayable 
under this Code and may, subject to as aforesaid, from  time to time re -invest or realise such investments.  
(3) The Corporation may, with the previous sanction of the Central Government and  on such terms as 
may be prescribed by it, raise loans and take measures for discharging  such loans.  
(4) The Corporation may constitute for the benefit of its officers and staff or any  class of them, such 
provident or other benefit fund as it may think fit.  
28. All employee s to be insured. —(1) Subject to the provisions of this Code, every employee in an 
establishment to  which this Chapter applies shall be insured in such manner whether electronically or  
otherwise, as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(2) An employee whether insured or insurable under sub -section ( 1) in respect of  whom contributions 
are or were payable and who is by reason thereof, entitled to any of  the benefits provided under this Chapter, 
shall be called “Insured Person ”. 
29. Contributions. —(1) The contribution payable under this Chapter in respect of an employee shall  
comprise contribution payable by the employer (hereinafter re
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 31]
pter in respect of an employee shall  
comprise contribution payable by the employer (hereinafter referred to as the employer's  contribution) and 
contribution payable by the employee (hereinafter referred to as the  employee's contribution) and shall be 
paid to the Corporation.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 32]
32 
 (2) The contributions (employer's contribution and the employee’s contribution both)  shall be paid at 
such rates as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(3) The wage period in relation  to an employee shall be the unit as specified in the  regulations 
(hereinafter referred to as the wage period) in respect of which all contributions  shall be payable under this 
Chapter.  
(4) The contributions payable in respect of each wage period shall ord inarily fall due  on the last day of 
the wage period, and where an employee is employed for part of the  wage period, or is employed under two 
or more employers during the same wage period,  the contributions shall fall due on such days as may be 
specified in  the regulations.  
30.  Administrative expenses. —The types of expenses which may be termed as administrative 
expenses and the  percentage of the income of the Corporation which may be spent for such expenses shall  
be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government and the Corporation shall keep  its administrative 
expenses within the limit so prescribed by the Central Government.  
31. Provisions as to payment of contributions by employer etc.  .— (1) The employer shall pay in 
respect of every employee, whether directly  employed by him or by or through a contractor, both the 
employer's contribution and the  employee's contribution.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,  but subject to the 
provisions of this Cod e and the rules and regulations, if any, made  thereunder in this behalf, the employer 
shall, in the case of an employee directly employed  by him (not being an exempted employee), be entitled 
to recover from the employee the  employee's contribution by reduc tion from his wages and not otherwise:  
Provided that no such deduction shall be made from any wages other than such as  relates to the period 
or part of the period in respect of which the contribution is payable or  in exce
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 32]
tes to the period 
or part of the period in respect of which the contribution is payable or  in excess of the sum representing the 
empl oyee's contribution for the period.  
(3) Notwithstanding any contract to the contrary, neither the employer nor the  contractor shall be 
entitled to deduct the employer's contribution from any wages payable  to an employee or otherwise to 
recover it from him.  
(4) Any sum deducted by the employer from wages under this Chapter shall be deemed  to have been 
entrusted to him by the employee for the purpose of paying the contribution  in respect of which it was 
deducted.  
(5) The employer shall bear the expenses of re mitting the contributions to the  Corporation.  
(6) An employer, who has paid contribution in respect of an employee employed by  or through a 
contractor, shall be entitled to recover the amount of the contribution so paid  (that is to say the employer's 
contribution as well as the employee's contribution, if any,)  from the contractor, either by deduction from 
any amount payable to him by the employer  under any contract, or as a debt payable by the contractor.  
(7) The contractor shall maintain a register o f employees employed by or through  him as provided in 
the regulations and submit the same to the employer before the settlement  of any amount payable under 
sub-section ( 6). 
(8) In the case referred to in sub -section ( 6), the contractor shall be entitled to  recover  the employee's 
contribution from the employee employed by or through him by deduction  from wages and not otherwise, 
subject to such conditions as specified in the proviso to  sub-section ( 2). 
(9) Subject to the provisions of this Code, the Corporat ion may make regulations for  any matter relating 
or incidental to the payment and collection of contributions payable  under this Chapter.  
32. Benefits. — (1) Subject to the provisions of this Code, the Insured Persons, their dependants  or the 
persons hereinafter mentioned, as the
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 32]
s of this Code, the Insured Persons, their dependants  or the 
persons hereinafter mentioned, as the case may be, shall be entitled to the following  benefits, namely: — 
(a) periodical payments to any Insured Person in case of his sickness certified  by a duly appointed 
medical practitioner or by any other person possessing such  qualifications and experience as the 
Corporation may, by the regulations, specify in  this behalf (hereinafter referred to as sickness benefit);  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 33]
33 
 (b) periodical payments to an Insured Person being a woman in case of  confinement or miscarriage 
or sickness ar ising out of pregnancy, confinement,  premature birth of child or miscarriage, such woman 
being certified to be eligible  for such payments by an authority specified in this behalf by the regulations  
(hereinafter referred to as maternity benefit);  
(c) period ical payments to an Insured Person suffering from disablement as a  result of an employment 
injury sustained by him as an employee for the purposes of  this Chapter and certified to be eligible for 
such payments by an authority specified  in this behalf by th e regulations (hereinafter referred to as 
disablement benefit);  
(d) periodical payments to such dependants of an Insured Person who dies as a  result of an 
employment injury sustained by him as an employee for the purposes of  this Chapter, as are entitled 
under this Chapter (hereinafter referred to as dependents’ benefit);  
(e) medical treatment for and attendance on Insured Persons (hereinafter referred  to as medical 
benefit); and  
(f) payment to the eldest surviving member of the family of an Insured Person  who has died, towards 
the expenditure on the funeral of the deceased Insured Person,  or, where the Insured Person did not 
have a family or was not living with his family  at the time of his death, to the person who actually 
incurs the expenditure on the  funeral of the deceased Insured Person (to be known as funeral expenses):  
Provided that the amount of payment under this clause shall not exceed such amount  as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government and the claim for such payment shall be  made within three months 
of the death of the Insured Person or within such extended  period as the Corporation or any officer or 
authority authorised by it in this behalf may  allow.  
(2) The Corporation may, subject to such conditions as may be laid down in the  regulati ons, extend the 
medical benefits to the fami
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 33]
o such conditions as may be laid down in the  regulati ons, extend the 
medical benefits to the family of an Insured Person.  
(3) The qualification of a person to claim sickness benefit, maternity benefit,  disablement benefit and 
dependants' benefit and the conditions subject to which such benefit  may be given a nd the rate and period 
thereof, shall be such as may be prescribed by the  Central Government.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Code and the rules made thereunder relating to  this Chapter, the 
Corporation may make regulations for any matter relating or  incidental to  the accrual and payment of 
benefits payable under this Chapter.  
33. Corporation’s power to promote measures for health, etc., of Insured Persons. —The 
Corporation may, in addition to the benefits specified in this Chapter, promote  measures fo r the 
improvement of the health and welfare of Insured Persons and for the  rehabilitation and re -employment of 
Insured Persons who have been disabled or injured  and may incur in respect of such measures, expenditure 
from the Employees' State Insurance  Fund  within such limits as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government.  
34. Presumption as to accident arising in course of employment. —(1) For the purposes of this 
Chapter, an accident arising in the course of an  employee's employment shall be presumed, in th e absence 
of evidence to the contrary, to  have arisen out of that employment.  
(2) An accident happening to an employee in or about any premises at which he is for  the time being 
employed for the purpose of his employer's trade or business shall be  deemed t o arise out of and in the 
course of his employment, if it happens while he is taking  steps, on an actual or supposed emergency at 
those premises, to rescue, succour or protect  persons who are, or are thought to be or possibly to be, injured 
or imperilled, or to avert or  minimise serious damage to property.  
(3) An accident occurring to an employee while c
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 33]
to avert or  minimise serious damage to property.  
(3) An accident occurring to an employee while commuting from his residence to  the place of 
employment for duty or from the place of employment to his residence after  performing duty, shall be 
deemed to h ave arisen out of and in the course of employment if  nexus between the circumstances, time 
and place in which the accident occurred and the  employment is established.  
(4) An accident happening while an employee is, with the express or implied  permission of  his 
employer, travelling as a passenger by any vehicle to or from his place of  work shall, notwithstanding that 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 34]
34 
 he is under no obligation to his employer to travel by that  vehicle, be deemed to arise out of and in the 
course of his employment, if — 
(a) the accident would have been deemed so to have arisen had he been under  such obligation; and  
(b) at the time of the accident, the vehicle — 
(i) is being operated by or on behalf of his employer or some other  person by whom it is provided 
in pursuance of arrang ements made with his  employer; and  
(ii) is not being operated in the ordinary course of public transport service.  
Explanation .—In this section, “vehicle ” includes a vessel and an aircraft.  
35. Accidents happening while acting in breach of law etc. — An accident shall be deemed to arise 
out of and in the course of an employee's  employment notwithstanding that he is at the time of the accident 
acting in contravention  of the provisions of any law applicable to him, or of any orders given by or on 
behalf of his employer or that he is acting without instructions from his employer, if — 
(a) the accident would have been deemed so to have arisen had the act not  been done in contravention 
as aforesaid or without instructions from his employer,  as the case may be; a nd 
(b) the act is done for the purpose of and in connection with the employer's  trade or business.  
36. Occupational disease. —(1) If an employee employed in any employment specified in Part A of 
the Third  Schedule contracts any disease specified therein as an occupational disease peculiar to  that 
employment, or if an employee employed in the employment specified in Part B of  that Schedule for a 
continuous period of not less than six months contracts any disease  specified therein as an occupational 
disease pe culiar to that employment or if an employee  employed in any employment specified in Part C of 
that Schedule for such continuous  period as the Corporation may specify by regulations in respect of each 
such employment,  contracts any disease specified in such  Part C as 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 34]
egulations in respect of each 
such employment,  contracts any disease specified in such  Part C as an occupational disease peculiar to that  
employment, the contracting of the disease shall, unless the contrary is proved, be deemed  to be an 
“employment injury “, arising out of and in the course of employment.  
(2) Save as provided by sub -sectio n (1), no benefit shall be payable to an employee  in respect of any 
disease unless the disease is directly attributable to a specific injury by  accident arising out of and in the 
course of his employment.  
(3) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 34  shall not apply to the cases to  which this section 
applies.  
37. References to medical board. — (1) Any question — 
(a) whether the relevant accident has resulted in permanent disablement; or  
(b) whether the extent of loss of earning capacity can be assessed provisionally  or finally; or  
(c) whether the assessment of the proportion of the loss of earning capacity is  provisional or final; or  
(d) in the case of provisional assessment, as to the period for which such  assessment shall hold good,  
shall be determined  by a medical board constituted in accordance with the provisions of  the regulations 
(hereinafter referred to as medical board) and any such question shall  hereafter be referred to as the 
“disablement question ”. 
(2) The case of any Insured Person for perma nent disablement benefit shall be referred  by the 
Corporation to a medical board for determination of the disablement in question  and if, on that or any 
subsequent reference, the extent of loss of earning capacity of the  Insured Person is provisionally assessed, 
it shall again be so referred to the medical board  not later than the end of the period taken into account by 
the provisional assessment.  
(3) Any decision under this Chapter of a medical board may be reviewed at any time  by the medical 
board if i t is satisfied by fresh evidence that the decision was given in  c
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 34]
 time  by the medical 
board if i t is satisfied by fresh evidence that the decision was given in  consequence of the non -disclosure 
or misrepresentation by the employee or any other  person of a material fact whether the non -disclosure or 
misrepresentation was or was not  fraudulent.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 35]
35 
 (4) Any  assessment of the extent of the disablement resulting from the relevant  employment injury may 
also be reviewed by a medical board if it is satisfied that since the  making of the assessment there has been 
a substantial and unforeseen aggravation of the  results of the relevant injury:  
Provided that an assessment shall not be reviewed under this sub -section unless the  medical board is of 
the opinion, having regard to the period taken into account by the  assessment and the probable duration of 
the aggravation aforesaid, that substantial injustice  will be done by not reviewing it.  
(5) Except with the leave of a medical appeal tribunal constituted by regulations, an  assessment shall 
not be reviewed under sub -section ( 4) on any application made less than  five year s, or in the case of a 
provisional assessment, six months, from the date thereof and  on such a review the period to be taken into 
account by any revised assessment shall not  include any period before the date of the application.  
(6) Subject to the foregoin g provisions of this section, a medical board may deal  with a case of review 
in any manner in which it could deal with it on an original reference  to it, and in particular may make a 
provisional assessment notwithstanding that the  assessment under review w as final and the provisions of 
sub-section ( 2) shall apply to an  application for review under this sub -section and to a decision of a medical 
board in  connection with such application as they apply to a case for disablement benefit under that  sub-
section a nd to a decision of the medical board in connection with such case.  
(7) (a) If the Insured Person or the Corporation is aggrieved by any decision of the  medical board, the 
Insured Person or the Corporation, as the case may be, may appeal in  such manner and  within such time as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government to — 
(i) the medical appeal tribunal constituted in accordance with the provisi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 35]
 Central Government to — 
(i) the medical appeal tribunal constituted in accordance with the provisions of  the regulations; or  
(ii) the Employees' Insurance Court directly:  
Provided that no appeal by an Insured Person shall lie under this sub -section if such  person has applied 
for commutation of disablement benefit on the basis of the decision of  the medical board and received the 
commuted value of such benefits:  
Provided further that no appeal by the Corporation  shall lie under this sub -section if  the Corporation 
paid the commuted value of the disablement benefit on the basis of the  decision of the medical board.  
(b) Where the Insured Person or the Corporation preferred appeal to the medical  appeal tribunal under  
sub-clause ( i) of clause ( a) instead of to the Employees' Insurance  Court under sub -clause ( ii) of that clause, 
then, he or it, as the case may be, shall have the  further right to file second appeal to the Employees' 
Insurance Court in such manner and  within such time as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government.  
38. Dependants’ benefit. —(1) If an Insured Person dies as a result of an employment injury sustained 
as an  employee under this Chapter (whether or not he was in receipt of any periodical pay ment  for 
temporary disablement in respect of the injury), dependants' benefit shall be payable to  his dependants 
specified in sub -clause ( a) and sub -clause ( b) of clause ( 24) of section 2 at  such rates and for such periods 
and subject to such conditions as  may be prescribed by the  Central Government.  
(2) In case the Insured Person dies without leaving behind him the dependants as  aforesaid, the 
dependants' benefit shall be paid to the other dependants of the deceased at  such rates and for such periods 
and s ubject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the  Central Government.  
(3) Any decision awarding dependants' benefit under this Chapter may be reviewed  at any time by the 
Corporation if it
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 35]
arding dependants' benefit under this Chapter may be reviewed  at any time by the 
Corporation if it is satisfied by fresh evidence that the decision was  given in co nsequence of non -disclosure 
or misrepresentation by the claimant or any other  person of a material fact (whether the non -disclosure or 
misrepresentation was or was not  fraudulent) or that the decision is no longer in accordance with this 
Chapter due to any  birth or death or due to the marriage, re -marriage, or ceasing of infirmity, or attainment 
of the  age of twenty -five years by, a claimant.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, the Corporation may, on such review  under sub -section 
(3), direct tha t the dependants' benefit be continued, increased, reduced  or discontinued.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 36]
36 
 39. Medical benefit. —(1) An Insured Person or (where such medical benefit is extended to his family)  
a member of his family whose condition requires medical treatment and attendanc e shall  be entitled to 
receive medical benefit.  
(2) Such medical benefit may be given either in the form of out -patient treatment  and attendance in a 
hospital or dispensary, clinic or other institution or by visits to the  home of the Insured Person or treatment 
as in-patient in a hospital or other institution.  
(3) The qualification of an Insured Person and (where such medical benefit is extended  to his family) 
his family, to claim medical benefit and the conditions subject to which such  benefit may be g iven, the scale 
and period thereof shall be such as may be prescribed by  the Central Government:  
Provided that a person in respect of whom contribution ceases to be payable under  this Chapter may be 
allowed medical benefit for such period and of such natur e as may be  provided by the regulations:  
Provided further that an Insured Person who has attained the age of superannuation,  a person who retires 
under a Voluntary Retirement Scheme or takes premature retirement,  and his spouse shall be eligible to 
receive  medical benefits subject to payment of contribution  and such other conditions as may be specified 
in the regulations:  
Provided also that an Insured Person who ceases to be in insurable employment on  account of 
permanent disablement caused due to employmen t injury shall continue to  receive medical benefits, subject 
to payment of contribution and other conditions as may  be prescribed by the Central Government:  
Provided also that the conditions for grant of medical benefits to the Insured Person  during employ ment 
injury shall be as specified in the regulations.  
(4) (a) The Corporation may establish medical education institutions, including  colleges, dental 
colleges, nursing colleges and the training institutes for its officers and  st
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 36]
g  colleges, dental 
colleges, nursing colleges and the training institutes for its officers and  staff with a view to improve the 
quality of their services.  
(b) The medical education institutions referred to in clause ( a) shall require its students  to furnish a 
bond for serving the Corporation for such time and in such manner, as may be  specified in the regulations.  
(5) The medic al education institutions and training institutes referred to in  sub-section ( 4) may be run 
by the Corporation itself or on the request of the Corporation,  by the Central Government, any State 
Government, Public Sector Undertaking of the Central  Government  or the State Government or any other 
body notified by the Central Government.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, the expression “other body ” means any such 
organisation of persons which the Central Government considers capable  to run colle ges and training 
institutions referred to in sub -section ( 4). 
(6) The Corporation may, in order to take preventive and curative measures for welfare  of the Insured 
Persons, carry out such occupational and epidemiological surveys and studies  for assessment of health and 
working conditions of Insured Persons in such manner as  may be specified in the regulations.  
40. Provision of medical treatment by State Government or by Corporation. — (1) The State 
Government shall provide for Insured Persons and (where such  benefit is extended to their families) their 
families in the State, reasonable medical, surgical  and obstetric treatment:  
Provided that the State Government may, with the approval of the Corporation, arrange  for medical 
treatment at clinics of medical pra ctitioners on such scale and subject to such  terms and conditions as may 
be agreed upon.  
(2) Where the incidence of sickness benefit payment to Insured Persons in any State  is found to exceed 
the all -India average, the amount of such excess shall be shared  between  the Corporation 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 36]
exceed 
the all -India average, the amount of such excess shall be shared  between  the Corporation and the State 
Government in such proportion as may be fixed by agreement  between them:  
Provided that the Corporation may in any case waive the recovery of the whole or  any part of the share 
which is to be borne by the State Governm ent. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 37]
37 
 (3) The Corporation may enter into an agreement with a State Government in regard  to the nature and 
scale of the medical treatment that should be provided to Insured Persons  and (where such medical benefit 
is extended to the families) their families (including  provision of buildings, equipment, medicines, and 
staff) and for the sharing of the cost  thereof and of any excess in the incidence of sickness benefit to Insured 
Persons between  the Corporation and the State Government.  
(4) In default of agreem ent between the Corporation and any State Government as  aforesaid, the nature 
and extent of the medical treatment to be provided by the State  Government and the proportion in which 
the cost thereof and of the excess in the incidence  of sickness benefit sha ll be shared between the 
Corporation and that Government, shall be  determined by an arbitrator who shall be appointed by the 
Central Government in  consultation with the State Government.  
(5) The State Government may, in addition to the Corporation under th is Code, with  the previous 
approval of the Central Government, establish such organisation (by whatever  name called) to provide for 
certain benefits to employees in case of sickness, maternity and  employment injury:  
Provided that any reference to the State  Government in this Code relating to this  Chapter shall also 
include reference to the organisation as and when such organisation is  established by the State Government.  
(6) The organisation referred to in sub -section ( 5) shall have such structure, discharg e functions, 
exercise powers and undertake such activities as may be prescribed by the Central  Government.  
(7) The Corporation may establish and maintain in a State such hospitals, dispensaries  and other 
medical and surgical services as it may think fit fo r the benefit of Insured Persons  and (where such medical 
benefit is extended to their families), their families.  
(8) The Corporation may enter into agreement
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 37]
nefit is extended to their families), their families.  
(8) The Corporation may enter into agreement with any local authority, private body  or individual in 
regard to the provision of medical treatment and attendance for Insured  Persons and (where such medical 
benefit is extended to their families) their families, in  any area and sharing the cost thereof.  
(9) The Corporation may also enter into agreement with any local authority, local  body or private body 
for commissioning and running Employees' State Insurance hospitals  through third party participation for 
providing medical treatment and attendance to Insured  Persons and (where such medical benefit has been 
extended to their families), to the ir families.  
(10) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of this Chapter, the  Corporation may, 
in consultation with the State Government, undertake the responsibility  for providing medical benefit to 
Insured Persons and (where such medic al benefit is extended  to their families), to the families of such 
Insured Persons in the State subject to the condition  that the State Government shall share the cost of such 
medical benefit in such proportion  as may be agreed upon between the State Gover nment and the 
Corporation.  
(11) In the event of the Corporation exercising its power under sub -section ( 10), the  provisions relating 
to medical benefit under this Chapter shall apply, so far as may be, as if  a reference therein to the State 
Government were  a reference to the Corporation.  
(12) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, in respect of establishments  located in the States 
where medical benefit is provided by the Corporation, the Central  Government shall be the appropriate 
Government.  
41. General provisions as to benefits. —(1) Save as may be provided in the regulations, no person 
shall be entitled to  commute for a lump sum any disablement benefit admissible under this Chapter.  
(2) Save as may be provided in
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 37]
r a lump sum any disablement benefit admissible under this Chapter.  
(2) Save as may be provided in the regulations, no person shall be entitled to sickness  benefit or 
disablement benefit for temporary disablement on any day on which he works or  remains on leave or on a 
holiday in respect of which he receives wages or on any day on  which he remains on strike.  
(3) A person who is in rece ipt of sickness benefit or disablement benefit (other than  benefit granted on 
permanent disablement) — 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 38]
38 
 (a) shall remain under medical treatment at a dispensary, hospital, clinic or other  institution provided 
under this Chapter, and shall carry out the inst ructions given by  the medical officer or medical attendant 
in-charge thereof;  
(b) shall not while under treatment do anything which might retard or prejudice  his chances of 
recovery;  
(c) shall not leave the area in which medical treatment provided by this Chapter  is being given, 
without the permission of the medical officer, medical attendant or  such other authority as may be 
specified in this behalf by the regulations; and  
(d) shall allow himself to be examined by any duly appointed medical officer or othe r person 
authorised by the Corporation in this behalf.  
(4) An Insured Person shall not be entitled to receive for the same period — 
(a) both sickness benefit and maternity benefit; or  
(b) both sickness benefit and disablement benefit for temporary disablement;  or 
(c) both maternity benefit and disablement benefit for temporary disablement.  
(5) Where a person is entitled to more than one of the benefits mentioned in  sub-section ( 4), he shall be 
entitled to choose which benefit he shall receive.  
(6) If a person dies during any period for which he is entitled to a cash benefit under  this Chapter, the 
amount of such benefit up to and including the day of his death shall be  paid to any person nominated by 
the deceased person in writing in such form as may  be specified in the regulations or, if there is no such 
nomination, to the heir or legal  representative of the deceased person.  
(7) (a) Any person eligible for availing dependant or disablement benefit under this  Chapter shall not 
be entitled to claim Emp loyees’ Compensation from his employer under  Chapter VII.  
(b) Any women employee eligible for availing maternity benefit under this Chapter  shall not be entitled 
to claim maternity benefit from her employer under Chapter VI.  
(8) Where any person has receiv ed an
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 38]
 claim maternity benefit from her employer under Chapter VI.  
(8) Where any person has receiv ed any benefit or payment under this Chapter when  he is not lawfully 
entitled thereto, he shall be liable to repay to the Corporation the value  of the benefit or the amount of such 
payment, or in the case of death, his legal representative  shall be liable to repay the same from the assets of 
the deceased devolved on him.  
(9) The value of any benefits received other than cash payments shall be determined  by such authority 
as may be specified in the regulations made in this behalf and the decision  of such aut hority shall be final.  
(10) The amount recoverable under this section may be recovered in the manner  specified under 
sections 129 to 132.  
42. Corporation’s rights when an employer fails to register, etc. — (1) If any employer, — 
(a) fails or neglects to insure under section 28, an employee at the time of his  appointment or within 
such extended period as may be prescribed by the Central  Government, as a result of which the 
employee becomes disentitled to any benefit  under this Chapter; or  
(b) insures under  section 28, an employee on or after the date of accident which  resulted in personal 
injury to such employee which has the effect of making such  employee disentitled to receive any 
dependant benefit or disablement benefit from  the Corporation; or  
(c) fails  or neglects to pay any contribution which under this Chapter he is  liable to pay in respect of 
any employee and by reason thereof such employee becomes  disentitled to any benefit or becomes 
entitled to a benefit on a lower scale,   
then, the Corporation may, on being satisfied in the manner prescribed by the Central  Government that the 
benefit is payable to the employee, pay to the employee benefit at  such rate to which he is entitled or would 
have been entitled if the failure or neglect would  not have oc curred, and the Corporation shall be entitled 
to recover from the emp
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 38]
or neglect would  not have oc curred, and the Corporation shall be entitled 
to recover from the employer,  subject to the employer being given an opportunity of being heard, the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 39]
39 
 capitalised value of  the benefit paid to the employee, to be calculated in such manner as may be prescribed 
by the Central Government:  
Provided that the capitalised value to be calculated may be adjusted for the payment  of any contribution 
and interest or damages that the employer is liable to pay for delay in  the payment of or non -payment of 
such contribution.  
(2) The amount recoverable under this section may be recovered as if it were an arrear  of land revenue 
or recovered in the manner specified under sections 129 to 132.  
43. Liability of owner or occupier of factories, etc., for excessive sickness benefit. — (1) Where the 
Corporation considers that the incidence of sickness among Insured  Persons is excessive by reason of — 
(a) insanitary working conditions in a factory or other establishment or the  neglect of the owner or 
occupier of the factory or other establis hment to observe any  health regulations enjoined on him by or 
under any enactment for the time being in  force, or  
(b) insanitary conditions of any tenements or lodgings occupied by Insured  Persons and such 
insanitary conditions are attributable to the neglect of the owner of  the tenements or lodgings to observe 
any health regulations enjoined on him by or  under any enactments for the time being in force,  
then, the Corporation may send to the owner or occupier of the factory or other establishment  or to the 
owner of the tenements or lodgings, as the case may be, a claim for the payment of  the amount of the extra 
expenditure incurred by the Corporation as sickness benefit; and if  the claim is not settled by agreement, 
the Corporation may refer the matter, with a statement  in support of its claim, to the appropriate 
Government.  
(2) If the appropriate Government is of the opinion that a prima facie case for inquiry  is made out, it 
may appoint a competent person or persons to hold an inquiry into the  matter re ferred under sub -section 
(1). 
(3) If upon inqu
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 39]
 or persons to hold an inquiry into the  matter re ferred under sub -section 
(1). 
(3) If upon inquiry under sub -section ( 2), it is proved to the satisfaction of the person  or persons holding 
the inquiry that the excess in incidence of sickness among the Insured  Persons is due to the default or neglect 
of the owner or occupier of the factory or other  establishment or the owner of the tenements or lodgings, as 
the case may be, the said  person or persons shall determine, the amount of the extra expenditure incurred 
as sickness  benefit as well as the person or p ersons by whom the whole or any part of such amount  shall be 
paid to the Corporation.  
(4) A determination under sub -section ( 3) may be enforced as if it were a decree for  payment of money 
passed in a suit by a Civil Court.  
(5) For the purposes of this sect ion, “owner ” of tenements or lodgings shall include  any agent of the 
owner and any person who is entitled to collect the rent of the tenements  or lodgings as a lessee of the 
owner.  
44. Scheme for other beneficiaries. —Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, the Central 
Government  may, by notification, frame, amend, vary or rescind scheme for other beneficiaries and the  
members of their families for providing medical facility in any hospital established by the  Corporation in 
any area which is und erutilised on payment of user charges, and prescribe  the terms and conditions subject 
to which the scheme may be operated.  
Explanation. — For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “other beneficiaries ” means persons other than employees insured under  section 2 8; 
(b) “underutilised hospital ” means any hospital not fully utilised by the  employees insured under 
section 28; and  
(c) “user charges ” means the amount which is to be charged from other  beneficiaries for medical 
facilities as may be specified in the regulations after prior  approval of the Central Government.  
45. Schemes for unorganized workers, gig
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 39]
ulations after prior  approval of the Central Government.  
45. Schemes for unorganized workers, gig workers and platform workers. — (1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Chapter, the Central Government  may, by notification, frame scheme for 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 40]
40 
 unorga nised workers, gig workers and platform  workers and the members of their families for providing 
benefits admissible under this  Chapter by the Corporation.  
(2) The contribution, user charges, scale of benefits, qualifying and eligibility  conditions and othe r 
terms and conditions subject to which the scheme may be operated  shall be such as may be specified in the 
scheme.  
46. Exemption of factories or other establishments belonging to Government or any local 
authority .—The appropriate Government may, after consultation with the Corporation, by  notification and 
subject to such conditions as may be specified in the notification, exempt  any factory or other establishment 
belonging to the Government or any local authority,  from the operation of this Chapter if t he employees in 
any such factory or other establishment  are otherwise in receipt of benefits substantially similar or superior 
to the benefits provided  under this Chapter.  
47. Contributions, etc., due to Corporation to have priority over other debts. —Notwi thstanding 
anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,  any amount due under this Chapter shall be 
the charge on the assets of the establishment  to which it relates and shall be paid in priority in accordance 
with the provisions of the  Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016  (31 of 2016) . 
48. Constitution of Employees’ Insurance Court. —(1) The State Government shall, by notification, 
constitute an Employees' Insurance  Court for such local area as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) The Employees’ Insurance Court shall consist of such number of Judges as the  State Government 
may think fit.  
(3) Any person who is or has been a judicial officer or is a legal practitioner of five  years' standing shall 
be qualified to be a Judge of the Emp loyees' Insurance Court.  
(4) The State Government may appoint the same Court for two or more local areas or  two or more 
Employees’ Insurance Courts 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 40]
may appoint the same Court for two or more local areas or  two or more 
Employees’ Insurance Courts for the same local area.  
(5) Where more than one Employees’ Insurance Court has been appointed for the  same local area, the 
State Government may by general or special order regulate the distribution  of business between them.  
49.Matters to be decided by Employees’ Insurance Court .—(1) If any question or dispute or claim 
arises as to — 
(a) whether any person is an employee within the meaning of this Code relating  to this Chapter or 
whether he is liable to pay the employee's contribution; or  
(b) the rate of wages or average daily wages of an employee for the purposes of  this Chapter; or  
(c) the rate of contribution p ayable by an employer in respect of any employee  under this Chapter; or  
(d) the person who is or was the employer in respect of any employee for the  purposes of this Chapter; 
or 
(e) the right of any person to any benefit under this Chapter and as to the  amount and duration thereof; 
or 
(f) any direction issued by the Corporation on a review of any payment of  dependants' benefit under 
this Chapter; or  
(g) any other matter which is in dispute between an employer and the Corporation  relating to this 
Chapter, or between an employer and a Contractor relating to this  Chapter or between a person and the 
Corporation relating to this Chapter or between  an employee and an employer or Contractor relating to 
this Chapter, in respect of any  contribution or benefit or ot her dues payable or recoverable under this 
Code relating  to this Chapter; or  
(h) claim for the recovery of contributions from the employer under this Code  relating to this Chapter; 
or 
(i) claim under sub -section ( 8) of section 41 for the recovery of the value or  amount of the benefits 
received by a person when he is not lawfully entitled thereto;  or 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 41]
41 
 (j) claim against an employer under section 42; or  
(k) order of the appellate authority under section 126 in respect of Chapter IV;  or 
(l) claim by an employe r to recover contributions from any contractor under  this Code relating to this 
Chapter; or  
(m) any other claim for the recovery of any benefit admissible under this Chapter,  such matter shall 
be decided by the Employers' Insurance Court.  
(2) No matter whi ch is in dispute between an employer and the Corporation in respect  of any 
contribution or any other dues under this Chapter shall be raised by the employer in  the Employees' 
Insurance Court unless he has deposited with that Court fifty per cent. of  the am ount due from him as 
claimed by the Corporation:  
Provided that the Employees' Insurance Court may, for reasons to be recorded in  writing, waive or 
reduce the amount to be deposited under this sub -section.  
(3) No Civil Court shall have jurisdiction to decid e or deal with any question or  dispute as specified in 
sub-section ( 1) or to adjudicate on any liability which by or under  this Code relating to this Chapter is to be 
decided by a medical board, or by a medical appeal  tribunal or by the Employees' Insuranc e Court.  
50. Powers of Employees’ Insurance Court. — (1) The Employees' Insurance Court shall have all the 
powers of a Civil Court for  the purposes of summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses, 
compelling the  discovery and production of documents and material objects, administering oath and  
recording evidence and such court shall be deemed to be a Civil Court within the meaning  of section 195 
and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) . 
(2) The Employees' Insurance Court sh all follow such procedure as may be prescribed  by the State 
Government.  
(3) All costs incidental to any proceeding before an Employees' Insurance Court  shall, subject to such 
rules as may be made in this behalf by the State Government, be in th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 41]
Court  shall, subject to such 
rules as may be made in this behalf by the State Government, be in the  discretion  of that court.  
(4) An order of the Employees' Insurance Court shall be enforceable by it as if it were  a decree passed 
in a suit by a Civil Court.  
51. Proceedings of Employees’ Insurance Courts. —(1) The manner of commencement of 
proceedings before the Employees’ Insurance  Court, fees and procedure thereof shall be such as may be 
prescribed by the appropriate  Government:  
Provided that the limitation for initiating the proceedings by the aggrieved person in  the Employees' 
Insurance Court shall be three ye ars from the date on which the cause of  action arises:  
Provided further that the “arising of cause of action ” in respect of a claim by the  Insured Person or 
dependants; by the Corporation for recovering contribution (including  interests and damages) from t he 
employer; and the claim by the employer for recovering  contributions from a Contractor and the time within 
which such claims, recovery or  contribution, from employer by the Corporation and recovery of 
contribution by the employer  from the Contractor, shall be as specified in the regulations.  
(2) Any application, appearance or act required to be made or done by any person to,  or before, an 
Employees' Insurance Court (other than appearance of a person required for  the purpose of his examination 
as a witn ess) may be made or done by a legal practitioner or  by an officer of a registered trade union 
authorised in writing by such person or with the  permission of that Court, by any other person so authorised.  
(3) An Employees' Insurance Court may submit any que stion of law for the decision  of the High Court 
and if it does so shall decide the question pending before it in accordance  with such decision.  
52. Appeal to High Court. — (1) Save as expressly provided in this section, no appeal shall lie from 
an order of  an Employees' Insurance Court.  
(2) An appeal s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 41]
his section, no appeal shall lie from 
an order of  an Employees' Insurance Court.  
(2) An appeal shall lie to the High Court from an order of an Employees' Insurance  Court, if it involves 
a substantial question of law.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 42]
42 
 (3) The appeal shall be filed under this section within a period of sixty days from the  date of the order 
made by the Employees' Insurance Court.  
(4) The provisions of sections 5 and 12 of the Limitation Act, 1963  (36 of 1963)  shall apply to  appeals 
under this section.  
(5) Where the Corporation has presented an appeal against an order of the Employees'  Insurance Court, 
that Court may, and if so directed by the High Court, shall, pending the  decision of the appeal, withhold the 
payment of any sum directed to be paid by the order  appealed against.  
CHAPTER V  
GRATUITY  
53. Payment of gra tuity. — (1) Gratuity shall be payable to an employee on the termination of his 
employment  after he has rendered continuous service for not less than five years, — 
(a) on his superannuation; or  
(b) on his retirement or resignation; or  
(c) on his death or disablement du e to accident or disease; or  
(d) on termination of his contract period under fixed term employment; or  
(e) on happening of any such event as may be notified by the Central Government:  
Provided that in case of working journalist as defined in clause ( f) of section 2 of the  Working 
Journalists and Other Newspaper Employees (Condition of Service) and  Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 
1955  (45 of 1955) , the expression “five years ” occurring in this  sub-section shall be deemed to be three 
years:  
Provided further tha t the completion of continuous service of five years shall not be  necessary where 
the termination of the employment of any employee is due to death or  disablement or expiration of fixed 
term employment or happening of any such event as  may be notified by t he Central Government:  
Provided also that in the case of death of the employee, gratuity payable to him shall  be paid to his 
nominee or, if no nomination has been made, to his heirs, and where any  such nominees or heirs is a minor, 
the share of such minor,  shall be deposited with the  competent authority a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 42]
s or heirs is a minor, 
the share of such minor,  shall be deposited with the  competent authority as may be notified by the 
appropriate Government who shall invest  the same for the benefit of such minor in such bank or other 
financial institution, as may be  prescribed by the appropriate Government, until  such minor attains majority.  
(2) For every completed year of service or part thereof in excess of six months, the  employer shall pay 
gratuity to an employee at the rate of fifteen days' wages or such  number of days as may be notified by the 
Central Govern ment, based on the rate of wages  last drawn by the employee concerned:  
Provided that in the case of a piece -rated employee, daily wages shall be computed  on the average of 
the total wages received by him for a period of three months immediately  preceding the termination of his 
employment, and, for this purpose, the wages paid for any  overtime work shall not be taken into account:  
Provided further that in the case of an employee who is employed in a seasonal  establishment and who 
is not so employed througho ut the year, the employer shall pay the  gratuity at the rate of seven days' wages 
for each season:  
Provided also that in the case of an employee employed on fixed term employment or  a deceased 
employee, the employer shall pay gratuity on pro rata basis.  
(3) The amount of gratuity payable to an employee shall not exceed such amount as  may be notified by 
the Central Government.  
(4) For the purpose of computing the gratuity payable to an employee who is employed,  after his 
disablement, on reduced wages, his wa ges for the period preceding his disablement  shall be taken to be the 
wages received by him during that period, and his wages for the  period subsequent to his disablement shall 
be taken to be the wages as so reduced.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 43]
43 
 (5) Nothing in this section shall affec t the right of an employee to receive better terms  of gratuity under 
any award or agreement or contract with the employer.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) the gratuity of an employee, whose services have been terminated for any act, wilful omission or 
negligence causing any damage or loss to, or destruction of,  property belonging to the employer, shall 
be forfeited to the extent of the damage or  loss so caused;  
(b) the gratuity payable to an employee may be wholly or partiall y forfeited — 
(i) if the services of such employee have been terminated for his riotous  or disorderly conduct or 
any other act of violence on his part, or  
(ii) if the services of such employee have been terminated for any act  which constitutes an offence 
involving moral turpitude, provided such offence  is committed by him in the course of his employment.  
Explanation 1.— For the purposes of this Chapter, employee does not include any  such person who 
holds a post under the Central Government or a State Governm ent and is  governed by any other Act or by 
any rules providing for payment of gratuity.  
Explanation 2.— For the purposes of this section, disablement means such disablement  as incapacitates 
an employee for the work which he was capable of performing before  the accident or disease, resulting in 
such disablement.  
Explanation 3.— For the purposes of this section, it is clarified that in the case of a  monthly rated 
employee, the fifteen days' wages shall be calculated by dividing the monthly  rate of wages last drawn by 
him by twenty -six and multiplying the quotient by fifteen.  
54. Continuous service. —For the purposes of this Chapter, —(A) an employee shall be said to be in 
continuous service for a period if he has,  for that period, been in uninterrupted service, including service 
which may be  interrupted on account of sickness, accident, leave, absence from duty without le
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 43]
ice 
which may be  interrupted on account of sickness, accident, leave, absence from duty without leave  (not 
being absence in respect of which an order treating the absence as break in  service has been passed in 
accordance with the standing ord ers, rules or regulations  governing the employees of the establishment), 
lay-off, strike or a lock -out or cessation  of work not due to any fault of the employee, whether such 
uninterrupted or interrupted  service was rendered before or after the commencemen t of this Code;  
(B) where an employee (not being an employee employed in a seasonal  establishment) is not in 
continuous service within the meaning of clause ( A), for any  period of one year or six months, he shall be 
deemed to be in continuous service  under  the employer — 
(a) for the said period of one year, if the employee during the period of  twelve calendar months 
preceding the date with reference to which calculation  is to be made, has actually worked under the 
employer for not less than — 
(i) one hundred and ninety days, in the case of any employee  employed below the ground in a 
mine or in an establishment which works  for less than six days in a week; and  
(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case;  
(b) for the said period of six months, if the empl oyee during the period of  six calendar months 
preceding the date with reference to which the calculation  is to be made, has actually worked under the 
employer for not less than — 
(i) ninety -five days, in the case of an employee employed below the  ground in a mine or in an 
establishment which works for less than six  days in a week; and  
(ii) one hundred and twenty days, in any other case.  
Explanation. — For the purposes of this clause, the number of days on  which an employee has 
actually worked under an employe r shall include the  days on which — 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 44]
44 
 (i) he has been laid -off under an agreement or as permitted by  standing orders made under the 
Industrial Employment (Standing Orders)  Act, 1946  (20 of 1946) , or under the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 1947  (14 of 1947) , or und er any other  law applicable to the establishment;  
(ii) he has been on leave with full wages, earned in the previous  year;  
(iii) he has been absent due to temporary disablement caused by  accident arising out of and in the 
course of his employment; and  
(iv) in the case of a female, she has been on maternity leave; so,  however, that the total period of 
such maternity leave does not exceed  twenty -six weeks;  
(C) where an employee, employed in a seasonal establishment, is not in  continuous service within the 
mean ing of clause ( A), for any period of one year or six  months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous 
service under the employer for such  period if he has actually worked for not less than seventy -five per cent. 
of the number  of days on which the establishme nt was in operation during such period.  
55.  Nomination. —(1) Each employee, who has completed one year of service, shall make, a 
nomination  within such time, in such form and in such manner, as may be prescribed by the appropriate  
Government.  
(2) An employ ee may, in his nomination, distribute the amount of gratuity payable to  him under this 
Chapter amongst more than one nominee.  
(3) If an employee has a family at the time of making a nomination, the nomination  shall be made in 
favour of one or more members of his family, and any nomination made  by such employee in favour of a 
person who is not a member of his family shall be void.  
(4) If at the time of making a nomination the employee has no family, the nomination  may be made in 
favour of any person or persons but if the employee subsequently acquires  a family, such nomination shall 
forthwith become invalid and the employee shall make,  within such time as may be prescribed by the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 44]
forthwith become invalid and the employee shall make,  within such time as may be prescribed by the 
appropriate Government, a fresh nomination  in favour of one or more members  of his family.  
(5) A nomination may, subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4), be modified  by an employee 
at any time, after giving to his employer a written intimation in such form  and in such manner as may be 
prescribed by the appropriate G overnment, of his intention  to do so.  
(6) If a nominee predeceases the employee, the interest of the nominee shall revert to  the employee 
who shall make a fresh nomination, in the form prescribed by the appropriate  Government, in respect of 
such interest.  
(7) Every nomination, fresh nomination or alteration of nomination, as the case may  be, shall be sent 
by the employee to his employer, who shall keep the same in his safe  custody.  
56. Determination of amount of gratuity. —(1) A person who is eligible for pa yment of gratuity under 
this Chapter or any  person authorised, in writing, to act on his behalf shall send a written application to the  
employer, within such time and in such form, as may be prescribed by the appropriate  Government, for 
payment of such gratuity.  
(2) As soon as gratuity becomes payable, the employer shall, whether an application  referred to in sub -
section ( 1) has been made or not, determine the amount of gratuity and  give notice in writing to the person 
to whom the gratuity is payable and  also to the competent  authority specifying the amount of gratuity so 
determined.  
(3) The employer shall arrange to pay the amount of gratuity within thirty days from  the date it becomes 
payable to the person to whom the gratuity is payable.  
(4) If the amo unt of gratuity payable under sub -section ( 3) is not paid by the employer  within the period 
specified in sub -section ( 3), the employer shall pay, from the date on  which the gratuity becomes payable 
to the date on which it is paid, 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 44]
r shall pay, from the date on  which the gratuity becomes payable 
to the date on which it is paid, simple interest at such  rate, not exceeding the rate notified by the Central 
Government from time to time for  repayment of long term deposits:  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 45]
45 
 Provided that no such interest shall be payable if the delay in the payment is due to  the fault of the 
employee and the employer has obtai ned permission in writing from the  competent authority for the delayed 
payment on this ground.  
(5) (a) If there is any dispute as to the amount of gratuity payable to an employee  under this Chapter or 
as to the admissibility of any claim of, or in relation  to, an employee  for payment of gratuity, or as to the 
person entitled to receive the gratuity, the employer  shall deposit with the competent authority such amount 
as he admits to be payable by him  as gratuity.  
(b) Where there is a dispute with regard to a ny matter or matters specified in  clause ( a), the employer 
or employee or any other person raising the dispute may make an  application to the competent authority in 
the form prescribed by the appropriate Government  for deciding the dispute.  
(c) The compete nt authority shall, after due inquiry and after giving the parties to the  dispute a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard, determine the matter or matters in dispute  and if, as a result of such 
inquiry any amount is found to be payable to the employee, the  competent authority shall direct the 
employer to pay such amount or, as the case may be,  such amount as reduced by the amount already 
deposited by the employer.  
(d) The competent authority shall pay the amount deposited, including the excess  amount, if an y, 
deposited by the employer, to the person entitled thereto.  
(e) As soon as may be after a deposit is made under clause ( a), the competent authority  shall pay the 
amount of the deposit — 
(i) to the applicant where he is the employee; or  
(ii) where the appl icant is not the employee, to the nominee or, as the case may  be, the guardian of 
such nominee or heir of the employee if the competent authority is  satisfied that there is no dispute as 
to the right of the applicant to receive the amount  of gratuity.  
(6) For the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 45]
e is no dispute as 
to the right of the applicant to receive the amount  of gratuity.  
(6) For the purpose of conducting an inquiry under sub -section ( 5), the competent  authority shall have 
the same powers as are vested in a court, while trying a suit, under the  Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 
1908) , in respect of the following matters, name ly:— 
(a) enforcing the attendance of any person or examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses.  
(7) Any inquiry under this section shall be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of  section 193, 
section 228 and for the purpose of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
(8) Any person aggrieved by an order under sub -section ( 5) may, within sixty days  from the date of the 
receipt of the order, prefer an appeal to the appropriate Government or  such other authority as may be 
specified by the appropriate Government in this behalf:  
Provided that the appropriate Government or the appellate authority, as the case may  be, m ay, if it is 
satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring  the appeal within the said 
period of sixty days, extend the said period by a further period of  sixty days:  
Provided further that no appeal by an employer shall be a dmitted unless at the time  of preferring the 
appeal, the appellant either produces a certificate of the competent authority  to the effect that the appellant 
has deposited with him an amount equal to the amount of  gratuity required to be deposited under sub -
section ( 5), or deposits with the appellate  authority such amount.  
(9) The appropriate Government or the appellate authority, as the case may be, may,  after giving the 
parties to the appeal a reasonable opportunity of being heard, confirm,  modify, or reve rse the decision of 
the competent authority.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 45]
ing heard, confirm,  modify, or reve rse the decision of 
the competent authority.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 46]
46 
 57. Compulsory insurance. —(1) With effect from such date as may be notified by the appropriate 
Government  in this behalf, every employer, other than an employer or an establishment belonging to, or  
under the control of, the Central Government or a State Government, shall, subject to the  provisions of sub -
section ( 2), obtain an insurance in the manner prescribed by the Central  Government, for his liability for 
payment towards the gratuity under this Chapter, fr om any insurance company regulated by the Authority 
as defined under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of section 2 of the Insurance Regulatory and Development 
Authority Act, 1999  (41 of 1999) : 
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different estab lishments or class  of establishments 
or for different areas.  
(2) The appropriate Government may, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed  by the Central 
Government, exempt any employer who had already established an approved  gratuity fund in respect  of his 
employees and who desires to continue such arrangement,  and every employer employing five hundred or 
more persons who establishes an approved  gratuity fund in the manner prescribed by the Central 
Government from the provisions of  sub-section ( 1). 
(3) For the purposes of effectively implementing the provisions of this section, every  employer shall 
within such time as may be prescribed by the Central Government get his  establishment registered with the 
competent authority in the manner prescribed by t he appropriate Government and no employer shall be 
registered under the provisions of this section unless he has taken an insurance referred to in sub -section 
(1) or has established an  approved gratuity fund referred to in sub -section ( 2). 
(4) The appropriate Government may provide for the composition of the Board of  Trustees of the 
approved gratuity fund and for the recovery by the competent authority of  the amount of the gratuity payable 
to an emplo
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 46]
 and for the recovery by the competent authority of  the amount of the gratuity payable 
to an employee from the insurer with whom an insurance  has b een taken under sub -section ( 1), or as the 
case may be, the Board of Trustees of the  approved gratuity fund, in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(5) Where an employer fails to make any payment by way of premium in respect of the  insurance 
referred to in s ub-section ( 1) or by way of contribution to an approved gratuity  fund referred to in  
sub-section ( 2), he shall be liable to pay the amount of gratuity due under  this Chapter (including interest, 
if any, for delayed payments) forthwith to the competent  authority.  
Explanation. — In this section, “approved gratuity fund ” shall have the same meaning  as assigned to it 
in sub -section ( 5) of section 2 of the Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961) . 
58. Competent authority. —(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification, appoint any officer 
of that  Government having such qualifications and experience as may be prescribed by that  Government to 
be a competent authority for implementation of any provision of this Chapter  for such area as may be 
specified in the notification.  
(2) Where more than one competent authority has been appointed for any area, the  appropriate 
Government may, by general or special order, regulate the distribution of business  among them.  
(3) Any competent authority may, for the purpose of de ciding any matter referred to  him for decision 
under this Chapter, choose one or more persons possessing special  knowledge of any matter relevant to the 
matter under reference to assist him in holding the  inquiry relating thereto.  
CHAPTER VI  
MATERNITY BENE FIT 
59. Emplo yment of, or work by, women prohibited during certain period .—(1) No employer shall 
knowingly employ a woman in any establishment during the  six weeks immediately following the day of 
her delivery, miscarriage or medical termination  of pregnancy.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 46]
 immediately following the day of 
her delivery, miscarriage or medical termination  of pregnancy.  
(2) No woman shall work in any establishment during the six weeks immediately  following the day of 
her delivery, miscarriage or medical termination of pregnancy.  
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 62, no pregnant woman shall, on a request being 
made by her in this behalf, be required by her employer to do, during the  period specified in sub -section 
(4), any work which is of an arduous nature or which  involves long hours of standing or which in any way 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 47]
47 
 is likely to interfere with h er pregnancy  or the normal development of the foetus or is likely to cause her 
miscarriage or otherwise to  adversely affect her health.  
(4) The period referred to in sub -section ( 3) shall be — 
(a) the period of one month immediately preceding the period of six weeks,  before the date of her 
expected delivery;  
(b) any period during the said period of six weeks for which the pregnant  woman does not avail of 
leave of absence under section 62.  
Explanation. — For the purposes of this section, the expression “any work of arduous  nature ” shall mean 
any work which involve or require strenuous effort or is difficult and  tiring in nature.  
60. Right to payment of maternity benefit. —(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Code, every 
woman shall be entitled to,  and h er employer shall be liable for, the payment of maternity benefit at the rate 
of the  average daily wage for the period of her actual absence, that is to say, the period immediately  
preceding the day of her delivery, and any period immediately following tha t day.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub -section, “the average daily wage ” means  the average of the 
woman's wages payable to her for the days on which she has worked  during the period of three calendar 
months immediately preceding the date from whi ch she  absents herself on account of maternity, subject to 
the minimum rate of wage fixed or  revised under the Code on Wages, 2019  (29 of 2019) . 
(2) No woman shall be entitled to maternity benefit unless she has actually worked in  an establishment 
of the employer from whom she claims maternity benefit, for a period of  not less than eighty days in the 
twelve months immediately preceding the date of her  expected delivery.  
Explanation. — For the purposes of calculating the period under this sub -section,  the da ys on which a 
woman has actually worked in the establishment, the days for which  she has been laid off or was on h
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 47]
oman has actually worked in the establishment, the days for which  she has been laid off or was on holidays 
declared under any law for the time being in force  to be holidays with wages, during the period of twelve 
months immediately preceding  the expected date of her delivery shall be taken into account.  
(3) The maximum period for which any woman shall be entitled to maternity benefit  shall be twenty -
six weeks of which not more than eight weeks shall precede the expected  date of her delivery:  
Provided that the maximum period entitled to maternity benefit by a woman having  two or more 
surviving children shall be twelve weeks of which not more than six weeks  shall precede the date of her 
expected delivery:  
Provided further that where a woman dies  during this period, the maternity benefit  shall be payable 
only for the days up to and including the day of her death:  
Provided also that where a woman, having been delivered of a child, dies during her  delivery or during 
the period immediately following the date of her delivery for which she  is entitled for the maternity benefit, 
leaving behind in either case the child, the employer  shall be liable for the maternity benefit for that entire 
period but if the child also dies  during the said period, then, fo r the days up to and including the date of the 
death of the  child.  
Explanation. — For the purposes of this sub -section, “child ” includes a stillborn  child.  
(4) A woman who legally adopts a child below the age of three months or a  commissioning mother 
shall be entitled to maternity benefit for a period of twelve weeks  from the date the child is handed over to 
the adopting mother or the commissioning mother,  as the case may be.  
(5) In case the work assigned to a woman is of such nature that she may work from  home, the employer 
may allow her to do so after availing of the maternity benefit for such  period and on such conditions as the 
employer and the woman may mutually agree. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 47]
 benefit for such  period and on such conditions as the 
employer and the woman may mutually agree.  
61. Continuance of payment of maternity benefit in certain cases. — Every woman entitle d to the 
payment of maternity benefit under this Chapter,  shall, notwithstanding the application of Chapter IV to 
the factory or other establishment  in which she is employed, continue to be so entitled until she becomes 
qualified to claim  maternity benefit  under section 32.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 48]
48 
 62. Notice of claim for maternity benefit and payment thereof. —(1) Any woman employed in an 
establishment and entitled to maternity benefit  under the provisions of this Chapter may give notice in 
writing in such form as may be  prescribed  by the Central Government, to her employer, stating that her 
maternity benefit  and any other amount to which she may be entitled under this Chapter may be paid to her 
or to such person as she may nominate in the notice and that she will not work in any  establishment during 
the period for which she receives maternity benefit.  
(2) In the case of a woman who is pregnant, such notice shall state the date from  which she will be 
absent from work, not being a date earlier than eight weeks from the date  of her exp ected delivery.  
(3) Any woman who has not given the notice when she was pregnant may give such  notice as soon as 
possible after her delivery.  
(4) On receipt of the notice, the employer shall permit such woman to absent herself  from the 
establishment during  the period for which she receives the maternity benefit.  
(5) The amount of maternity benefit for the period preceding the date of her expected  delivery shall be 
paid in advance by the employer to the woman on production of such  proof as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government that the woman is pregnant, and  the amount due for the subsequent period shall be 
paid by the employer to the woman  within forty -eight hours of production of such proof as may be 
prescribed by the Central  Government that the woman  has been delivered of a child.  
(6) The failure to give notice under this section shall not disentitle a woman to  maternity benefit or any 
other amount under this Chapter if she is otherwise entitled to  such benefit or amount and in any such case 
an Inspec tor-cum-Facilitator may either of his  own motion or on an application made to him by the woman, 
order the payment of such  benefit or amount within such period as may be spec
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 48]
to him by the woman, 
order the payment of such  benefit or amount within such period as may be specified in the order.  
63. Payment  of maternity benefit in case of death of a woman .—If a woman entitled to maternity 
benefit or any other amount under this Chapter,  dies before receiving such maternity benefit or amount, or 
where the employer is liable for  maternity benefit under the second proviso to sub -section ( 3) of section 60, 
the em ployer  shall pay such benefit or amount to the person nominated by the woman in the notice given  
under section 62 and in case there is no such nominee, to her legal representative.  
64. Payment of medical bonus. —Every woman entitled to maternity benefit und er this Chapter shall 
also be entitled  to receive from her employer a medical bonus of three thousand five hundred rupees or  such 
amount as may be notified by the Central Government, if no pre -natal confinement  and post -natal care is 
provided for by the em ployer free of charge.  
65. Leave for miscarriage etc. —(1) In case of miscarriage, or medical termination of pregnancy, a 
woman shall, on  production of such proof as may be prescribed by the Central Government, be entitled to  
leave with wages at the rate of  maternity benefit, for a period of six weeks immediately  following the day 
of her miscarriage or, as the case may be, her medical termination of  pregnancy.  
(2) In case of tubectomy operation, a woman shall, on production of such proof as  may be prescribed  
by the Central Government, be entitled to leave with wages at the rate  of maternity benefit for a period of 
two weeks immediately following the day of her  tubectomy operation.  
(3) A woman suffering from illness arising out of pregnancy, delivery, prematur e birth of child, 
miscarriage or medical termination of pregnancy shall, on production of  such proof as may be prescribed 
by the Central Government, be entitled, in addition to the  period of absence allowed to her under section 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 48]
Central Government, be entitled, in addition to the  period of absence allowed to her under section 
62, or, as the case may be, under  sub-section ( 1), to leave with wages at the rate of maternity benefit for a 
maximum period of  one month.  
66.Nursing breaks. —Every woman delivered of a child who returns to duty after such delivery shall, 
in addition to the interval for rest allowed to her, be allowed in the course of her daily work two  breaks of 
such duration as may be prescribed by the Central Government, for nursing the  child until the child attains 
the age of fifteen months.  
67. Creche facility. —(1) Every establishment to which th is Chapter applies, in which fifty employees 
or such number of employees as may be prescribed by the Central Government, are employed shall have 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 49]
49 
 the facility of crèche within such distance as may be prescribed by the Central  Government, either 
separately o r along with common facilities:  
Provided that the employer shall allow four visits a day to the crèche by the woman,  which shall also 
include the intervals of rest allowed to her:  
Provided further that an establishment may avail common crèche facility of the Central  Government, 
State Government, municipality or private entity or provided by non -Governmental organisation or by any 
other organisation or group of establishments who  may pool their resources for setting up of common crèche 
in the manner as they  may agree  for such purpose.  
(2) Every establishment to which this Chapter applies shall intimate in writing and  electronically to 
every woman at the time of her initial appointment in such establishment  regarding every benefit available 
under this Chapter.  
68. Dismissal for absence during pregnancy. —(1) When a woman absents herself from work in 
accordance with the provisions  of this Chapter, it shall be unlawful for her employer to discharge or dismiss 
her during or  on account of such absence or to give notice of discharge or dismissal on such a day that  the 
notice will expire during such absence, or to vary to her disadvantage any of the  conditions of her service:  
Provided that the discharge or dismissal of a woman at any time during her pregnancy,  if the woman 
but for such discharge or dismissal would have been entitled to maternity  benefit or medical bonus under 
this Chapter, shall not have the effect of depriving her of  the maternity benefit or medical bonus:  
Provided further that where the dismis sal is for any gross misconduct as may be  prescribed by the 
Central Government, the employer may, by order in writing,  communicated to the woman, deprive her of 
the maternity benefit or medical bonus, or  both.  
(2) Any woman deprived of maternity benefit or  medical bonus, or both, or discharged  or dismis
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 49]
.  
(2) Any woman deprived of maternity benefit or  medical bonus, or both, or discharged  or dismissed 
under sub -section ( 1), may, within sixty days from the date on which order of  such deprivation or discharge 
or dismissal is communicated to her, appeal to the competent  authority, and the decision of that  authority 
on such appeal, whether the woman should or  should not be deprived of maternity benefit or medical bonus 
or both, or discharged or  dismissed, shall be final.  
69. No deduction of wages in certain cases. —No deduction from the normal and usual daily wages 
of a woman entitled to  maternity benefit under the provisions of this Chapter shall be made by reason only 
of— 
(a) the nature of work assigned to her by virtue of the provisions contained in  section 59; or  
(b) breaks for nursing the child allow ed to her under the provisions of  section 66.  
70. Forfeiture of maternity benefit. —A woman who works for remuneration during the period she 
has been permitted  by an employer to absent herself for availing the maternity benefits provided under this  
Chapter shall not be entitled to receive maternity benefit for such period.  
71. Duties of employer. —An abstract of the provisions of this Chapter and the rules relating thereto 
in the  language or languages of the locality shall be exhibited in a conspicuous place by the  employer in 
every part of the establishment in which women are employed.  
72. Power of Inspector -cum-Facilitator to direct payments to be made. —(1) Any woman claiming 
that,— 
(a) maternity benefit or any other amount to which she is entitled under thi s Chapter and any person 
claiming that payment due under this Chapter has been  improperly withheld;  
(b) her employer has discharged or dismissed her during or on account of her  absence from work in 
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter,  
may make a  complaint to the Inspector -cum-Facilitator.  
(2) The Inspector -cum-Facilitator may, on receipt of a com
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 49]
int to the Inspector -cum-Facilitator.  
(2) The Inspector -cum-Facilitator may, on receipt of a complaint referred to in  sub-section ( 1), make 
an inquiry or cause an inquiry to be made and if satisfied that — 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 50]
50 
 (a) payment has been wrongfully withheld, may direct the payment to be made  in accordance with 
his order in writing;  
(b) she has been discharged or dismissed during or on account of her absence  from work in 
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter,  
may pass such orders as he deems just and proper according to the circumstances of the  case.  
(3) Any person aggrieved by the order of the Inspector -cum-Facilitator under  sub-section ( 2) may, 
within thirty days from the date on which such order is communicated  to such person, appeal to the authorit y 
prescribed by the appropriate Government.  
(4) The decision of the authority referred to in sub -section ( 3), where an appeal has  been preferred to it 
under that sub -section or of the Inspector -cum-Facilitator where no  such appeal has been preferred, shall  
be final.  
CHAPTER VII  
EMPLOYEE'S COMPENSATION  
73. Reports of fatal accident s and serious bodily injuries. —(1) Where, by any law for the time being 
in force, notice is required to be given to  any authority, by or on behalf of an employer, of any accident 
occurring in his premises  which results in death or serious bodily injury, the person required to give the 
notice shall,  within seven days of the death or serious bodily injury, send a report to the competent  authority 
giving the circumstances attending th e death or serious bodily injury:  
Provided that where the State Government has so specified, the person required to  give the notice may 
instead of sending such report to the competent authority send it to the  authority to whom he is required to 
give the no tice. 
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub -section, “serious bodily injury ” means  an injury which 
involves, or in all probability will involve the permanent loss of the use of,  or permanent injury to, any 
limb, or the permanent loss of or injury to th e sight or hearing,  or the fracture of any limb, or the enforced 
absence of the injured person from
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 50]
 sight or hearing,  or the fracture of any limb, or the enforced 
absence of the injured person from work for a  period exceeding twenty days.  
(2) The State Government may, by notification, extend the provisions of  sub-section ( 1) to any class of 
premises other than those coming within the scope of that  sub-section, and may, by such notification, 
specify the persons who shall send the report  to the competent authority.  
(3) Nothing in this section shall apply to establishments to which Chapter IV, relating  to Employees' 
State Insurance Corporation, applies.  
74. Employer’s liability for compensation. —(1) If personal injury is caused to an employee by 
accident or an occupational  disease listed in the Third Schedule arising out of and in the course of his 
employ ment, his  employer shall be liable to pay compensation in accordance with the provisions of this  
Chapter:  
Provided that the employer shall not be so liable — 
(a) in respect of such injury which does not result in the total or partial  disablement of the employee 
for a period exceeding three days; and  
(b) in respect of such injury, not resulting in death or permanent total disablement  caused by an 
accident which is directly attributable to — 
(i) the employee having been at the time thereof under the influen ce of  drink or drugs, or  
(ii) the wilful disobedience of the employee to an order expressly given,  or to a rule expressly 
framed, for the purpose of securing the safety of employees,  or 
(iii) the wilful removal or disregard by the employee of any safety guard  or other device which he 
knew to have been provided for the purpose of securing  the safety of employee.  
(2) An accident or an occupational disease referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be  deemed to arise out of 
and in the course of an employee's emplo yment notwithstanding  that he is at the time of the accident or at 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 50]
or at 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 51]
51 
 the time of contracting the occupational disease,  referred to in that sub -section, acting in contravention of 
the provisions of any law applicable  to him, or of any orders given by or on be half of his employer or that 
he is acting without  instructions from his employer, if — 
(a) such accident or contracting of such occupational disease would have been  deemed so to have 
arisen had the act not been done in contravention as aforesaid or  without instructions from his employer, 
as the case may be; and  
(b) the act is done for the purpose of, and in connection with, the employer's  trade or business.  
(3) If an employee employed in any employment specified in the Second Schedule  contracts any disease 
specified in the Third Schedule, being an occupational disease peculiar  to that employment whilst in the 
service of an employer in whose service he has been  employed for a continuous period of not less than six 
months, then, such disease shall be  deemed to  be an injury by accident within the meaning of this section 
and unless the  contrary is proved, the accident shall be deemed to have arisen out of and in the course of  
the employment.  
(4) An accident occurring to an employee while commuting from his reside nce to  the place of 
employment for duty or from the place of employment to his residence after  performing duty, shall be 
deemed to have arisen out of and in the course of employment if  nexus between the circumstances, time 
and place in which the accident o ccurred and his  employment is established.  
(5) The Central Government or the State Government, after giving, by notification,  not less than three 
months' notice of its intention so to do, may, by a like notification,  modify or add any description of 
employ ment to the employments specified in the Second  Schedule, and occupational diseases specified in 
the Third Schedule and shall specify in  the case of employments so modified or added, the diseases which 
shall be deemed f
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 51]
hall specify in  the case of employments so modified or added, the diseases which 
shall be deemed for the  purposes of this section to be  occupational diseases peculiar to those employments  
respectively, and thereupon the provisions of sub -section ( 2) shall apply, in the case of a  notification by the 
Central Government, within the territories to which this Code extends  or, in case of a noti fication by the 
State Government, within that State as if such diseases  had been declared by this Code to be occupational 
diseases peculiar to those employments.  
(6) Save as provided by sub -sections ( 2), (3) and ( 4), no compensation shall be payable  to an employee 
in respect of any accident or disease unless the accident or disease is  directly attributable to a specific injury 
by accident or disease arising out of and in the  course of his employment.  
(7) Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to confer an y right to compensation  on an employee in 
respect of any accident or disease if he has instituted in a civil court a suit  for damages in respect of the 
accident or disease against the employer or any other person;  and no suit for damages shall be maintaina ble 
by an employee in any Court of law in respect  of such accident or disease — 
(a) if he has instituted a claim to compensation in respect of the accident or  disease before a competent 
authority; or  
(b) if an agreement has been made between the employee and his employer  providing for the payment 
of compensation in respect of the accident or disease in  accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.  
75. Compensation in case of death of or injury in plantation. — If death or injury is caused to any 
worker or  a member of his family as a result of  the collapse of a house provided by the employer in a 
plantation, and the collapse is not  solely and directly attributable to a fault on the part of any occupant of 
the house or to a  natural calamity, the employer sha ll be liable to pay
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 51]
e part of any occupant of 
the house or to a  natural calamity, the employer sha ll be liable to pay compensation under section 76 and 
the Sixth Schedule, so far as may be applicable.  
Explanation. — For the purposes of this section, the expression “worker ” means a  person employed in 
a plantation for hire or reward, whether directly or through any agency,  to do any work, skilled, unskilled, 
manual or clerical, and includes a person employed on  contract for more than sixty days in a year, but does 
not include — 
(i) a medical officer employed in the plantation;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 52]
52 
 (ii) any person employed in t he plantation (including any member of the medical  staff) whose 
monthly wages exceed the amount as determined by the appropriate  Government, by notification, from 
time to time;  
(iii) any person employed in the plantation primarily in a managerial or  admini strative capacity, 
notwithstanding that his monthly wages do not exceed the  amount as determined by the appropriate 
Government, by notification, from time to  time;  
(iv) any person temporarily employed in the plantation in any work relating to  the construct ion, 
development or maintenance of buildings, roads, bridges, drains or  canals.  
76. Amount of compensation. —(1) Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, the amount of 
compensation shall  be,— 
(a) where death results from the injury, an amount equal to fifty per cent. of the  monthly wages of 
the deceased employee multiplied by the relevant factor or an  amount as may be notified by the Central 
Government from time to time, whichever is  more;  
(b) where permanent total disablement results from the injury, a n amount equal  to sixty per cent. of 
the monthly wages of the injured employee multiplied by the  relevant factor or an amount as may be 
notified by the Central Government from time  to time, whichever is more:  
Provided that the Central Government may, by no tification, from time to time, enhance  the amount of 
compensation specified in clauses ( a) and ( b). 
Explanation. —For the purposes of clauses ( a) and ( b), “relevant factor ”, in relation  to an employee 
means the factor specified in column (3) of the Sixth Schedule relating to  factors against the corresponding 
entry in column (2) thereof, specifying the number of  years which are the same as the completed years of 
the age of the employee on his last  birthday immediately preceding the date on which the compens ation fell 
due; 
(c) where permanent partial disablement results from the injury, — 
(i) in the case of an injury specif
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 52]
 where permanent partial disablement results from the injury, — 
(i) in the case of an injury specified in Part II of the Fourth Schedule, such  percentage of the 
compensation which would have been payable in the case of  permanent total dis ablement as is 
specified therein as being the percentage of  the loss of earning capacity caused by that injury; and  
(ii) in the case of an injury not specified in the Fourth Schedule, such  percentage of the 
compensation payable in the case of permanent total disablement as is proportionate to the loss of 
earning capacity (as assessed by  the medical practitioner) permanently caused by the injury.  
Explanation 1.— For the purposes of this clause, where more injuries than one are  caused by the same 
accident,  the amount of compensation payable under this head shall be  aggregated but not so in any case as 
to exceed the amount which would have been payable  if permanent total disablement had resulted from the 
injuries.  
Explanation 2.—In assessing the loss of earn ing capacity under sub -clause ( ii), the  medical practitioner 
shall have due regard to the percentage of loss of earning capacity in  relation to different injuries specified 
in the Fourth Schedule;  
(d) where temporary disablement, whether total or partial, results from the  injury, a half -monthly 
payment of the sum equivalent to twenty -five per cent. of  monthly wages of the employee, to be paid 
in accordance with the provisions of  sub-section ( 4). 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), whi le fixing the amount  of compensation 
payable to an employee in respect of an accident which occurred outside  India, the competent authority 
shall take into account the amount of compensation, if any,  awarded to such employee in accordance with 
the law of t he country in which the accident  occurred and shall reduce the amount fixed by him by the 
amount of compensation awarded  to the employee in accordance with the law of that co
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 52]
by him by the 
amount of compensation awarded  to the employee in accordance with the law of that country.  
(3) The Central Government may, by notification, specify for the purposes o f sub-section ( 1), such 
monthly wages in relation to an employee as it may consider necessary.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 53]
53 
 (4) The half -monthly payment referred to in clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) shall be  payable on the 
sixteenth day — 
(i) from the date of disablement where such disablement lasts for a period of  twenty -eight days or 
more; or  
(ii) after the expiry of a waiting period of three days from the date of disablement,  where such 
disablement lasts for a period of less than twenty -eight days; and thereafter  half-monthly duri ng the 
disablement or during a period of five years, whichever is  shorter:  
Provided that — 
(a) there shall be deducted from any lump sum or half -monthly payments  to which the employee is 
entitled, the amount of any payment or allowance  which the employee ha s received from the employer 
by way of compensation  during the period of disablement prior to the receipt of such lump sum or of 
the first half -monthly payment, as the case may be, and such payment or allowance  which the employee 
has received from the empl oyer towards his medical  treatment shall not be deemed to be a payment or 
allowance received by him by  way of compensation;  
(b) no half -monthly payment shall in any case exceed the amount, if any,  by which half the amount 
of the monthly wages of the employ ee before the  accident exceeds half the amount of such wages which 
he is earning after the  accident.  
(5) The employee shall be reimbursed, the actual medical expenditure incurred by him  for treatment of 
injuries caused during the course of employment, by h is employer.  
(6) On the ceasing of the disablement before the date on which any half -monthly  payment falls due, 
there shall be payable in respect of that half -month a sum proportionate  to the duration of the disablement 
in that half -month.  
(7) If the injur y of the employee results in his death, the employer shall, in addition to  the compensation 
under sub -section ( 1), deposit with the competent authority a sum of not  less than fifteen thousand rupees 
or such amount as may be prescri
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 53]
ompetent authority a sum of not  less than fifteen thousand rupees 
or such amount as may be prescribed by the State  Government, for payment of the same to the eldest 
surviving dependant of the employee  towards the expenditure of the funeral of such employee or where the 
employee did not  have a dependant or was not living with his dependant at the time of his death, to t he 
person who actually incurred such expenditure:  
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification from time to time, enhance  the amount 
specified in this sub -section.  
77. Compensation to be paid when due and damages for default. —(1) Compensation under section 
76 shall be paid as soon as it falls due.  
(2) In cases where the employer does not accept the liability for compensation to the  extent claimed, he 
shall be bound to make provisional payment based on the extent of  liability which he accepts, and, such 
payment shall be deposited with the competent authority  or made to the employee, as the case may be, 
without prejudice to the right of the employee  to make any further claim.  
(3) Where any employer is in default in paying the compensation due und er this  Chapter within one 
month from the date it fell due, the competent authority shall, — 
(a) direct that the employer shall, in addition to the amount of the arrears, pay  interest at such rate as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government, on the amount  due; and  
(b) if in his opinion, there is no justification for the delay, direct that the employer  shall, in addition 
to the amount of the arrears and interest thereon, pay a further sum  not exceeding fifty per cent. of such 
amount of arrears by way of damages:  
Provided that an order for the payment of damages shall not be passed under  clause ( b) without giving 
a reasonable opportunity to the employer to show cause as  to why it should not be passed.  
(4) The interest and the damages payable under sub -section ( 3) shall be paid to the  employee or h
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 53]
(4) The interest and the damages payable under sub -section ( 3) shall be paid to the  employee or his 
dependant, as the case may be.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 54]
54 
 78. Method of calculating monthly wages for purposes of compensation. — For the purposes of this 
Chapter, the expression “monthly wages ” means the  amount of wages deemed to be payable for a month's 
service (whether the wages are  payable by the month or by whatever other period or at piece rates), and 
calculated as  follows, namely: — 
(a) where the employee has, during a continuous period of not less than twelve  months immediately 
preceding the accident, been in the service of the employer who  is liable to pay compensation, the 
monthly wages of the employee shall be one-twelfth  of the total wages which have fallen due for 
payment to him by the employer  in the last twelve months of t hat period;  
(b) where the whole of the continuous period of service immediately preceding  the accident during 
which the employee was in the service of the employer who is  liable to pay the compensation was less 
than one month, the monthly wages of the  empl oyee shall be the average monthly amount which, during 
the twelve months  immediately preceding the accident, was being earned by an employee employed on  
the same work by the same employer, or, if there was no employee so employed, by an  employee 
employed o n similar work in the same locality;  
(c) in other cases including cases in which it is not possible for want of necessary  information to 
calculate the monthly wages under clause ( b), the monthly wages shall  be thirty times the total wages 
earned in respect  of the last continuous period of  service immediately preceding the accident from the 
employer who is liable to pay  compensation, divided by the number of days comprising such period.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, “a period of service ” shall be deemed  to be continuous 
which has not been interrupted by a period of absence from work exceeding  fourteen days.  
79. Review. —(1) Any half -monthly payment payable under this Chapter, either under an  agreement 
between the p
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 54]
—(1) Any half -monthly payment payable under this Chapter, either under an  agreement 
between the parties or under the order  of a competent authority, may be reviewed  by the competent 
authority, on the application either of the employer or of the employee  accompanied by the certificate of a 
medical practitioner that there has been a change in the  condition of the employee or, s ubject to such 
conditions as may be prescribed by the State  Government, on application made without such certificate.  
(2) Any half -monthly payment may, on review under this section, subject to the  provisions of this 
Chapter, be continued, increased, decrea sed or ended, or if the accident  is found to have resulted in 
permanent disablement, be converted to the lump sum to which  the employee is entitled less any amount 
which he has already received by way of half -monthly  payments.  
80. Commutation of half -monthly payments. —Any right to receive half -monthly payments may, by 
agreement between the  parties or, if the parties cannot agree and the payments have been continued for not 
less than six months, on the application of either party to  the competent authority be redeemed  by the 
payment of a lump sum of such amount as may be agreed to by the parties or  determined by the competent 
authority, as the case may be.  
81. Distribution of compensation. —(1) No payment of compensation in respect of  an employee 
whose injury has  resulted in death, and no payment of a lump sum as compensation to a woman or a person  
under a legal disability, shall be made otherwise than by deposit with the competent authority,  and no such 
payment made directly by an emp loyer shall be deemed to be a payment of  compensation:  
Provided that, in the case of a deceased employee, an employer may make to any  dependant, advances 
on account of compensation of an amount equal to three months'  wages of such employee and so much of 
such amount as does not exceed the compensation  payable t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 54]
'  wages of such employee and so much of 
such amount as does not exceed the compensation  payable to that dependant shall be deducted by the 
competent authority from such  compensation and repaid to the employer.  
(2) Any other sum amounting to not less than five thousand rupees which is payable  as compensation 
may be deposited with the competent authority on behalf of the person  entitled thereto.  
(3) The receipt of the competent authority shall be a sufficient discharge in respect  of any compensation 
deposited with him.  
(4) (a) On the deposit of any money under sub -section ( 1) as compensation in respect  of a deceased 
employee, the competent authority shall, if he thinks necessary, cause notice  to be published or to be served 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 55]
55 
 on each dependant in such manner as he thinks fit, calling  upon the dependant s to appear before him on 
such date as he may fix for determining the  distribution of the compensation.  
(b) If the competent authority is satisfied after any inquiry which he may deem  necessary, that no 
dependant exists, he shall repay the balance of the m oney to the employer  by whom it was paid.  
(c) The competent authority shall, on an application by the employer, furnish a statement  showing in 
detail all disbursements made.  
(5) The compensation deposited in respect of a deceased employee shall, subject to  any deduction made 
under sub -section ( 1), be apportioned by order by the competent  authority among the dependants of the 
deceased employee or any of them in such proportion  as the competent authority thinks fit, or may, in the 
discretion of the competent authority,  be allotted to any one dependant:  
Provided that the competent authority shall not make any order under this  sub-section without hearing 
the dependants and shall record reasons in the order for the  apportionment of such compensation among 
dependa nts or any of them, as the case may  be. 
(6) Where any compensation deposited with the competent authority is payable to  any person, other 
than a woman or a person under legal disability, the competent authority  may pay the compensation to the 
person entitl ed thereto.  
(7) Where any lump sum deposited with the competent authority is payable to a  woman or a person 
under a legal disability, such sum may be invested, applied or otherwise  dealt with for the benefit of the 
woman, or of such person during his disability, in such  manner as the competent authority may direct; and 
where a half -monthly payment is payable  to any person under a legal disability, the competent authority 
may, of his own motion or on  an application made to him in this behalf, order that  the payment be made 
during the  disability to any dependant of the employee o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 55]
s behalf, order that  the payment be made 
during the  disability to any dependant of the employee or to any other person, whom the competent  authority 
thinks fit to provide for the welfare of the employee.  
(8) Where, on application made to him in this behalf or otherwise, the c ompetent  authority is satisfied 
that, on account of neglect of children on the part of a parent or on  account of the variation of the 
circumstances of any dependant or for any other sufficient  cause, an order of the competent authority as to 
the distributi on of any sum paid as  compensation or as to the manner in which any sum payable to any such 
dependant is to be  invested, applied or otherwise dealt with, ought to be varied, the competent authority 
may make such orders for the variation of the former order  as he thinks just in the circumstances  of the 
case:  
Provided that no such order prejudicial to any person shall be made unless such  person has been given 
an opportunity of showing cause as to why the order should not be  made, or shall be made in any case in 
which it would involve the repayment by a dependant  of any sum already paid to him.  
(9) Where the competent authority varies any order under sub -section ( 8) by reason  of the fact that 
payment of compensation to any person has been obtained by fraud,  impersonation or other improper 
means, any amount so paid to or on behalf of such person  may be recovered in the manner as specified in 
sub-section ( 10). 
(10) The competent authority may recover as an arrear of land revenue any amount  referred to in  
sub-section (9), and for such purpose the competent authority shall be deemed  to be a public officer within 
the meaning of section 5 of the Revenue Recovery Act, 1890  (1 of 1890) . 
82. Notice and claim. —(1) No claim for compensation shall be entertained by a compet ent authority  
unless notice of the accident has been given in the manner hereinafter provided as soon as  practicable after 
the happeni
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 55]
ccident has been given in the manner hereinafter provided as soon as  practicable after 
the happening thereof and unless the claim is preferred before him within  two years of the occurrence of 
the accident or, in case of death, within two years from the  date of death:  
Provided that where the accident is the contracting of a disease in respect of which  the provisions of 
sub-section ( 3) of section 74 are applicable, the accident shall be deemed  to have occurred on the first of 
the days during which the employee was continuously  absent from work in consequence of the disablement 
caused by the disease:  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 56]
56 
 Provided further that in case of partial disablement due to the contracting of any  such disease and which 
does not force the em ployee to absent himself from work, the  period of two years shall be counted from the 
day the employee gives notice of the  disablement to his employer:  
Provided also that if an employee who, having been employed in an employment for  a continuous 
period spe cified under sub -section ( 3) of section 74 in respect of that  employment, ceases to be so employed 
and develops symptoms of an occupational disease peculiar to that employment within two years of the 
cessation of employment, the accident  shall be deemed to  have occurred on the day on which the symptoms 
were first detected.  
(2) The want of or any defect or irregularity, in a notice given under sub -section ( 1), shall not be a bar 
to the entertainment of a claim — 
(a) if the claim is preferred in respect of the  death of an employee resulting from  an accident which 
occurred on the premises of the employer, or at any place where the  employee at the time of the accident 
was working under the control of the employer or  of any person employed by him, and the employee  
died on such premises or at such  place, or on any premises belonging to the employer, or died without 
having left the  vicinity of the premises or place where the accident occurred, or  
(b) if the employer or any one of several employers or any person respo nsible  to the employer for the 
management of any branch of the trade or business in which  the injured employee was employed had 
knowledge of the accident from any other  source at or about the time when it occurred:  
Provided that the competent authority may  entertain and decide any claim to  compensation in any case 
notwithstanding that the notice has not been given, or the  claim has not been preferred in due time as 
provided under sub -section ( 1), if he is  satisfied that the failure so to give the notice or prefer the claim, as 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 56]
b -section ( 1), if he is  satisfied that the failure so to give the notice or prefer the claim, as 
the case may be,  was due to sufficient cause.  
(3) Every such notice shall give the name and address of the person injured and shall  state the cause of 
the injury and the date on which the accident happened, and shall be  served on the e mployer or upon any 
one of several employers, or upon any person  responsible to the employer for the management of any branch 
of the trade or business in  which the injured employee was employed.  
(4) The appropriate Government may require that any class of employers as may be  prescribed by that 
Government shall maintain, at their premises at which employees are  employed, a notice -book, in such 
form as may be prescribed by that Government, which  shall be readily accessible at all reasonable times to 
any injur ed employee employed on  the premises and to any person acting bona fide on his behalf.  
(5) A notice under this section may be served by delivering it at, or sending it by  registered post 
addressed to, the residence or any office or place of business of the  person  on whom it is to be served, or 
where possible, electronically or, where a notice -book is  maintained, by entry in the notice -book.  
83. Special provisions relating to accidents occurring outside Indian territory. —(1) The provisions 
of this section shall, subject to the modifications specified in  this section, apply in case of employees who 
are— 
(a) masters of ships or seamen; or  
(b) captain and other members of crew of aircraft;  
(c) persons recruited by companies registered in India and working as s uch abroad;  
(d) persons sent for work abroad along with motor vehicles registered under  the Motor Vehicles Act, 
1988  (59 of 1988)  as drivers, helpers, mechanics, cleaners or other  employees.  
(2) The notice of the accident and the claim for compensation by a person injured may  be served on the 
following persons, as if they were th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 56]
im for compensation by a person injured may  be served on the 
following persons, as if they were the employer — 
(a) in case of accident where the person injured is a seamen, but not the master  of the ship, on the 
master of the ship;  
(b) in case of accident where the person injured  is a member of crew of an  aircraft, but not the captain 
of the aircraft, on the captain of the aircraft;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 57]
57 
 (c) in case of persons recruited by companies registered in India and working as  such abroad, on the 
local agent of the company;  
(d) in case of persons sent for work abroad along with motor vehicles as drivers,  helpers, mechanics, 
cleaners or other employees, on the local agent of the owner of  the motor vehicle, in the country of the 
accident:  
Provided that where the accident happened and the disa blement commenced  on board, the ship or 
aircraft, as the case may be, then, it shall not be necessary for  any seaman or members of the crew of aircraft 
to give any notice of the accident.  
(3) The claim of compensation shall be made — 
(a) in the case of the death of an employee referred to in sub -section ( 1), one  year after the news of 
the death has been received by the claimant;  
(b) in the case where the ship or the aircraft as the case may be, has been or is  deemed to have been 
lost with all hands, eighteen  months of the date on which the  ship or the aircraft was, or is deemed to 
have been, so lost:  
Provided that the competent authority may entertain any claim to compensation  in any case 
notwithstanding that the claim has not been preferred in due time as  provided in this sub -section, if he is 
satisfied that the failure so to prefer the claim was  due to sufficient cause.  
(4) Where an injured employee referred to in sub -section ( 1) is discharged or left  behind in any part of 
India or in any foreign country, th en, any depositions taken by any  Judge or Magistrate in that part or by 
any Consular Officer in the foreign country and  transmitted by the person by whom they are taken to the 
Central Government or any  State Government shall, in any proceedings for enforcing the claim, be 
admissible in  evidence — 
(a) if the deposition is authenticated by the signature of the Judge, Magistrate  or Consular Officer 
before whom it is made;  
(b) if the defendant or the person accused, as the case may be, had an opportunity  by hims
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 57]
 made;  
(b) if the defendant or the person accused, as the case may be, had an opportunity  by himself or his 
agent to cross -examine the witness; and  
(c) if the deposition was made in the course of a criminal proceeding, on proof  that the deposition 
was made in the presence of the person accused,   
and it shall not be necessary in any case to prov e the signature or official character of the  person appearing 
to have signed any such deposition and a certificate by such person that  the defendant or the person accused 
had an opportunity of cross -examining the witness  and that the deposition if made in a criminal proceeding 
was made in the presence of the  person accused shall, unless the contrary is proved, be sufficient evidence 
that he had that  opportunity and that it was so made.  
(5) No half -monthly payment shall be payable in respect of the period du ring which  the owner of the 
ship is, under any law for the time being in force relating to merchant  shipping, liable to defray the expenses 
of maintenance of the injured master or seaman.  
(6) Failure to give a notice or make a claim or commence proceedings  within the time  required by this 
section shall not be a bar to the maintenance of proceedings under this  Chapter in respect of any personal 
injury, if such proceedings under this Chapter are  commenced within one month from the date on which 
the certificat e of the State to that  effect Government was furnished to the person commencing the 
proceedings.  
84. Medical examination. —(1) Where an employee has given notice of an accident, he, shall, if the 
employer,  before the expiry of three days from the time at which service of the notice has been  effected, 
offers to have him examined free of charge by a medical practitioner, submit  himself for such examination, 
and any employee who is in receipt of a half -monthly payment under this Chapter shall, if so required,  
submit himself for such examination from time to  time:  
Provide
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 57]
s Chapter shall, if so required,  
submit himself for such examination from time to  time:  
Provided that an employee shall not be required to submit himself for examination by  a medical 
practitioner at more than such frequent interval as may be prescribed by the State  Government.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 58]
58 
 (2) If an employee, on being required to do so by the employer under sub -section ( 1) or by the 
competent authority at any time, refuses to submit himself for examination by a  medical practitioner or in 
any way obstructs the same, his right to compensation shall be  suspended during the continuance of such 
refusal or obstruction unless in the case of  refusal, he was prevented by any sufficient cause from so 
submitting himself.  
(3) If an employee, before the expiry of the period within which he is liable under  sub-section (1) to be 
required to submit himself for medical examination, voluntarily leaves  the vicinity of the place in which he 
was employed without having been so examined, his  right to compensation shall be suspended until he 
returns and offers himself for such examination:  
Provided that where such employee proves before the medical practitioner that he  could not so submit 
himself for medical examination due to the circumstances beyond his  control and he was also handicapped 
to communicate such information i n writing, the  medical practitioner may after recording such reasons in 
writing, condone the delay and his  right to compensation shall be revived as if no such suspension was 
made.  
(4) Where an employee, whose right to compensation has been suspended under  sub-section ( 2) or sub -
section ( 3), dies without having submitted himself for medical  examination as required by either of those 
sub-sections, the competent authority may, if he  thinks fit, direct the payment of compensation to the 
dependants of the decea sed employee.  
(5) Where under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3), a right to compensation is  suspended, no 
compensation shall be payable in respect of the period of suspension, and,  if the period of suspension 
commences before the expiry of the waiting per iod referred to in  clause ( ii) of sub -section ( 4) of section 
76, the waiting period shall be increased by the  period during which the suspe
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 58]
ion ( 4) of section 
76, the waiting period shall be increased by the  period during which the suspension continues.  
(6) Where an injured employee has refused to be attended by a medical practitioner  whose services 
have been offered to him by the employer free of charge or having accepted  such offer has deliberately 
disregarded the instructions of such medical practitioner, then,  if it is proved that the employee has not 
thereafter been regularly attended by a medical  practitioner or having been so attended has deliberately 
failed to follow his instructions  and that such refusal, disregard or failure was unreasonable in the 
circumstances of the  case and that the injury has been aggravated thereby, the injury and resulti ng 
disablement  shall be deemed to be of the same nature and duration as they might reasonably have been  
expected to be if the employee had been regularly attended by a medical practitioner, whose  instructions he 
had followed, and compensation, if any, shal l be payable accordingly.  
85. Contracting .—(1) Where any employer in the course of or for the purposes of his trade or  business 
contracts with a contractor for the execution by or under the contractor of the  whole or any part of any work 
which is ordinarily part of the trade or business of the  employer, the employer shall be liable to pay to any 
employee employed in the execution of  the work any compensation, which he would have been liable to 
pay if that employee had  been immediately employed by h im; and that the amount of compensation shall 
be calculated  with reference to the wages of the employee under the employer by whom he is immediately  
employed.  
(2) Where the employer is liable to pay compensation under this section, he shall be  entitled to be 
indemnified by the contractor, or any other person from whom the employee  could have recovered the 
compensation and where a contractor who is himself an employer  is liable to pay compensation or to 
indemnify
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 58]
on and where a contractor who is himself an employer  is liable to pay compensation or to 
indemnify an employer under this section, he shall be  entitled to be indemnified by any person standing to 
him in relation of a contractor from whom the employee could have recovered the compensation, and all 
questions as to the  right to and the amount of any such indemnity shall, in default of agreement, be s ettled 
by the competent authority.  
(3) Nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing an employee from  recovering compensation 
referred to in sub -section ( 2) from the contractor instead of the  employer.  
(4) The provisions of this section shall not apply in any case where the accident  occurred elsewhere 
than on, in or about the premises on which the employer has undertaken  or usually undertakes, as the case 
may be, to execute the work or which are otherwise  under his control or management.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 59]
59 
 86. Remedies of employer against stranger. —Where an employee has recovered compensation in 
respect of any injury caused  under circumstances creating a legal liability of some person other than the 
person by  whom the compensation was paid to pay damages in respec t thereof, the person by whom  the 
compensation was paid and any person who has been called on to pay an indemnity  under section 85 shall 
be entitled to be indemnified by the person so liable to pay damages  as aforesaid.  
87. Insolvency of employ er.—(1) Where any employer has entered into a contract with any insurers 
in respect  of any liability under this Chapter to any employee, then, in the event of the employer  becoming 
insolvent or making a composition or scheme of arrangement with his creditors  or, if the employer is a 
company, in the event of the company having commenced to be  wound up, the rights of the employer 
against the insurers as respects that liability shall,  notwithstanding anything in any law for the time being 
in force relating to insolven cy or  the winding up of companies, be transferred to and vest in the employee, 
and upon any  such transfer the insurers shall have the same rights and remedies and be subject to the  same 
liabilities as if they were the employer, so, however, that the insure rs shall not be  under any greater liability 
to the employee than they would have been under the employer.  
(2) If the liability of the insurers to the employee is less than the liability of the  employer to the 
employee, the burden of proof shall lie on the employee for the balance in  the insolvency proceedings or 
liquidation.  
(3) Where in any case such as is referred to in sub -section ( 1), the contract of the  employer with the 
insurers is void or voidable by reason of non -compliance on the part of  the employ er with any terms or 
conditions of the contract (other than a stipulation for the  payment of premium), the provisions of that sub -
section shall apply
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 59]
er than a stipulation for the  payment of premium), the provisions of that sub -
section shall apply as if the contract were  not void or voidable, and the insurers shall be entitled to prove in 
the insolvenc y proceedings  or liquidation for the amount paid to the employee:  
Provided that the provisions of this sub -section shall not apply in any case in which  the employee fails 
to give notice to the insurers of the happening of the accident and of any  resulting disablement as soon as 
practicable after he becomes aware of the institution of  the insolvency or liquidation proceedings.  
(4) There shall be deemed to be included among the debts which under the Insolvency  and Bankruptcy 
Code, 2016  (31 of 2016)  or under the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013  (18 of 2013)  are in the  
distribution of the assets of an insolvent or in the distribution of the assets of a company  being wound up 
to be paid in priority to all other debts, the amount due in respect of any compensation, the liability accrued 
before the date of the order of adjudication of the  insolvent or the date of the commencement of the winding 
up, as the case may be, and the  provisions of that Code and Act shall have effect accordingly.  
(5) Where th e compensation is a half -monthly payment, the amount due in respect  thereof shall, for the 
purposes of this section, be taken to be the amount of the lump sum  for which the half -monthly payment 
could, if redeemable, be redeemed if applications  were made fo r that purpose under section 80, and a 
certificate of the competent authority  as to the amount of such sum shall be conclusive proof thereof.  
(6) The provisions of sub -section ( 4) shall apply in the case of any amount for which  an insurer is 
entitled to pr ove under sub -section ( 3), but otherwise those provisions shall  not apply where the insolvent 
or the company being wound up has entered into such a  contract with insurers as is referred to in  
sub-section ( 1). 
(7
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 59]
ound up has entered into such a  contract with insurers as is referred to in  
sub-section ( 1). 
(7) The provisions of this section shall not apply where a company is wound up  voluntarily merely for 
the purposes of reconstruction or of amalgamation with another  company.  
88. Power to required from  employers statements regarding fatal accidents. —(1) Where a 
competent authority receives information  from any source that an  employee has died as a result of an 
accident arising out of and in the course of his employment,  he may send by registered post or where 
possible, electronically a notice to the employee's  employer requiring him to submit, within t hirty days of 
the service of the notice, a statement,  in such form as may be prescribed by the State Government, giving 
the circumstances  attending the death of the employee, and indicating whether, in the opinion of the 
employer,  he is or is not liable to  deposit compensation on account of the death and a copy of such  notice 
shall also be sent by the competent authority in the same manner to the dependants  of such employee 
ascertained by the competent authority.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 60]
60 
 (2) If the employer is of the opinion that h e is liable to deposit compensation, he shall  make the deposit 
within thirty days of the service of the notice.  
(3) If the employer is of the opinion that he is not liable to deposit compensation, he  shall in his 
statement indicate the grounds on which he disclaims liability.  
(4) Where the employer has so disclaimed liability, the competent authority, after  such inquiry as he 
may think fit, may inform any of the dependants of the deceased employee,  that it is open to the dependants 
to prefer a claim for com pensation, and may give them such  other further information as he may think fit.  
(5) Where in the opinion of the competent authority, a dependant of the deceased  employee is not in a 
position to engage an advocate to file a claim for compensation, the  comp etent authority may provide an 
advocate to such dependant, from the panel of  advocates maintained by the State Government.  
89. Registration of agreements. — (1) Where the amount of any lump sum payable as compensation 
has been settled  by agreement, whether by way of redemption of a half -monthly payment or otherwise, or  
where any compensation has been so settled as being payable to a woman, or a person  under a legal 
disability, a memorandum thereof shall be sent by the employer to the competent  authority, who  shall, on 
being satisfied as to its genuineness, record the memorandum in a  register, electronically or otherwise, in 
such manner as may be prescribed by the appropriate  Government:  
Provided that — 
(a) no such memorandum shall be recorded before seven days  after communication by the competent 
authority of notice to the parties concerned;  
(b) the competent authority may at any time rectify the register;  
(c) where it appears to the competent authority that an agreement as to the  payment of a lump sum 
whether by way of redemption of a half -monthly payment or  otherwise, or an agreement as to the 
amount of compensa
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 60]
f redemption of a half -monthly payment or  otherwise, or an agreement as to the 
amount of compensation payable, to a woman or  a person under a legal disability ought not to be 
registered by reason of the inadequacy  of the sum or amount, or by reason  of the agreement having 
been obtained by fraud  or undue influence or other improper means, the competent authority may refuse 
to record the memorandum of the agreement and may make such order including an  order as to any 
sum already paid under the agreeme nt, as the competent authority  thinks just in the circumstances.  
(2) An agreement for the payment of compensation which has been registered under  sub-section ( 1) 
shall be enforceable under this Code notwithstanding anything contained  in the Indian Contract  Act, 1872  
(9 of 1872) , or in any other law for the time being in force.  
(3) Where a memorandum of any agreement, the registration of which is required  under this section, is 
not sent to the competent authority as required by this section, the  employer shall be liable to pay the full 
amount of compensation which he is liable to pay  under the provisions of this Chapter, and notwithstanding 
anything contained in the proviso  to sub -section ( 1) of section 76, shall not, unless the competent authority 
otherwi se directs,  be entitled to deduct more than half of any amount paid to the employee by way of  
compensation whether under the agreement or otherwise.  
90. Reference to competent authority. —(1) If any question arises in any proceedings under this 
Chapter as t o the liability  of any person to pay compensation (including any question as to whether a person 
injured  is or is not an employee) or as to the amount or duration of compensation (including any  question 
as to the nature or extent of disablement), the quest ion shall, in default of agreement,  be settled by a 
competent authority.  
(2) No Civil Court shall have jurisdiction to settle, decide or deal with any question  whi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 60]
ority.  
(2) No Civil Court shall have jurisdiction to settle, decide or deal with any question  which is by or 
under this Chapter required to be settled, decided or dealt with by a competent  authority or to enforce any 
liability incurred under this Chapter.  
91. Appointment of competent authority. —(1) The State Government may, by notification, appoint 
any person who is or has  been a member of a State Judicial Service for a period of not less than five years 
or is or  has been for not less than five years an advocate or is or has been a Gazetted Officer for not  less 
than five years having educational qualifications and experience in personnel  management, human resource 
development, industrial re lations and legal affairs or such  other experience and qualifications as may be 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 61]
61 
 prescribed by the appropriate Government  to be a competent authority for the purposes of this Chapter and 
for such area as may be  specified in the notification.  
(2) Where more than one competent authority has been appointed for any area, the  State Government 
may, by general or special order, regulate the distribution of business  amongst them.  
(3) Any competent authority may, for the purpose of deciding any matter referred to  him for decision 
under this Chapter, choose one or more persons possessing special  knowledge of any matter relevant to the 
matter under inquiry to assist him in holding the  inquiry.  
92. Venue of proceedings and transfer. — (1) Where any matter under this Chapter is to be done by 
or before a competent  authority, the same shall, subject to the provisions of this Chapter and in the manner  
prescribed in this behalf by the State Government, be done by or before the competent  authority for the area 
in which — 
(a) the accident took place which resulted in the injury; or  
(b) the employee or in case of his death, the dependant claiming the  compensation ordinarily resides; 
or 
(c) the employer has his registered office:  
Provided that no matter shall be processed before  or by a competent authority, other  than the competent 
authority having jurisdiction over the area in which the accident took  place, without his giving notice 
electronically or otherwise in the manner prescribed by the  Central Government to the competent a uthority 
having jurisdiction over the area and the  State Government concerned:  
Provided further that, where the employee, being the master of a ship or a seaman or  the captain or a 
member of the crew of an aircraft or an employee in a motor vehicle or a  company, meets with the accident 
outside India, any such matter may be done by or before a competent authority for the area in which the 
owner or agent of the ship, aircraft or motor  vehicle resides or carries on business or the registered 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 61]
r or agent of the ship, aircraft or motor  vehicle resides or carries on business or the registered office 
of the comp any is situate, as  the case may be.  
(2) If a competent authority, other than the competent authority with whom any  money has been 
deposited under section 81, proceeds with a matter under this Chapter, the  former may for the proper 
disposal of the matter call for transfer of any records or moneys  remaining with the latter and on receipt of 
such a request, he shall comply with the same.  
(3) If a competent authority is satisfied that any matter arising out of any proceedings  pending before 
him can be more co nveniently dealt with by any other competent authority,  whether in the same State or 
not, he may, subject to rules made under this Code relating to  this Chapter, order such matter to be 
transferred to such other competent authority either  for report or for  disposal, and, if he does so, shall 
forthwith transmit to such other competent  authority all documents relevant for the decision of such matter 
and, where the matter is  transferred for disposal, shall also transmit in the manner as may be prescribed by 
the Central Government any money remaining in his hands or invested by him for the benefit of  any party 
to the proceedings:  
Provided that the competent authority shall not, where any party to the proceedings  has appeared before 
him, make any order of transfe r relating to the distribution among  dependants of a lump sum without giving 
such party an opportunity of being heard.  
(4) The competent authority to whom any matter is so transferred shall, subject to  rules made under this 
Code relating to this Chapter, i nquire therein to and, if the matter was  transferred for report, return his report 
thereon or, if the matter was transferred for disposal,  continue the proceedings as if they had originally 
commenced before him.  
(5) On receipt of a report from a competent authority to whom any matter has been  transf
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 61]
ore him.  
(5) On receipt of a report from a competent authority to whom any matter has been  transferred for report 
under sub -section ( 3), the competent authority by whom it was referred  shall decide the matter referred to 
in conformity with such report.  
(6) The State Government may transfer any matter from an y competent authority  appointed by it to any 
other competent authority appointed by it.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 62]
62 
 93. Form of application. —(1) Where an accident occurs in respect of which liability to pay 
compensation  under this Chapter arises, a claim for such compensation may, subject to the provisions of  
this Chapter, be made before the competent authority.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), no application for the settlement of  any matter by 
competent authority, other than an application by a dependant or joint  application by dependants for 
compensation, shall be made unless and until some question  has arisen between the parties in connection 
therewith which they have been unable to  settle by agreement.  
(3) An application to a competent authority for claim under s ub-section ( 1) or settlement  under  
sub-section ( 2) may be made electronically or otherwise in such form and in such  manner accompanied by 
such fee, if any, as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(4) The time -limit for the disposal of applications  under this section and the costs  incidental to the 
proceedings under this section to be imposed by the competent authority  shall be such as may be prescribed 
by the State Government.  
94. Power of competent authority to require further deposit in cases of fatal accident. —(1) Where 
any sum has been deposited by an employer as compensation payable  in respect of an employee whose 
injury has resulted in death, and in the opinion of the  compete nt authority such sum is insufficient, the 
competent authority may, by notice in  writing stating his reasons, call upon the employer to show cause 
why he should not make  a further deposit within such time as may be stated in the notice.  
(2) If the employer  fails to show cause to the satisfaction of the competent authority,  the competent 
authority may make an award determining the total amount payable, and  requiring the employer to deposit 
the deficiency.  
95. Powers and procedure of competent authority. —The competent authority shall have all the 
powers of a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 62]
owers and procedure of competent authority. —The competent authority shall have all the 
powers of a Civil Court under the Code  of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , for the purpose of taking 
evidence on oath (which such competent  authority is hereby empowered to impose) and of enforcing the 
attendance of  witnesses  and compelling the production of documents and material objects, and the 
competent  authority shall be deemed to be a Civil Court for all the purposes of section 195 and of  Chapter 
XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) . 
96. Appearance of parties. — Any appearance, application or act required to be made or done by any 
person  before or to a competent authority (other than an appearance of a party which is required for  the 
purpose of his examination as a witness) may be made or done  on behalf of such person  by a legal 
practitioner or by an official of an Insurance Company or a registered Trade Union  or by an Inspector -cum-
Facilitator appointed under sub -section ( 1) of section 122 or by any  other officer specified by the State 
Government in this behalf, authorised in writing by such  person, or, with the permission of the competent 
authority, by any other person so authorised.  
97. Method of recording evidence. —The competent authority shall make a brief memorandum of the 
substance  of the  evidence of every witness as the examination of the witness proceeds, and such  
memorandum shall be authenticated under the hand of the competent authority or in the  manner as may be 
prescribed by the State Government and shall form part of the reco rd: 
Provided that, if the competent authority is prevented from making such  memorandum, he shall record 
the reason of his inability to do so and shall cause such  memorandum to be made in writing from his 
dictation and shall sign the same, and such  memorand um shall form part of the record:  
Provided further that the evidence of any medical witness shall be taken down a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 62]
art of the record:  
Provided further that the evidence of any medical witness shall be taken down as  nearly as may be word 
for word.  
98. Power to submit cases. — A competent authority may, if he thinks fit, submit any question of law 
for the  decision of the High Court and, if he does so, shall decide the question in conformity with  such 
decision.  
99. Appeal against order of competent authority. — (1) An appeal shall lie to the High Court from 
the following orders of a competent  authority under this Chapter, namely: — 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 63]
63 
 (a) an order awarding as compensation a lump sum whether by way of redemption  of a half -monthly 
payment or otherwise or disallowing a claim in full or in part for a  lump sum;  
(b) an order awarding interest or damages under section 77; 
(c) an order refusing to allow redemption of a half -monthly payment;  
(d) an order providing for the distribution of compensation among the dependants  of a deceased 
employee, or disallowing any claim of a person alleging himself to be  such dependant;  
(e) an order allowing or disallowing any claim for the amount of an indemnity  under the provisions 
of sub -section ( 2) of section 85; or  
(f) an order refusing to register a memorandum of agreement or registering the  same or providing for 
the registration of the same subject to conditions:  
Provided that no appeal shall lie against any order unless a substantial question of  law is involved in 
the appeal, and in the case of an order other than an order referred to in  clause ( c), unless the amount in 
dispute in t he appeal is not less than ten thousand rupees  or such higher amount as the Central Government 
may, by notification, specify:  
Provided further that no appeal shall lie in any case in which the parties have agreed  to abide by the 
decision of the competent a uthority, or in which the order of the competent  authority gives effect to an 
agreement arrived at by the parties:  
Provided also that no appeal by an employer under clause ( a) shall lie unless the  memorandum of appeal 
is accompanied by a certificate by the  competent authority to the  effect that the appellant has deposited with 
him the amount payable under the order appealed  against.  
(2) The period of limitation for an appeal under this section shall be sixty days from  the date of passing 
of the order.  
(3) The provisions of section 5 of the Limitation Act, 1963  (36 of 1963) , shall be applicable to  appeal 
under this section.  
CHAPTER VIII  
SOCIAL SECURITY AND CESS IN RESPEC
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 63]
ll be applicable to  appeal 
under this section.  
CHAPTER VIII  
SOCIAL SECURITY AND CESS IN RESPECT OF BUILDING AND  
OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS  
100.  Levy and collection of cess. — (1) There  shall be levied and collected a cess for the purposes of 
social security  and welfare of building workers at such rate not exceeding two per cent. but not less than  
one per cent. of the cost of construction incurred by an employer, as the Central Governmen t may, by 
notification, from time to time, specify.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub -section, the cost of construction shall  not include, — 
(a) the cost of land; and  
(b) any compensation paid or payable to an employee or his kin under  Chapter VII.  
(2) The cess levied under sub -section ( 1) shall be collected from every employer  undertaking building 
or other construction work in such manner and at such time, including  deduction at source in relation to a 
building or other construction work of a Govern ment or  of a public sector undertaking or advance collection 
through a local authority where an  approval of such building or other construction work by such local 
authority or such other  authority notified by the State Government is required, as may be pre scribed by the 
Central  Government.  
(3) The proceeds of the cess collected under sub -section ( 2) shall be deposited by the  local authority or 
such other authority notified by the State Government to the Building  Workers' Welfare Board in such 
manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the  cess leviable under 
this Chapter including payment of such cess in advance may, subject to  final assessment to be made, be 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 64]
64 
 collected at a uniform rate or rates as may be prescribed by  the Central Government on the basis of the 
quantum of the building or other construction  work involved.  
101.Interest payable on de lay in payment of cess. — If any employer fails to pay any amount of cess 
payable under section 100 within  such time as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government, such 
employer shall be  liable to pay interest at such rate as may be prescribed by the Central Government, on 
the amount of cess, to be paid, for the period from  the date on which such payment is due till  such amount 
is actually paid.  
102.Power to exempt from cess. — Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, the 
appropriate Government  may, by notification, exempt any employer or class of employers in a State from 
the payment  of cess payable under this Chapter where such cess is already levied and payable under  any 
corresponding law in force in that State.  
103. Self-assessment of cess. — (1) The employer shall, within sixty days or such period as may be 
notified by the  Central Government of the completion of his each building and other construction work,  
pay such cess (adjusting the advance cess already paid under section 100) payable under  this Chapter on 
the basis of his self -assessment on the cost of con struction worked out on  the basis of the documents and 
in the manner prescribed by the Central Government and  after such payment of cess, he shall file a return 
under clause ( d) of section 123.  
(2) If the officer or the authority to whom or to which the re turn has been filed under  sub-section ( 1) 
finds any discrepancy in the payment under the self -assessment and the  payment required under the return 
referred to in that sub -section, then, he or it shall, after  making or causing to be made such inquiry as he or 
it thinks fit and after such inquiry make  the appropriate assessment order.  
(3) An order of assessment made under sub -section ( 2) shall s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 64]
 the appropriate assessment order.  
(3) An order of assessment made under sub -section ( 2) shall specify the date within  which the cess shall 
be paid by the employer, if any.  
104. Penalty for non -payment of cess wi thin the specified time. — If any amount of cess payable by 
any employer under section 103 is not paid  within the date specified in the order of assessment made under 
sub-section ( 2) of that  section, it shall be deemed to be in arrears and the authority pre scribed by the Central  
Government in this behalf may, after making such inquiry as it deems fit, impose on such  employer a 
penalty not exceeding the amount of cess:  
Provided that, before imposing any such penalty, such employer shall be given a  reasonable opportunity 
of being heard and if after such hearing the said authority is satisfied  that the default was for any good and 
sufficient reason, no penalty shall be imposed under  this section.  
105. Appeal to appellate authority. — (1) Any employer aggrieved by  an order of assessment made 
under section 103  or by an order imposing penalty made under section 104 may, within such time as may 
be prescribed by the Central Government, appeal to such appellate authority in such form and  in such 
manner as may be prescri bed by the Central Government.  
(2) Every appeal preferred under sub -section ( 1) shall be accompanied by such fees  as may be 
prescribed by the appropriate Government.  
(3) After the receipt of any appeal under sub -section ( 1), the appellate authority shall,  after giving the 
appellant an opportunity of being heard in the matter, dispose of the appeal  as expeditiously as possible.  
(4) Every order passed in appeal under this section shall be final and shall not be  called in question in 
any court of law.  
106.Regi stration of building workers as beneficiaries. — Every building worker who has completed 
eighteen years of age, but has not  completed sixty years of age, and who has been engaged in any buildi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 64]
teen years of age, but has not  completed sixty years of age, and who has been engaged in any building 
or other construction  work for not less than ninety days during the preceding twelve months shall be 
registered  by the officer authorised by the Building Workers' Welfare Board as a beneficiary under  this 
Chapter in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
107.Cessation as a beneficiary. — (1) A building worker who has been registered as a beneficiary 
under section 106  shall cease to be as such when he attains the age of sixty years or when he is not engaged  
in building or other construction work for not less than ninety days in a year:  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 65]
65 
 Provided  that in computing the period of ninety days under this sub -section, there  shall be excluded 
any period of absence from the building or other construction work due  to any personal injury caused to the 
building worker by accident arising out of and in the  course of his employment.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), if a person had been a  beneficiary for at 
least three years continuously immediately before attaining the age of  sixty years, then, he shall be eligible 
to get such benefits as may be prescribed by the  Central Government.  
Explanation. —For computing the period of three years under this sub -section as a  beneficiary registered 
with a Building Workers' Welfare Board, there shall be added any  period for which a person had been a 
beneficiary registered with any other such Board  immediately before his registration with the Building 
Workers' Welfare Board.  
108. Building and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Fund and its application. —(1) There 
shall be constituted by a Buildi ng Workers' Welfare Board a fund to be  called the Building and Other 
Construction Workers' Welfare Fund and there shall be credited  thereto — 
(a) the amount of any cess levied under sub -section ( 1) of section 100;  
(b) any grants and loans made to the Building Workers' Welfare Board by the  Central Government; 
and 
(c) all sums received by the Building Workers' Welfare Board from such other  sources as may be 
decided by the Central Government.  
(2) The Building and Other Construction Workers' Welfare Fund s hall be applied for  meeting — 
(a) expenses of the Building Workers' Welfare Board in the discharge of its  functions under  
sub-section ( 6) of section 7;  
(b) salaries, allowances and other remuneration of the members, officers and  other employees of the 
Building Workers' Welfare Board; and  
(c) expenses on objects and for purposes authorised by this Code.  
(3) No Building Workers' Welfare Board shall, i
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 65]
 objects and for purposes authorised by this Code.  
(3) No Building Workers' Welfare Board shall, in any financial year, incur expenses  towards salaries, 
allowances and other remuneration to its members, o fficers and other  employees and for meeting the other 
administrative expenses exceeding five per cent. of  its total expenses during that financial year.  
CHAPTER IX  
SOCIAL SECURITY FOR UNORGANISED WORKERS, GIG WORKERS AND  
PLATFORM WORKERS  
109. Framing of sc hemes for unorganized workers. — (1) The Central Government shall frame and 
notify, from time to time, suitable  welfare schemes for unorganised workers on matters relating to — 
(i) life and disability cover;  
(ii) health and maternity benefits;  
(iii) old age protection;  
(iv) education; and  
(v) any other benefit as may be determined by the Central Government.  
(2) The State Government shall frame and notify, from time to time, suitable welfare  schemes for 
unorganised workers, including schemes relating to — 
(i) provident fund;  
(ii) employment injury benefit;  
(iii) housing;  
(iv) educational schemes for children;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 66]
66 
 (v) skill upgradation of workers;  
(vi) funeral assistance; and  
(vii) old age homes.  
(3) Any scheme notified by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1), may be — 
(i) wholly funded by the Central Government; or  
(ii) partly funded by the Central Government and partly funded by the State  Government; or  
(iii) partly funded by the Central Government, partly funded by the State  Government and partly 
funded thr ough contributions collected from the beneficiaries  of the scheme or the employers as may 
be specified in the scheme by the Central  Government; or  
(iv) funded from any source including corporate social responsibility fund  within the meaning of the 
Companie s Act, 2013  (18 of 2013)  or any other such source as may be  specified in the scheme.  
(4) Every scheme notified by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) shall  provide for such 
matters that are necessary for the efficient implementation of the scheme  including the matters relating to 
all or any of the following, namely: — 
(i) scope of the scheme;  
(ii) authority to implement the scheme;  
(iii) beneficiaries of the scheme;  
(iv) resources of the scheme;  
(v) agency or agencies that will implement the scheme;  
(vi) redressal of grievances; and  
(vii) any other relevant matter,  
and a special purpose vehicle may also be constituted by the Central Government for the  purpose of 
implementation of any such scheme.  
110.  Funding of State Government schemes. — (1) Any sc heme notified by the State Government 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 109 may be — 
(a) wholly funded by the State Government; or  
(b) partly funded by the State Government, partly funded through contributions  collected from the 
beneficiaries of the scheme or the employers as may be specified in  the scheme by the State 
Government; or  
(c) funded from any source including corporate social responsibility fund referred  to in clause ( iv) of 
sub-section ( 3) of section 109 or any other suc
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 66]
esponsibility fund referred  to in clause ( iv) of 
sub-section ( 3) of section 109 or any other such source as may be  specified in the scheme.  
(2) The State Government may seek financial assistance from the Central Government  for the schemes 
framed by it.  
(3) The Central Government may provide such financial assistance to the State  Governments for the 
purpose of schemes f or such period and on such terms and conditions  as it may deem fit.  
111. Record keeping. —The Government formulating and notifying the scheme under this Chapter 
shall  provide therein the form and manner of keeping the records electronically or otherwise  relating to the 
scheme and the authority by whom such records shall be maintained:  
Provided that such records shall, as far as may be possible, bear continuous number  for the purpose of 
proper management of the scheme and for avoiding any duplication and  overlapping in records.  
112. Helpline, facilitation centre, etc., for unorganized workers, gig workers and platform 
workers. —The appropriate Government may set up a toll free call centre or helpline or such  facilitation 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 67]
67 
 centres as may be considered necessary from time to time to perform any or more  of the following functions, 
namely: — 
(a) to disseminate information on available social security schemes for the  unorganised workers, gig 
workers and platform workers;  
(b) to facilitate filing, processing and forwar ding of application forms for  registration of unorganised 
workers, gig workers and platform workers;  
(c) to assist unorganised workers, gig workers and platform workers to obtain  registration; and  
(d) to facilitate the enrolment of the registered unorganis ed workers, gig workers  and platform 
workers in the social security schemes.  
113. Registration of unorganized workers, gig workers and platform workers. — (1) Every 
unorganised worker, gig worker or platform worker shall be required to  be registered for the  purposes of 
this Chapter, subject to the fulfilment of the following  conditions, namely: — 
(a) he has completed sixteen years of age or such age as may be prescribed by  the Central 
Government;  
(b) he has submitted a self -declaration electronically or otherwise in such form  and in such manner 
containing such information as may be prescribed by the Central  Government.  
(2) Every eligible unorganised worker, gig worker or platform worker referred to in  sub-section ( 1) 
shall make an application for registra tion in such form along with such  documents including Aadhaar 
number as may be prescribed by the Central Government and  such worker shall be assigned a 
distinguishable number to his application:  
Provided that the system of electronic registration maintaine d by the appropriate  Government shall also 
provide for self registration by any such worker in such manner as  may be prescribed by the Central 
Government.  
(3) A registered unorganised worker, gig worker or platform worker shall be eligible  to avail the ben efit 
of the concerned scheme framed under this Chapter.  
(4) The Central Government, or as the case may be, t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 67]
e concerned scheme framed under this Chapter.  
(4) The Central Government, or as the case may be, the State Government shall  make such contribution 
in a scheme as may be specified therein.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, the term “Aadhaar ” shall have the  same meaning as is 
assigned to it in section 142.  
114. Schemes for gig works and platform workers. — (1) The Central Government may frame and 
notify, from time to time, suitable  social security schemes for gig workers and platform workers on matters 
relating to — 
(a) life and disability cover;  
(b) accident insurance;  
(c) health and maternity benefits;  
(d) old age protection;  
(e) crèche; and  
(f) any other benefit as may be determined by the Central Government.  
(2) Every scheme framed and notified under sub -section ( 1) may provide for — 
(a) the manner of administration of the scheme;  
(b) the agency or agencies for implementing the scheme;  
(c) the role of aggregators in the scheme;  
(d) the sources of funding of the scheme; and  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 68]
68 
 (e) any other matter as the Central Government may consider necessary for the  efficient 
administration of the scheme.  
(3) Any scheme notified by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1), may be — 
(a) wholly funded by the Central Government; or  
(b) partly funded  by the Central Government and partly funded by the State  Government; or  
(c) wholly funded by the contributions of the aggregators; or  
(d) partly funded by the Central Government, partly funded by the State  Government and partly 
funded through contribution s collected from the beneficiaries  of the scheme or the aggregators, as may 
be specified in the scheme framed by the  Central Government; or  
(e) funded from corporate social responsibility fund within the meaning of  Companies Act, 2013  (18 
of 2013) ; or 
(f) any other source.  
(4) The contribution to be paid by the aggregators for the funding referred to in  clause ( ii) of  
sub-section ( 1) of section 141, shall be at such rate not exceeding two per  cent., but not less than one per 
cent., as may be notified by th e Central Government, of the  annual turnover of every such aggregator who 
falls within a category of aggregators, as  are specified in the Seventh Schedule:  
Provided that the contribution by an aggregator shall not exceed five per cent. of the  amount paid o r 
payable by an aggregator to gig workers and platform workers.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub -section, the annual turnover of an  aggregator shall not 
include any tax, levy and cess paid or payable to the Central Government.  
(5) The date of commencement of contribution from aggregator under this section  shall be notified by 
the Central Government.  
(6) The National Social Security Board constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 shall be the Board 
for the purposes of the welfare of gig wor kers and platform  workers under the provisions of this Code:  
Provided that while such Board serves the purposes of welfare of, or matt
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 68]
provisions of this Code:  
Provided that while such Board serves the purposes of welfare of, or matters relating  to, gig workers 
and platform workers, the following members shall constitute the Board  instead of the members  specified 
in clauses ( c) and ( d) of sub -section ( 2) of section 6,  namely: — 
(a) five representatives of the aggregators as the Central Government may  nominate;  
(b) five representatives of the gig workers and platform workers as the Central  Government may 
nominate;  
(c) Director General of the Corporation;  
(d) Central Provident Fund Commissioner of the Central Board;  
(e) such expert members as the Central Government may consider appropriate;  
(f) five representatives of the State Governments by such rotation as the Central  Government may 
consider appropriate;  
(g) Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Labour and  Employment, who shall 
be the Member Secretary to the Board.  
(7) (i) The Central Government may provide that — 
(a) the authority to collect and to expend the proceeds of contribution collected;  
(b) the rate of interest to be paid by an aggregator in case of delayed payment,  less payment or non -
payment of contribution;  
(c) self -assessment of contribution by aggregators;  
(d) condition s for cessation of a gig worker or a platform worker; and  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 69]
69 
 (e) any other matter relating to smooth functioning of the social security scheme  notified under this 
section,  shall be such as may be prescribed by that Government.  
(ii) The Central Government may by notification, exempt such aggregator or class of  aggregators from 
paying of contribution under sub -section ( 4), subject to such conditions  as may be specified in the 
notification.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, an aggregator having more than one  business shall be 
treated as a separate business entity or aggregator.  
CHAPTER X  
FINANCE AND ACCOUNTS  
115. Accounts. —Each of the Social Security Organisations shall maintain proper accounts of its  
income and expenditure in such form and in such manner as the appropriate Government  may, after 
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India, specify.  
116. Audit .—(1) The accounts of each of the Social Security Organisations shall be audited  annually 
by the Comptroller and Auditor -Gene ral of India and any expenditure incurred  by him in connection with 
such audit shall be payable by the respective Social Security  Organisation to the Comptroller and Auditor -
General of India.  
(2) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him  in connection with 
the audit of the accounts of a Social Security Organisation shall have  the same rights and privileges and 
authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller  and Auditor -General of India has, in connection 
with th e audit of Government accounts  and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of 
books, accounts, connected  vouchers, documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the Social 
Security  Organisation.  
(3) The accounts of a Socia l Security Organisation as certified by the Comptroller  and Auditor -General 
of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf together  with the audit report thereon shall be 
forwarded to t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 69]
son appointed by him in this behalf together  with the audit report thereon shall be 
forwarded to the Social Security Organisation which  shall along with it s comments on the audit report of 
the Comptroller and Auditor -General  of India forward the same to the appropriate Government.  
117. Budget estimates. — (1) Each of the Social Security Organisations shall in each year frame a 
budget  showing the probable rece ipts and the expenditure which it proposes to incur during the  following 
year and shall submit a copy of the budget for the approval of the appropriate  Government before such date 
as may be fixed by it in that behalf.  
(2) The budget shall contain provisions adequate in the opinion of the appropriate  Government for the 
discharge of the liabilities incurred by the Social Security Organisation  and for the maintenance of a 
working balance.  
118. Annual report. — (1) Each of the Social Security Organisations shall submit to the appropriate  
Government an annual report of its work and activities and the budget finally adopted by  the Social Security 
Organisation.  
(2) The appropriate Government shall cause a copy of the annual report, budget and  the audited 
accounts together with the report of the Comptroller and Auditor -General of  India and the comments of 
the respective Social Security Organisation thereon to be laid  before each House of Parliament or the State 
legislature, as the case may be.  
119. Valuation of assets and liabilities. — Each of the fund maintained by a Social Security 
Organisation or by an  establishment under this Code shall have a valuation of its assets and liabilities made 
by a valuer or actuary, as the case may be, appointed, wit h the prior approval of the appropriate  Government, 
by such Social Security Organisation or the establishment, as the case may  be, in the following manner, 
namely: — 
(a) in case of Central Board, annually;  
(b) in case of Corporation, once in every three years;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 69]
of Central Board, annually;  
(b) in case of Corporation, once in every three years;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 70]
70 
 (c) in case of any other Social Security Organisation or establishment, as  specified by the appropriate 
Government, by order:  
Provided that the appropriate Government, if it considers necessary, may direct such  valuation to be 
made at such intervals  other than provided in this section.  
120. Holding of property, etc, by Social Security Organisation. —(1) A Social Security Organisation 
(except Corporation) may, subject to such  conditions as may by Social Security Organisation be prescribed 
by the approp riate Government, acquire and hold property, both movable and immovable, sell or otherwise  
transfer any movable or immovable property which may have become vested in or have  been acquired by 
it and do all things necessary for such purposes and for the purp oses for  which the said Social Security 
Organisation is established.  
(2) Subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government,  a Social Security 
Organisation may, from time to time invest any moneys vested in it, which  are not immediately required 
for expenses properly defrayable and may, subject to as aforesaid,  from time to time re -invest or realise 
such investments:  
Provided that in case of Provident Fund, Pension Fund or Insurance Fund, such  investment, re -
investment or real isation shall be specified in the Provident Fund Scheme or  Pension Scheme or Insurance 
Scheme, as the case may be.  
(3) Each of the Social Security Organisations (except Corporation) may, with the  previous sanction of 
the appropriate Government and on such terms as may be prescribed  by such Government, raise loans and 
take measures for discharging such loans.  
(4) Each of the Social Security Organisations (except Corporation) may, with the  previous sanction of 
the appropriate Government and on such terms as m ay be prescribed  by such Government, constitute for 
the benefit of its officers and staff or any class of them,  such provident or other benefit funds as it may th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 70]
 of its officers and staff or any class of them,  such provident or other benefit funds as it may think 
fit: 
Provided that in case of officers and staff of the Central Board, such terms shall be  specified in the 
Provident Fund Scheme.  
121. Writing off of losses. —Subject to the conditions as may be prescribed by the appropriate 
Government,  where any of the Social Security Organisations is of the opinion that the amount of  
contribution, cess, inter est and damages due to it, under this Code, is irrecoverable, the  concerned Social 
Security Organisation may sanction the writing off of the said amount in  such manner as may be prescribed 
by the appropriate Government:  
Provided that in the case of Provide nt Fund, Pension Fund or Insurance Fund, such  writing off shall be 
specified in the Provident Fund Scheme or Pension Scheme or Insurance  Scheme, as the case may be.  
CHAPTER XI  
AUTHORITIES, ASSESSMENT, COMPLIANCE AND RECOVERY  
122. Appointment of Inspector -cum- Facilitators and their powers. —(1) The Central Government 
for the purposes of Chapter III and Chapter IV and  for the provisions in this Code relating to those Chapters, 
and the appropriate Government  for the purposes of other  provisions of this Code, may, by notification, 
appoint Inspectorcum -Facilitators who shall discharge his duties under this Code and exercise the powers 
conferred on them under sub -section ( 6) in accordance with the inspection scheme referred  to in sub -section 
(2). 
(2) The Central Government for the purposes of Chapter III and Chapter IV and for the  provisions in 
this Code relating to those Chapters and the appropriate Government in  respect of other provisions of this 
Code, may, by notification, lay down an  inspection  scheme which may provide for generation of a web -
based inspection and calling of  information relating to the inspection under this Code electronically and 
such scheme shall,  inter alia , have provisions to cater to special circums
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 70]
ode electronically and 
such scheme shall,  inter alia , have provisions to cater to special circumstances for assigning inspections 
and calling for information from the establishment or any other person.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 71]
71 
 (3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), the Central Government  for the purposes of 
Chapter III and Chapter IV and the other provisions in this  Code relating  to those Chapters and the 
appropriate Government in relation to other provisions of this  Code, may, by notification, confer such 
jurisdiction of randomised selection of inspection  for the purposes of this Code, to the Inspector -cum-
Facilitat ors as may be specified in  such notification.  
(4) Without prejudice to the powers of the Central Government or the appropriate  Government, as the 
case may be, under this section, the inspection scheme may be designed  taking into account, inter alia , the 
following factors, namely: — 
(a) assignment of unique number to each establishment (which will be same as  the registration 
number allotted to that establishment), each Inspector -cum-Facilitator  and each inspection in such 
manner as may be notified for the pur poses of Chapter III  and Chapter IV and the other provisions of 
this Code relating to those Chapters, by  the Central Government, and in respect of other provisions of 
this Code, by the  appropriate Government;  
(b) timely uploading of inspection reports in s uch manner and subject to such  conditions as may be 
notified, for the purposes of Chapter III and Chapter IV and the  other provisions of this Code relating 
to those Chapters, by the Central Government,  and in respect of other provisions of this Code, by th e 
appropriate Government;  
(c) provisions for special inspections based on such parameters as may be  notified, for the purposes 
of Chapter III and Chapter IV and the other provisions of  this Code relating to those Chapters, by the 
Central Government, and in  respect of  other provisions of this Code, by the appropriate Government; 
and 
(d) the characteristics of employment relationships, the nature of work and  characteristics of the 
workplaces based on such parameters as may be notified, for  the
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 71]
f work and  characteristics of the 
workplaces based on such parameters as may be notified, for  the purposes of Cha pter III and Chapter 
IV and the other provisions of this Code  relating to those Chapters, by the Central Government, and in 
respect of other  provisions of this Code, by the appropriate Government.  
(5) The Inspector -cum-Facilitator may — 
(a) advice the employers and employees relating to compliance with the  provisions of this Code; and  
(b) inspect the establishments as assigned to him under the provisions of this  Code,   
subject to the instructions or guidelines issued by the appropriate Government from t ime to  time.  
(6) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 4), the Inspector -cum-Facilitator  may, — 
(a) examine any person who is found in any premises of the establishment,  whom the Inspector -cum-
Facilitator has reasonable cause to believe, is an employee  of the establishment;  
(b) require any person whom the Inspector -cum-Facilitator has reasonable  cause to believe, is an 
employer of the establishment, to produce any document or to  give any information, which is in his 
power with respect to any of the purpo ses for  which the inspection is made;  
(c) search, seize or take copies of such register, record of wages or notices or  portions thereof as the 
Inspector -cum-Facilitator may consider relevant in respect of  an offence under this Code and which the 
Inspector -cum-Facilitator has reason to  believe has been committed by the employer;  
(d) bring to the notice of the appropriate Government defects or abuses not  covered by any law for 
the time being in force; and  
(e) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed by  the appropriate  Government.  
(7) Any person required to produce any document or to give any information required  by an Inspector -
cum-Facilitator for the purposes of sub -section ( 6) shall be deemed to be  legally bound to do so within the 
meaning of section 175 and section 176 of the India
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 71]
deemed to be  legally bound to do so within the 
meaning of section 175 and section 176 of the Indian Penal  Code  (45 of 1860) . 
(8) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974)  shall, so far as may be,  apply 
to the search or seizure for the purposes of sub -section ( 6), as they apply to the  search or seizure made under 
the authority of a warrant issued under section 94 of the said  Code.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 72]
72 
 123. Maintenance of records, registers, returns, etc. . — An employer of an establishment shall — 
(a) maintain records and registers in the form prescribed by the appropr iate Government, 
electronically or otherwise, containing such particulars and details with  regard to persons employed, 
muster roll, wages and such other particulars and details,  in such manner, as may be prescribed by the 
appropriate Government including — 
(i) number of days for which work performed by employees;  
(ii) number of hours of work performed by the employees;  
(iii) wage paid;  
(iv) leave, leave wages, wages for overtime work and attendance;  
(v) employees identification number, by whatever nomenclatu re it may be  called;  
(vi) number of dangerous occurrences, accidents, injuries in respect of  which compensation has 
been paid by the employer and the amount of such  compensation relating to Chapter IV and Chapter 
VII, respectively;  
(vii) statutory deductio ns made by employer from the wages of an  employee in respect of Chapter 
III and Chapter IV;  
(viii) details as to cess paid in respect of building and other construction  work;  
(ix) total number of employees (regular, contractual or fixed term  employment) on  the day 
specified;  
(x) persons recruited during a particular period;  
(xi) occupational details of the employees; and  
(xii) vacancies for which suitable candidates were not available during  the specified period.  
(b) display notices at the workplaces of the  employees in such manner and form  as may be prescribed 
by the appropriate Government;  
(c) issue wage slips to the employees, in electronic forms or otherwise; and  
(d) file such return electronically or otherwise to such officer or authority in  such manner  and during 
such periods as may be prescribed by the appropriate  Government:  
Provided that matters to be provided under the rules required to be made under  this section relating to 
Chapter III shall, instead of providing them i
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 72]
 required to be made under  this section relating to 
Chapter III shall, instead of providing them in rules to be made  by the Central Government, be provided in 
the Provident Fund Scheme or the Pension  Scheme or the Insurance Scheme, as the case may be:  
Provided further that the forms of records and registers and that of the returns  to be filed under Chapter 
IV shall be specified  in the regulations instead of providing  them in the rules.  
124. Employer not to reduce wages, etc. — No employer in relation to an establishment to which this 
Code or any scheme  framed thereunder applies shall, by reason only of his liability for the payme nt of any  
contribution under this Code, or any charges thereunder reduce whether directly or indirectly,  the wages of 
any employee to whom the provisions of this Code or any scheme framed  thereunder applies or the total 
quantum of benefits to which such em ployee is entitled  under the terms of his employment, express or 
implied.  
125.  Assessment and determination of dues from employer. —(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification, authorise, such officers of the  Central Board or the Corporation, as the case may be, not below 
the rank of Group 'A' officer  of that Government, to function as the Authorised Officers for the purposes of 
Chapter III  or Chapter IV, as the case may be, who may, by order — 
(a) in a case where a dispute arises regarding the applica bility of Chapter III or  Chapter IV, as the 
case may be, to an establishment, decide such dispute; and  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 73]
73 
 (b) determine the amount due from any employer under any provision of  Chapter III or Chapter IV, 
as the case may be, or the schemes, or rules, regulation s made under such Chapter; and  
(c) for any of the purposes relating to clause ( a) and clause ( b), conduct such  inquiry, as he may deem 
necessary for such purposes:  
Provided that no proceeding under this sub -section shall be initiated after the expiry  of th e period of 
five years from the date on which the dispute referred to in clause ( a) is alleged to have been arisen or, as 
the case may be, the amount referred to in clause ( b) is alleged to have been due from an employer.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything conta ined in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , the inquiry 
under sub -section ( 1), as far as practicable, shall be held on day -to-day basis and  endeavour shall be made 
to ensure that the inquiry is concluded within a period of two  years:  
Provided th at where the inquiry is not concluded within the said period of two years,  the Authorised 
Officer conducting such inquiry shall record the circumstances and reasons  for not having concluded so 
and submit the circumstances and reasons so recorded to the  Central Provident Fund Commissioner or the 
Director General of the Corporation, as the  case may be, or such other officer authorised by him in this 
behalf:  
Provided further that the Central Provident Fund Commissioner or the Director  General of the 
Corpora tion, as the case may be, after considering the circumstances and  the reasons which have been 
submitted by the Authorised Officer may grant an extension  for a period up to one year to conclude the said 
inquiry:  
Provided also that the inquiries which are pe nding immediately before the date of  commencement of 
this Code shall be concluded by the Authorised Officer within a period  not exceeding two years from the 
date of such commencement.  
(3) The Authorised Officer conducting the inquiry under sub -secti
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 73]
the 
date of such commencement.  
(3) The Authorised Officer conducting the inquiry under sub -section ( 1) shall, for the  purposes of such 
inquiry have the same powers as are vested in a court under the Code of  Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , 
for trying a suit in respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) enforcing the attendance of any person or examini ng him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit; and  
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses,   
and any such inquiry shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning  of sections 193 and 
228, and for the purpose of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
(4) No order shall be made under sub -section ( 1), unless the employer concerned is  given a reasonable 
opportunity of representing his case.  
(5) Where the employer, employee or any other person required to attend the inquiry  under  
sub-section ( 1) fails to attend such inquiry without assigning any valid reason or  fails to produce any 
document or to file any report or return when called upon to do so by  the A uthorised Officer conducting 
the inquiry, such inquiry officer may decide the  applicability of the relevant provisions of this Code or 
determine the amount due from any  employer, as the case may be, on the basis of the evidence adduced 
during such inquiry and other documents available on record.  
(6) Where an order under sub -section ( 1) is passed against an employer ex parte , he may, within three 
months from the date of communication of such order, apply to the  Authorised Officer for setting aside 
such order  and if the Authorised Officer is satisfied that  the show cause notice was not duly served or that 
such employer was prevented by any  sufficient cause from appearing when the inquiry was held, the 
Authorised Officer shall  make an order setting aside his ea rlier order and shall appoint a date for procee
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 73]
ed Officer shall  make an order setting aside his ea rlier order and shall appoint a date for proceeding 
with the  inquiry:  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 74]
74 
 Provided that no such order shall be set aside merely on the ground that there has  been an irregularity 
in the service of the show cause notice if the Authorised Officer is  satisfied tha t the employer had notice of 
the date of hearing and had sufficient time to  appear before the Authorised Officer.  
Explanation. —Where an appeal has been preferred under this Code against an order  passed ex parte 
and such appeal has been disposed of otherwise than on the ground that  the appellant has withdrawn the 
appeal, no application shall lie under this sub -section for  setting aside the ex parte order.  
(7) No order passed under this section shall be set aside on any application under  sub-section ( 6) unless 
notice thereof has been served on the opposite party.  
126. Appeal against order of Authorised Officer relating to Chapter IV. . —If an employer is not 
satisfied with the order referred to in section 125 and relates  to Chapter IV, he may prefer an appeal to the 
appellate authority not below the rank of the  Joint Director of the Corporation as may be provided by 
regulations, within sixty days from  the date of such order after depositing twenty -five per cent. of the 
contribution so ordered  or the cont ribution as per his own calculation, whichever is higher, with the 
Corporation:  
Provided that the appellate authority shall decide the appeal within a period of six  months from the date 
of preferring the appeal:  
Provided further that if the employer finall y succeeds in the appeal, the Corporation  shall refund such 
deposit to the employer together with such interest as may be specified in  the regulations.  
127. Interest on amount due. — Except where expressly provided otherwise in this Code, the employer 
shall  be liable to pay simple interest at such rate as may be notified from time to time by the Central  
Government, from the date on which any amount has become due under this Code till the  date of its actual 
payment.  
128.  Power t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 74]
ich any amount has become due under this Code till the  date of its actual 
payment.  
128.  Power to recover damages. —Where an employer makes default in the payment of any 
contribution which he  is liable to pay in accordance with the provisions of Chapter III or Chapter IV, as the 
case may be, or any scheme framed thereunder or in the transfer of accumulations under  Chapter III, o r in 
the payment of any charges payable under any other provision of this  Code, the Central Provident Fund 
Commissioner or the Director General of the Corporation,  as the case may be, or such other officer as may 
be authorised, by notification, by the  appropriate Government, may levy on, and recover from, the employer 
by way of damages,  an amount not exceeding the amount of arrears, in such manner as may be specified in 
the regulations for the purposes of Chapter IV and in respect of Provident Fund Scheme,  Pension Scheme 
and Insurance Scheme, such levy and recovery shall be in the manner as  may be specified in the respective 
schemes framed by the Central Government:  
Provided that before levying and recovering such damages, the employer shall be  given an oppo rtunity 
of being heard:  
Provided further that the Central Board or the Corporation, as the case may be, may  reduce or waive 
the damages levied under this section in relation to an establishment for  which a resolution plan or 
repayment plan recommending suc h waiver has been approved  by the adjudicating authority established 
under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016  (31 of 2016)  subject to the terms and conditions as may 
be specified by notification, by the Central  Government.  
129. Recovery of amount due .— (1) Any amount due from an employer or any other person in relation 
to an  establishment including any contribution or cess payable, charges, interest, damages, or  benefit or any 
other amount may, if the amount is in arrear, be recovered in the manner  specified in this section and 
sectio
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 74]
t may, if the amount is in arrear, be recovered in the manner  specified in this section and 
sections 130 to 132.  
(2) Where any amount is in arrear under this Code, the Authorised Officer, or the  competent authority, 
as the case may be, shall issue to the Recovery Officer referred to in  sub-section ( 4), a certificate 
electronically or otherwise, specifying the amount of arrears  and the Recovery Officer, on receipt of such 
certificate, shall proceed to recover the amount  specified therein from the establishment or, as the case may 
be, the employer by one or more  of the modes mentioned below, namely: — 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 75]
75 
 (a) attachment and sale of the movable or immovable property of the  establishment or, as the case 
may be, of the employer;  
(b) arrest of the employer and his detention in prison;  
(c) appointing a receiver for the management of the movable or immovable  properties of the defaulter:  
Provided that the attachment and sale of any property under this section shall first be  effected against 
the properties of the establishment and where such attachment and sale is  insufficient for rec overing the 
whole of the amount or arrears specified in the certificate, the  Recovery Officer may move such proceeding 
against the property of the employer for  recovery of the whole or any part of such arrears.  
(3) The Authorised Officer or the competent authority, as the case may be, may issue  a certificate under 
sub-section ( 2), notwithstanding that proceeding for recovery of the  arrears by any other mode has been 
taken.  
(4) The Authorised Officer or the competent authority, as the case may be, may  forwa rd the certificate 
issued under this section, to the Recovery Officer within whose  jurisdiction the employer — 
(a) carries on his business or profession or within whose jurisdiction the  principal place of his 
establishment is situate; or  
(b) resides or any movable or immovable property of, the establishment or, the  employer is situated.  
(5) Where an establishment or the employer has property within the jurisdiction of  more than one 
Recovery Officer and the Recovery Officer to whom a certificate is sent by  the Authorised Officer or the 
competent authority, as the case may be — 
(a) is not able to recover the entire amount by the sale of the property, movable  or immovable, within 
his jurisdiction, or  
(b) is of the opinion that, for the purpose of expediting or se curing the recovery  of the whole or any 
part of the amount, it is necessary so to do,   
he may send the certificate or, where only a part of the amount is to be recovered, a copy of  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 75]
,   
he may send the certificate or, where only a part of the amount is to be recovered, a copy of  the certificate 
certified by him, specifying the amount to be recovered, to  the Recovery  Officer within whose jurisdiction 
the establishment or the employer has property or the  employer resides, and thereupon that Recovery 
Officer shall proceed to recover the amount  due under this section as if the certificate or the copy thereof  
had been the certificate sent  to him by the Authorised Officer or the competent authority, as the case may 
be. 
130.Validity of certificate and amendment thereof. —(1) When the Authorised Officer or the 
competent authority, as the case may be,  issues a certificate to a Recovery Officer under section 129, it 
shall not be open to the  employer to dispute before the Recovery Officer the correctness of the amount, and 
no objection to the certificate on any other ground shall be entertained by the Recovery  Officer. 
(2) Notwithstanding the issue of a certificate to a Recovery Officer, the Authorised  Officer or the 
competent authority, as the case may be, shall have power to withdraw the  certificate or correct any clerical 
or arithmetical mistake in the certifica te by sending intimation  to the Recovery Officer.  
(3) The Authorised Officer or the competent authority, as the case may be, shall  intimate to the 
Recovery Officer any orders of withdrawing or cancelling a certificate or any  correction made by him in 
respe ct of the said certificate under sub -section ( 2). 
(4) Notwithstanding that a certificate has been issued to the Recovery Officer for the  recovery of any 
amount, the Authorised Officer or the competent authority, as the case may  be, may grant time to the 
employer for payment of the amount recoverable under the certificate  and thereupon the Recovery Officer 
shall stay the proceedings until the expiry of the time  so granted.  
(5) Where a certificate for the recovery of amount has been issued, the Author
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 75]
e time  so granted.  
(5) Where a certificate for the recovery of amount has been issued, the Authorised Off icer or the 
competent authority, as the case may be, shall keep the Recovery Officer informed of any  amount paid or 
time granted for payment, subsequent to the issue of such certificate.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 76]
76 
 (6) Where the order giving rise to a demand of amount for which a certificate  for recovery has been 
issued under section 129 has been modified in appeal or other  proceeding under this Code, resulting in 
reduction of the demand but the order is the  subject matter of further proceeding under this Code, the 
Authorised Offic er or the competent  authority, as the case may be, shall stay the recovery of such part of 
the amount of the  certificate as pertains to the said reduction for the period for which the appeal or other  
proceeding remains pending.  
(7) Where a certificate for the recovery of amount has been issued and subsequently  the amount of the 
outstanding demand is reduced as a result of an appeal or other proceeding  under this Code, the Authorised 
Officer or the competent authority, as the case may be,  shall, when the ord er being the subject matter of 
such appeal or other proceeding becomes  final and conclusive, amend the certificate or withdraw it, as the 
case may be in consonance  with such finality or conclusion.  
131. other modes of recovery. — (1) Notwithstanding the iss ue of a certificate to the Recovery Officer 
under  section 129, the Central Provident Fund Commissioner or the Director General of the  Corporation, 
as the case may be, or any other officer of such Social Security Organisation  so authorised by it in this 
behalf, may, recover the amount by any one or more of the modes  provided in this section.  
(2) If any amount is due from any person to any employer who is in arrears, the Central  Provident Fund 
Commissioner or the Director General of the Corporation, as the case may  be, or any other officer of such 
Social Security Organisation authorised by it in this behalf,  may, require such person to deduct from the 
said amount the arrears so due, and such  person shall comply with any such requisition and shall pay the 
sum so deducted to the  credit of the Central Provident Fund Commissioner or the Director General
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 76]
e 
sum so deducted to the  credit of the Central Provident Fund Commissioner or the Director General of the 
Corporation,  as the case may be, or any other officer of such Social Security Organisation so authorised  by 
it in this behalf:  
Provided that nothing in thi s sub -section shall apply to any part of the amount  exempt from attachment 
in execution of a decree of a civil court under section 60 of the Code  of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) . 
(3) (a) The Central Provident Fund Commissioner or the Director General of the  Corporation, as the 
case may be, or any other officer of such Social Security Organisation  authorised by it in this behalf may, 
at any time or from time to time, by notice in writing,  require any person from whom money is due or may 
become due to th e employer or, as the  case may be, the establishment or any person who holds or may 
subsequently hold money  for or on account of the employer or, as the case may be, the establishment, to 
pay to the  Central Provident Fund Commissioner or the Director Gener al of the Corporation, as the  case 
may be, or any other officer authorised by it in this behalf either forthwith upon the  money becoming due 
or being held at or within the time specified in the notice (not being  before the money becomes due or is 
held) so much of the money as is sufficient to pay the  amount due from the employer in respect of arrears 
or the whole of the money when it is  equal to or less than that amount.  
(b) A notice under this sub -section may be issued to any person who holds or may  subseq uently hold 
any money for or on account of the employer jointly with any other  person and for the purposes of this sub -
section, the shares of the joint holders in such  account shall be presumed, until the contrary is proved, to be 
equal.  
(c) A copy of the notice shall be forwarded to the employer at his last address known  to the Central 
Provident Fund Commissioner or the Director General of the Corporat
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 76]
t address known  to the Central 
Provident Fund Commissioner or the Director General of the Corporation, as  the case may be, or any other 
officer of such Social Security Organisation authorised by it  in thi s behalf and in the case of a joint account 
to all the joint holders at their last addresses  so known.  
(d) Save as otherwise provided in this sub -section, every person to whom a notice is  issued under this 
sub-section shall be bound to comply with such notice, and, in particular,  where any such notice is issued 
to a post office, bank or an insurer, it shall not be necessary  for any pass book, deposit receipt, policy or 
any other document to be produced for the  purpose of any entry, endorsement or the lik e being made before 
payment is made  notwithstanding any rule, practice or requirement to the contrary.  
(e) Any claim respecting any property in relation to which a notice under this  sub-section has been 
issued arising after the date of the notice shall be void as against any  demand contained in the notice.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 77]
77 
 (f) Where a person to whom a notice under this sub -section is sent objects to it by  statement on oath 
that the sum demanded or any part thereof is not due to the employer or  that he does not hold any mone y 
for or on account of the employer, then, nothing contained  in this sub -section shall be deemed to require 
such person to pay any such sum or part  thereof, as the case may be, but if it is discovered that such 
statement was false in any  material particula r, such person shall be personally liable to the Central Provident 
Fund  Commissioner or the Director General of the Corporation, as the case may be, or any other  officer of 
such Social Security Organisation authorised by it in this behalf, to the extent of  his own liability to the 
employer on the date of the notice, or to the extent of the employer's  liability for any sum due under this 
Code, whichever is less.  
(g) The Central Provident Fund Commissioner or the Director General of the  Corporation, as the ca se 
may be, or any other officer of such Social Security Organisation  authorised by it in this behalf, may, at 
any time or from time to time, amend or revoke any  notice issued under this sub -section or extend the time 
for making any payment in pursuance  of such notice.  
(h) The Central Provident Fund Commissioner or the Director General of the  Corporation, as the case 
may be, or any other officer of such Social Security Organisation  authorised by it in this behalf, shall grant 
a receipt for any amount paid in  compliance with  a notice issued under this sub -section, and the person so 
paying shall be fully discharged  from his liability to the employer to the extent of the amount so paid.  
(i) Any person discharging any liability to the employer after the receipt o f a notice  under this  
sub-section shall be personally liable to the Central Provident Fund Commissioner  or the Director General 
of the Corporation, as the case may be, or any other officer of such  Social
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 77]
r the Director General 
of the Corporation, as the case may be, or any other officer of such  Social Security Organisation authorised 
by it in this behalf, to the extent of his own liability  to the employer so discharged or to the extent of the 
employer's liability for any sum due  under this Code, whichever is less.  
(j) If the person to whom a notice under this sub -section is sent fails to make paymen t in pursuance 
thereof to the Central Provident Fund Commissioner or the Director General of  the Corporation, as the case 
may be, or any other officer of such Social Security Organisation  authorised by it in this behalf, he shall be 
deemed to be an employe r in default in respect of  the amount specified in the notice and further proceeding 
may be moved against him for the  realisation of the amount as if it were an arrear due from him, in the 
manner provided in  sections 129 to 132 and the notice shall have th e same effect as an attachment of amount 
in arrears by the Recovery Officer in exercise of his powers under section 129.  
(4) The Central Provident Fund Commissioner or the Director General of the  Corporation, as the case 
may be, or any other officer of suc h Social Security Organisation  authorised by it in this behalf may apply 
to the court in whose custody there is money  belonging to the employer for payment to him of the entire 
amount of such money, or if it is  more than the amount due, an amount sufficien t to discharge the amount 
due. 
(5) The Central Provident Fund Commissioner or the Director General of the  Corporation, as the case 
may be, or any other officer of such Social Security Organisation  authorised by it in this behalf, if so 
authorised by the Ce ntral Government by general or  special order, recover any arrears of amount due from 
an employer or, as the case may be,  from the establishment by distraint and sale of his or its movable 
property in the manner laid  down in the Third Schedule to the Income -tax Act, 1961 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 77]
r its movable 
property in the manner laid  down in the Third Schedule to the Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961) . 
132.  Application of certain provisions of Income -tax Act .—The provisions of the Second Schedule 
and the Third Schedule to the Incometax  Act, 1961 and the Income -tax (Certificate Proceedings) Rules, 
1962, as in force from time  to time, shall apply with necessary modifications as if the said provisions and 
the rules  referred to the amount in arrears of the amount mentioned in section 129 of this Code  instead of 
to the income -tax: 
Provided that any reference in the said provisions  and the rules to the “assessees ” shall be construed as 
a reference to an employer or establishment, as the case may be.  
CHAPTER XII  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
133. Penalty for failure to pay contributions, etc. — If any person, — 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 78]
78 
 (a) being an employer, fails to  pay any contribution which he is liable to pay  under this Code or rules, 
regulations or schemes made thereunder; or  
(b) deducts or attempts to deduct from the wages of an employee, the whole or  any part of employer's 
contribution; or  
(c) in contravention of the provisions of this Code, reduces the wages or any  privilege or benefits 
admissible to an employee; or  
(d) in contravention of the provisions of Chapter IV or Chapter VI or rules,  regulations or schemes 
made or framed under this Code respectively, re lating to such  Chapters, dismisses, discharges, reduces 
in rank or otherwise penalises a woman  employee; or  
(e) fails or refuses to submit any return, report, statement or any other information  required under this 
Code or any rules, regulations or schemes made or framed  thereunder; or  
(f) obstructs any Inspector -cum-Facilitator or other officer or staff of the Central  Board or the 
Corporation or other Social Security Organisation or a competent authority  in the discharge of his 
duties; or  
(g) fails to pay a ny amount of gratuity to which an employee is entitled under  this Code; or  
(h) fails to pay any amount of compensation to which an employee is entitled  under this Code; or  
(i) fails to provide any maternity benefit to which a woman is entitled under this  Code; or  
(j) fails to send to a competent authority a statement which he is required to  send under Chapter VII; 
or 
(k) fails to produce on demand by the Inspector -cum-Facilitator any register or  document in his 
custody kept in pursuance of this Code or the  rules, regulations or  schemes made or framed thereunder; 
or 
(l) fails to pay the cess for building workers which he is liable to pay under this  Code; or  
(m) is guilty of any contravention of or non -compliance with any of the  requirements of this Code or 
the rules or the regulations or schemes made or framed  thereunder in respect of which no special penalty 
is provi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 78]
e regulations or schemes made or framed  thereunder in respect of which no special penalty 
is provided in this Chapter; or  
(n) obstructs executive officer in exercising his functions under Chapter XIII; or  
(o) dishonestly makes a false return,  report, statement or information to be  submitted thereunder; or  
(p) fails or makes default in complying with any condition subject to which  exemption under section 
143 was granted; or  
(q) fails to pay any administrative or inspection charges payable under  any of  the schemes framed 
under Chapter III,   
he shall be punishable, — 
(i) where he commits an offence under clause ( a), with imprisonment for a term  which may extend 
to three years, but — 
(a) which shall not be less than one year, in case of failure to pay the  employee's contribution 
which has been deducted by him from the employee's  wages and shall also be liable to fine of one 
lakh rupees;  
(b) which shall not be less than two months but may be extended to six  months, in any other case 
and shall also be  liable to fine of fifty thousand  rupees:  
Provided that the court may, for any adequate and special reasons to be  recorded in the judgment, 
impose a sentence of imprisonment for a lesser term;  
(ii) where he commits an offence under clause ( g), with impriso nment for a term  which may extend to 
one year or with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees,  or with both;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 79]
79 
 (iii) where he commits an offence under any of the clauses ( d), (f), (i), (k), (l) or (o), with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to six months or with a fine which  may extend to fifty thousand rupees, or 
with both;  
(iv) where he commits an offence under any of the clauses ( b), (c), (e), (h), (j), (m), (n), (p) or ( q), with 
fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees.  
134.  Enhanced punishment in certain cases after previous conviction. —Whoever, having been 
convicted by a court of an offence punishable under this  Code, commits the same offence shall, for second, 
or every subsequent such offence, be  punishable with imprisonme nt for a term which may extend to two 
years and with fine of two  lakh rupees:  
Provided that where such second or subsequent offence is for failure by the employer  to pay any 
contribution, charges, cess, maternity benefit, gratuity or compensation which  under this Code he is liable 
to pay, he shall, for such second or subsequent offence, be  punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to three years but which shall  not be less than two years and shall also be liable to fine of three 
lakh rupees.  
135. Offences by companies. — (1) Where an offence under this Chapter has been committed by a 
company,  every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was directly in charge of, and was  
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of  the company, as well as the  company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded  against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person  liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge  or that he exercised all due 
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence has  been committed b y a 
company and it is proved
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 79]
contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence has  been committed b y a 
company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the  consent or connivance of, or is 
attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director,  secretary or other officer of the company, such 
director, secretary or other officer shall a lso be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and  punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate, and includes a firm or other association  of individuals ; 
and 
(b) “Director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
136. Cognizance of offences. — (1) No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this 
Code,  except on a complaint made by an aggrieved person or such officer as may be  notified by  the Central 
Government for the purposes of offences relating to Chapter III and Chapter IV and the rules, regulations 
or schemes made or framed under this Code relating to those  Chapters, and for the purposes of offences 
relating to other prov isions of this Code and the  rules, regulations or schemes made or framed thereunder, 
by the officer notified by the  appropriate Government.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), no prosecution under  this Code shall be 
instituted, excep t by or with the previous sanction of the authority  notified by the Central Government for 
the purposes of offences relating to Chapter III and  Chapter IV and the rules, regulations or schemes made 
or framed under this Code relating to  those Chapters; and for the purposes of offences relating to other 
provisions of this Code  and the rules, regulations or schemes made or framed thereunder, the authority 
notified by  the appropriate Government.  
(3) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of  the first class shall 
try any offence punishable under this Ch
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 79]
istrate or a Judicial Magistrate of  the first class shall 
try any offence punishable under this Chapter.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), a single complaint may  be filed under that 
sub-section by more than one aggrieved persons if they are agg rieved  by the same or similar offence 
committed at a place or different places within the jurisdiction  of the court.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 80]
80 
 137.Prior opportunity before prosecution. —Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, the 
Inspector -cum-Facilitator  or any other officer notified for the purposes of offences relating to Chapter III 
and Chapter IV  and the rules, regulations or schemes made or framed under this Code relating to those  
Chapters, by the Central Government; and for the purposes of offences relating to ot her provisions of this 
Code and the rules, regulations or schemes made or framed under this  Code relating thereto, by the 
appropriate Government, shall, before initiation of prosecution  proceeding against an employer for any 
offence under this Chapter, giv e an opportunity to  the employer to comply with the aforesaid relevant 
provisions by way of a written direction,  which shall lay down a time period for such compliance, and, if 
the employer complies with  the direction within such period, then, no such proc eeding shall be initiated 
against the  employer; but no such opportunity shall be accorded to an employer, if the violation of the  same 
nature of such provisions is repeated within a period of three years from the date on  which such first 
violation was comm itted and in such case the prosecution shall be initiated  in accordance with the 
provisions of this Chapter.  
138. Compounding of offences. — (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure,  1973  (2 of 1974) , any offence committed for the first time, punishable under this Chapter, being 
an offence — 
(i) punishable with fine only; or  
(ii) punishable with imprisonment for a term which is not more than one year  and also with fine,  
may, on an application made, either before or after the institution of any prosecution, be  compounded by 
an officer authorised by the Central Government for the purposes of  offences relating to Chapter III and 
Chapter IV and the rules, regulations or schemes made  or framed under this Code relating to those Chap ters, 
by the Cen
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 80]
les, regulations or schemes made  or framed under this Code relating to those Chap ters, 
by the Central Government; and for  the purposes of offences relating to other provisions of this Code and 
the rules, regulations  or schemes made or framed under this Code relating thereto, by the appropriate 
Government,  in such manner as may be presc ribed by the Central Government on payment by the offender  
to the appropriate Government the amount — 
(i) in the case of an offence punishable with fine only, the half of the maximum  fine provided for that 
offence; and  
(ii) in the case of an offence punisha ble with imprisonment for a term which is  not more than one 
year and also with fine, the three -fourth of the maximum fine  provided for that offence.  
(2) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) shall apply to an offence committed by a  person for the second 
time or thereafter within a period of three years from the date — 
(i) of commission of a similar offence which was earlier compounded; or  
(ii) of commission of similar offence for which such person was earlier convicted.  
(3) Every officer referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall exercise the powers to compound  an offence, 
subject to the direction, control and supervision of the Central Government for  the purposes of offences 
relating to Chapter III and Chapter IV and the rules, regulations or  schemes made or framed under this Code 
relating to those Chapters; and for the purposes  of offences relating to other provisions of this Code and the 
rules, regulations or schemes  made or framed under this Code relating thereto, by the appropriate 
Government.  
(4) Every ap plication for the compounding of an offence shall be made in such form  and in such manner 
as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government.  
(5) Where any offence is compounded before the institution of any prosecution, no  prosecution shall 
be instituted in relation to such offence, against the offender in relation to  whom the offe
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 80]
shall 
be instituted in relation to such offence, against the offender in relation to  whom the offence is so 
compounded.  
(6) Where the compounding of any offence is made after the institution of any  prosecution, such 
compounding shall be brought to the notice of the court in w hich the  prosecution is pending in writing by 
the officer referred to in sub -section ( 1), and on such  notice of the compounding of the offence being given 
to the court, the person against  whom the offence is so compounded shall be discharged.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 81]
81 
 (7) Any perso n who fails to comply with the order made by the officer referred to in  sub-section ( 1), 
shall be liable to pay a sum equivalent to twenty per cent. of the maximum  fine provided for the offence, in 
addition to such fine.  
CHAPTER XIII  
EMPLOYMENT INFORMATION  AND MONITORING  
139.Reporting of vacancies to career centres. —(1) The appropriate Government may, by 
notification, require that from such date  as may be specified in the notification, the employer in every 
establishment or any class or  category of establishments, before filling up any vacancy in any employment 
in that  establishment or such class or category of establishments, as the case may be, shall report  or cause 
to be reported, that vacancy to such career centre as may be specified in the  notification, and the employer 
shall thereupon comply with such requisition.  
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), the appropriate Government may prescribe  the following, 
namely: — 
(i) the manner in which the vacancies, referred to in sub -section ( 1), shall b e reported to the career 
centres electronically or otherwise;  
(ii) the form in which such vacancies shall be reported to the career centres; and  
(iii) the manner and form of filing the return by the employer, to the concerned  career centre.  
(3) Nothing in sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall be deemed to impose any obligation  upon any employer 
to recruit any person through the career centre to fill any vacancy  merely because such vacancy has been 
reported.  
(4) The executive officer shall have access to any record  or document in the possession  of any employer 
required to furnish any information or returns for the purposes of this  Chapter and may enter, at any 
reasonable time, any premises where he believes such record  or document to be and inspect or take copies 
of such records or documents or ask any  question necessary for obtaining any information required.  
140. Exclusions from application of this
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 81]
uestion necessary for obtaining any information required.  
140. Exclusions from application of this Chapter. — (1) The provisions of section 139 shall not apply 
in relation to vacancies, — 
(a) in any employment in agricu lture (including horticulture) in any establishment  in private sector 
other than employment in plantation; or  
(b) in any employment in domestic service; or  
(c) in any employment connected with the staff of Parliament or any State  Legislature; or  
(d) in any  employment the total duration of which is less than ninety days; or  
(e) in any class or category of establishments as may be notified by the Central  Government; or  
(f) in any establishment (other than Government establishment) with less than  twenty or such number 
of employees as may be notified by the Central Government;  and 
(g) in any other employment as may be notified by the Central Government.  
(2) Unless the Central Government, by notification direct, the provisions of this  Chapter shall not apply 
in relation to — 
(a) vacancies which are proposed to be filled through promotion or by absorption  of surplus staff of 
any branch or department of the same establishment or through  independent recruitment agencies such 
as Union Public Service Commission, Sta ff Selection Commission or a State Public Service 
Commission or any other agencies as  may be notified by the Central Government; or  
(b) vacancies in an employment which carries a monthly remuneration of less  than an amount notified 
by the appropriate Gover nment.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 82]
82 
 CHAPTER XIV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
141. Social Security Fund. —(1) There shall be established by the Central Government a Social 
Security Fund  for social security and welfare of the unorganised workers, gig workers and platform workers  
and the sources of the fund shall comprise of funding received — 
(i) under sub -section ( 3) of section 109;  
(ii) under sub -section ( 3) of section 114;  
(iii) from the composition of the offences under this Code relating to Central  Government and from 
any other Social Security F und established under any other  central labour law.  
(2) A separate account shall be established and maintained for the funding mentioned  under each of the 
clauses ( i), (ii) and ( iii). 
(3) Social Security Fund referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be expende d for the  purposes for which 
each separate account has been established and maintained under  sub-section ( 2). 
(4) The Social Security Fund shall be established and administered in the manner  prescribed by the 
Central Government.  
(5) There shall be established by the State Government a Social Security Fund for the  welfare of the 
unorganised workers in which there shall be credited the amount received  from — 
(i) the composition of offences under this Code relating to the State Government; and  
(ii) such  other sources as may be prescribed by the State Government,  and the fund shall be 
administered and expended for the welfare of the unorganised workers  in such manner as may be 
prescribed by the State Government.  
 
142.  Application of Aadhaar. — (1) An empl oyee or unorganised worker or any other person, as the 
case may be,  for— 
(a) registration as member or beneficiary; or  
(b) seeking benefit whether in kind, cash or medical sickness benefit or pension,  gratuity or maternity 
benefit or any other benefit or f or withdrawal of fund; or  
(c) availing services of career centre; or  
(d) receiving any payment or medical attendance as Insured Person himself or  for 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 82]
reer centre; or  
(d) receiving any payment or medical attendance as Insured Person himself or  for his dependants,  
under this Code or rules, regulations or schemes made or framed thereunder, shall establish  his identity or, 
as the case may be, the identity of his family members or dependants through  Aadhaar number and for such 
purpose the expression “Aadhaar ” shall have the meaning as  defined in clause ( a) of section 2 of the 
Aadhaar (The Targeted D elivery of Financial and  Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016  (18 of 
2016) : 
Provided that any foreigner employee shall obtain and submit Aadhaar number for  establishing his 
identity, as soon as possible, on becoming resident within the meaning  of clause ( v) of section 2 of the 
Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies,  Benefits and Services) Act, 2016  (18 of 
2016) . 
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), the Aadhaar number issued to an individual  shall be in 
accordance with the provisions of section 3 of the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of  Financial and Other 
Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016  (18 of 2016) . 
143. Power to exempt establishment. —(1)Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, the 
appropriate Governmen t may, by notification, and subject to the conditions which may include the 
eligibility conditions  to be fulfilled prior to grant of exemption and the conditions to be complied with after  
exemption, as may be prescribed by the Central Government in this be half, grant exemption  to an 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 83]
83 
 establishment or class of establishments (including factory or other establishments  under the control of 
Central Government or State Government or local bodies) or employees  or class of employees, from any 
or all of the provisio ns of this Code or the scheme framed  thereunder as may be specified in the notification 
and may renew for further period such  exemption by like notification:  
Provided that no such exemption, — 
(i) in respect of Provident Fund Scheme, Pension Scheme and Insurance Scheme,  without prior 
consultation with the Central Board; and  
(ii) in respect of Chapter IV, without prior consultation with the Corporation,   
shall be granted or renewed and the Central Board or the Corporation, as the case may be,  shall on such 
consultation forward its view to the appropriate Government within such time  as may be prescribed by that 
Government.  
(2) The appropriate Government may, in the notification referred to in sub -section ( 1), specify therein 
conditions as may be prescrib ed by that Government, which the exempted  establishment or the class of 
establishments or an employee or class of employees, as the  case may be, shall comply with after such 
exemption:  
Provided that for the purpose of grant of exemption in respect of Provi dent Fund  Scheme, Pension 
Scheme and Insurance Scheme, the terms and conditions of exemption  shall be specified in such respective 
schemes.  
(3) The exemption granted under sub -section ( 1) to an establishment or class of  establishments or an 
employee or cla ss of employees, as the case may be, shall be initially  for a period of three years from the 
date of publication of such notification and may be  extended by the appropriate Government to the extent 
of such period as may be prescribed  by the Central Governm ent: 
Provided that for the purpose of grant of exemption in respect of Provident Fund  Scheme, Pension 
Scheme and Insurance Scheme, exemption may be extended for such  period as may be
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 83]
  Scheme, Pension 
Scheme and Insurance Scheme, exemption may be extended for such  period as may be specified in such 
respective schemes.  
(4) The exemption granted under sub -section ( 1) shall only be granted if the employees  in the 
establishment or class of establishments or an employee or the class of employees so  exempted are 
otherwise in receipt of benefits substantially similar or superior to the benefits  provided in the provisions 
of the Code or the scheme framed thereunder.  
(5) For the purposes of administering the fund, managing the investments, maintaining  accounts of the 
contributions, withdrawals, credit of interest in respect of each employee of  the fund created, an d any other 
matter specified in the scheme for any exempted establishment  or class of establishments, or employees or 
class of employees, a board of trustees shall be  constituted by the employer which will be a legal entity 
which can sue and can be sued an d the conditions for management of the trust shall be prescribed by the 
appropriate  Government as part of the conditions for exemption:  
Provided that conditions for administering the fund, managing the investments,  maintaining accounts 
of the contributions, withdrawals, credit of interest in respect of each  employee of the fund created, in 
respect of exemption from Provident Fund Scheme, Pension  Scheme and Insurance Scheme shall be 
specified in such respective schemes.  
(6) Where an exemption is  granted under this section from operation of any or all the  provisions of the 
Code or any of the scheme under Chapter III, to any establishment, class  of establishments, employee or 
class of employees, the employer in relation to such  establishment shall furnish such returns electronically 
in respect of persons employed,  accounts maintained in respect of employees, investments made from the 
fund, provide  facilities for inspection and pay such inspection charges as the Central Government may  
direct.  
(7) I
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 83]
ities for inspection and pay such inspection charges as the Central Government may  
direct.  
(7) If employer in relation to any establishment or class of establishments or employee  or class of 
employees in respect of whom the exemption has been granted under  sub-section ( 1), fails to comply with 
any of the conditions specified under this section,  then, t he appropriate Government may on such failure, 
cancel the exemption so granted.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 84]
84 
 (8) Where any exemption granted under sub -section ( 1) is cancelled, the entire amount  of surplus and 
reserves, if any, and accumulations to the credit of every employee, to who m such exemption applied, in 
the exempted fund of the establishment in which he is employed,  shall be transferred to the respective 
statutory fund created under this Code within such  time and manner as specified in the conditions for grant 
of exemption:  
Provided that in respect of any cancellation of exemption from the Provident Fund  Scheme, Pension 
Scheme and Insurance Scheme, the time limit, form and manner of transfer  of accumulations of exempted 
employees from the exempted funds to such respective  funds  shall be specified in such respective schemes.  
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the employer of an  establishment exempted 
under sub -section ( 1), after the resolution of the board of trustees  of the establishment to that effect may 
make an application to the appropriate Government  for surrender of the exemption granted under that sub -
section from the date specified in the  application and the appropriate Government may on receipt of that 
application, allow the  employer to remit the contribution in the statutory funds under this Code from the 
date specified in the application and process the application for cancellation of exemption and  on such 
cancellation, the employer and the board of trustees shall transfer accumulation of  each em ployee and 
surplus and reserves from the fund referred to in sub -section ( 5), to the  concerned statutory funds under this 
Code within such time and in such manner as may be  notified by the appropriate Government:  
Provided that in respect of any surrender o f exemption from the Provident Fund  Scheme, the Pension 
Scheme and the Insurance Scheme, the time limit, form and manner of  transfer of accumulation of exempted 
employees and surplus and reserves from the fund  referred to in sub -secti
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 84]
ccumulation of exempted 
employees and surplus and reserves from the fund  referred to in sub -section ( 5), to the concern ed statutory 
funds under this Code shall be  such as may be specified in the concerned schemes framed under Chapter 
III. 
144.Power to defer or reduce. — Notwithstanding anything contained in Chapter III or Chapter IV, 
the Central  Government may by order, def er or reduce employer's contribution, or employee's contribution,  
or both, payable under Chapter III or Chapter IV, as the case may be, for a period up to three  months at a 
time, in respect of establishment to which Chapter III or Chapter IV, as the case  may be, applies, for whole 
of India or part thereof in the event of pandemic, endemic or  national disaster.  
145. Liability in case of transfer of establishment. — Where an employer transfers his establishment 
in whole or in part, by sale, gift,  lease or licence or in any other manner whatsoever, the employer and the 
person to whom  the establishment is so transferred shall jointly and severally be liable to pay the amount  
due in respect of any liabilities, cess or any other amount payable under this Code i n respect of the periods 
up to the date of such transfer:  
Provided that the liability of the transferee shall be limited to the value of the assets  obtained by him 
by such transfer.  
146. Members officers and staff to be public servants. — Every member of a Social Security 
Organisation and the officers and staff thereof,  any Inspector -cum-Facilitator, competent authority, 
Authorised Officer, Recovery Officer  and any other person discharging any function under this Code, shall 
be deemed to be a  public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 85]
85 
 147. Protection of action taken in good faith. —No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against — 
(i) the Central Government;  
(ii) a State Government;  
(iii) a Social Security Organisation;  
(iv) a competent authority;  
(v) any officer or staff of a Social Security Organisation; or  
(vi) any other person or authority,  discharging the functions or exercising the powers under this Code, 
for anything which is  in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Code or of any 
rules,  regulations or schemes made or framed thereunder.  
148. Misuse of benefits. —If the appropriate Government is satisfied in the manner prescribed by it 
that any  establishment or any other person has misused any benefit provided to him under this  Code or 
rules, regulations or schemes made or framed thereunder, then, such Government  may, by notification, 
deprive such establishment or other person, as the case may be, from  such benefit for suc h time as may be 
specified in the notification:  
Provided that no such order shall be passed unless an opportunity of being heard is  given to such 
establishment or other person, as the case may be:  
Provided further that the manner to ascertain misuse of any  benefit under this section  relating to Chapter 
III, shall be specified in the Provident Fund Scheme or the Pension  Scheme or the Insurance Scheme, as 
the case may be.  
149. Power of Central Government to give directions to State Government and Social Secur ity 
Organisations. —The Central Government may give directions to — 
(i) any State Government or a State Board constituted under section 12 to  execute in that State, of 
any of the provisions of this Code; or  
(ii) any of the Social Security Organisations in respect of the matters relating to  the implementation 
of the provisions of this Code.  
150. Power to frame schemes. — The appropriate Government may, subject to the condition of 
previous  publication, frame schemes not incons
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 85]
opriate Government may, subject to the condition of 
previous  publication, frame schemes not inconsistent with this Code, for the purposes of giving  effect to 
the provisions thereof.  
151. Protection against attachment etc. — (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law 
for the time being in  force, the amount standing to be credited in favour of the employee under Chapters 
III, IV,  V, VI or VII of any member of any fund under this Code, or of any exempted employee in a  
provident fund maintained by his employer, shall not in any way be capable of being  assigned or charged 
and shall not be liable to attachment under any decree or order of any  Court in respect of any debt or liability 
incurred by such employee or member or the exempted  employee, as the case may be.  
(2) Any amount standing to the credit of a member in the fund or of an exempted  employee in a 
provident fund maintained by his employer at the time of the death of such  member or the exempted 
employee, as the case may be, and payable to his nominee or in  case of failure of nomination, to his family 
under the scheme or the rules of the fund shall,  subject to any d eduction authorised by the said scheme or 
rules, as the case may be, vest  in the nominee or such family and shall be free from any debt or other liability 
incurred by  the deceased or the nominee before his death and shall also not be liable to attachment  under 
any decree or order of any court.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,  any amount due 
under the Chapters referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be the charge on the  assets of the establishment to 
which it relates and shall be paid in priority in accordance  with the provisions of the Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code, 2016  (31 of 2016) . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 86]
86 
 152. Power to amend Schedule. —(1) If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or 
expedient so to  do, it may, b y notification amend the First Schedule, Fourth Schedule, Fifth Schedule, Sixth  
Schedule and Seventh Schedule by way of addition or deletion therein and upon such  addition or deletion, 
the Schedules shall stand to have been amended accordingly.  
(2) If the appropriate Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to  do, it may, by 
notification amend the Second Schedule and Third Schedule by way of  addition therein and not otherwise, 
and upon such addition, the Schedules shall stand to  have bee n amended accordingly.  
153. Transitional provisions. — Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, the following 
organisations  constituted or established under the enactments repealed under section 164, namely: — 
(i) the Central Board constituted under section 5A of the Employees' Provident  Funds and 
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952  (19 of 1952) ; 
(ii) Executive Committee constituted under section 5AA of the Employees'  Provident Funds and 
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952  (19 of 1952) ; 
(iii) the Corpor ation established under section 3 of the Employees' State  Insurance Act, 1948  (34 of 
1948) ; 
(iv) the Medical Benefit Council constituted under section 10 of the Employees'  State Insurance Act, 
1948  (34 of 1948) ; 
(v) the Standing Committee of the Corporation constituted under section 8 of  the Employees' State 
Insurance Act, 1948  (34 of 1948) ; and  
(vi) the Board constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 18 of the Building  and Other Construction 
Workers (Regulation of Employment and Condition of S ervice)  Act, 1996,  shall, after the 
commencement of this Code, continue to exercise the powers and discharge  the functions of the 
corresponding organisations under this Code, respectively, the Central  Board of Trustees for Employees 
Provident Fund constitu ted under section 4, the
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 86]
vely, the Central  Board of Trustees for Employees 
Provident Fund constitu ted under section 4, the Executive  Committee constituted under sub -section ( 3) 
of section 4, the Employees State Insurance  Corporation, constituted under section 5, the Medical 
Benefit Committee constituted under  sub-section ( 5) of section 5, the Standing Committee constituted 
under sub -section ( 3) of section 5, Building Workers' Welfare Board constituted under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 7,  as if such organisations constituted or, as the case may be, established under such repealed  
enactments, had been cons tituted under the respective provisions of this Code, till such  corresponding 
organisations are constituted under this Code or till their respective time  period under the repealed 
enactments expire, whichever is earlier.  
154. Power of appropriate Government to make rules. —(1) The appropriate Government may, by 
notification, and subject to the condition  of previous publication, make rules not inconsistent with this Code 
for the purpose of  giving effect to the provisions thereof.  
(2) In particular an d without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such  rules may provide 
for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the amount in connection with premium for Group Insurance Scheme of the  beneficiaries under 
clause ( c), the education al schemes for the benefit of children of  the beneficiaries under clause ( d) and 
the medical expenses for treatment of major  ailments of a beneficiary or, such dependant under clause 
(e) of sub -section ( 6) of section 7;  
(b) manner and time within which sec ond appeal may be filed to the Employees'  Insurance Court by 
the Insured Person or the Corporation under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 7) of section 37;  
(c) the manner of commencement of proceedings before the Employees'  Insurance Court, fees and 
procedure thereof under sub -section ( 1) of section 51;  
(d) bank or other financial institut
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 86]
and 
procedure thereof under sub -section ( 1) of section 51;  
(d) bank or other financial institution in which the gratuity shall be invested for  the benefit of minor 
under the third proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 53;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 87]
87 
 (e) the time, form and manner of nomination by an employee under sub -section ( 1), the time to make 
fresh nomination under sub -section ( 4), the form and manner of  modification of a nomination under 
sub-section ( 5) and the form for fresh nomination  under sub -section ( 6) of section 55;  
(f) time within whi ch and the form in which a written application shall be made  under sub -section ( 1) 
and the form of application to the competent authority under  clause ( b) of sub -section ( 5) of section 56;  
(g) the manner of registration of an establishment by the employer under  sub-section ( 3) and the 
manner of composition of the Board of Trustees of the  approved gratuity fund and the manner in which 
the competent authority may recover  the amount of the gratuity payable to an employee from the insurer 
under  sub-section ( 4) of section 57;  
(h) the qualifications and experience of the officer appointed as the competent  authority under sub -
section ( 1) of section 58;  
(i) authority to whom an appeal may be preferred under sub -section ( 3) of section 72;  
(j) class of employers and t he form of notice -book under sub -section ( 4) of section 82;  
(k) the manner of recording the memorandum in a register by the competent authority under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 89;  
(l) such other experience and qualifications for appointment as a competent  authority under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 91;  
(m) time limit to pay the amount of cess under section 101;  
(n) fees for appeal under sub -section ( 2) of section 105;  
(o) conditions to acquire, hold, sell or otherwise transfer any movable or  immov able property under 
sub-section ( 1), conditions to invest moneys, re -invest or  realise investments under sub -section ( 2) 
terms to raise loans and take measures for  discharging such loans under sub -section ( 3) and terms to 
constitute for the benefit  of offi cers and staff or any class of them, provident or other benefit funds 
under  sub-s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 87]
benefit  of offi cers and staff or any class of them, provident or other benefit funds 
under  sub-section ( 4) of section 120;  
(p) conditions and manner of writing off irrecoverable dues under section 121;  
(q) other powers of Inspector -cum-Facilitator under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 6) of section 122;  
(r) form and manner for maintenance of records and registers and other particulars  and details under 
clause ( a), manner and form for display of notices at the work places  of the employees under clause ( b) 
and the manner and period of filing returns to the  officers or authority under clause ( d) of section 123;  
(s) the form and manner of application for compounding of an offence under  sub-section ( 4) of section 
138; 
(t) the manner and form for reporting vacancies and form for f iling the return by  the employer, to the 
concerned career centre under sub -section ( 2) of section 139;  
(u) the time within which the Central Board or the Corporation, as the case may  be, shall forward its 
view to the appropriate Government under sub -sectio n (1), conditions which the exempted 
establishment or the class of establishments or an  employee or class of employees, as the case may be, 
shall comply with after such  exemption under sub -section ( 2) and conditions for management of the 
trust under  sub-section ( 5) of section 143;  
(v) manner of determining the misuse of any benefit by an establishment or by  any other person under 
section 148; and  
(w) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed by the  appropriate Government 
under the prov isions of this Code.  
155. Power of Central Government to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification, and subject to the condition of  previous publication, make rules not inconsistent with this Code, 
for the purpose of giving  effect to the provisions thereof.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 88]
88 
 (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such  rules may provide 
for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner, and the conditions subject to which, the provisions of Chapter II I shall be made 
inapplicable to an establishment by the Central Provident Fund  Commissioner, under sub -section ( 5) 
and the manner, and the conditions subject to  which the provisions of that Chapter IV shall be made 
inapplicable to an establishment  by the D irector General of the Corporation under sub -section ( 7) of 
section 1;  
(b) manner of establishment and maintenance of career centre and the career  services under clause 
(9), the income of dependant parents (including father -in-law and mother -in-law of a woman 
employee), under sub -clause ( e) of clause ( 33) and  other authority who shall be deemed to be the 
occupier under sub -clause ( c) and the  matters which are directly related to the condition of ship, for 
which the owner of ship  shall be deemed to be the occupier under the proviso to the said sub -clause ( c) 
of clause ( 52), of section 2;  
(c) the time and manner of registration of establishment, the manner of making  application for 
cancellation of the registration, the conditions subject to which the  registr ation shall be cancelled and 
the procedure of cancellation and other matters  relating thereto in respect of an establishment to which 
Chapter III or Chapter IV  applies, and whose business activities are in the process of closure, under 
section 3;  
(d) the manner of administration of the funds vested in the Central Board under  sub-section ( 1), the 
manner to assist the Central Board in performance of its functions  by Executive Committee under sub -
section ( 3), the terms and conditions, including  tenure of offi ce of members of the Central Board and 
Executive Committee under  sub-section ( 6) and the other functions and the manner of performing such 
functions  under sub -s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 88]
 sub-section ( 6) and the other functions and the manner of performing such 
functions  under sub -section ( 7), of section 4;  
(e) the manner of administration of the Corporation and the manner of  representation of States under 
clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1), the manner of constitution  of Standing Committee under sub -section ( 3), 
the manner of administration of the  affairs of the Corporation, exercise of powers and performance of 
functions by the  Standing Committee under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 4), the duties and powers of  
Medical Benefit Committee under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 5) and the terms and  conditions, including 
tenure of office, subject to which a member of the Corporation  and Standing Committee shall discharge 
their respective duties under sub -section ( 7) of section 5;  
(f) the manner of exercising the powers and performance of the functions by the  National Social 
Security Board under sub -section ( 1), the manner of nomination of  members,  their term of office and 
other conditions of service, procedure to be followed  in the discharge of their functions and manner of 
filling vacancies under sub -section ( 4) and time, place and rules of procedure relating to the transaction 
of business under  sub-section ( 6) of section 6;  
(g) other welfare measures and facilities under clause ( j) of sub -section ( 6) of section 7;  
(h) the intervals at which Social Security Organisation or any Committee thereof  shall meet and the 
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at meetings  under sub -section ( 1), and the fee and 
allowances of members of such Social Security  Organisation or Committee under sub -section ( 4) of 
section 9;  
(i) manner of reconstitution of the Corporation or the Central Board or t he National Social Security 
Board or the State Unorganised Workers' Board or the Building  Workers' Welfare Board or any of the 
Committees under sub -section ( 1) and the  alternate arrangements for the purpos
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 88]
ard or any of the 
Committees under sub -section ( 1) and the  alternate arrangements for the purpose of administration of 
the relevant provisions of  this Code under sub -section ( 2) of section 11;  
(j) the manner of maintenance of a provident fund account in relation to the  establishment under sub -
section ( 1) of section 21;  
(k) the form, manner, time limits and fees for filing of appeal under sub -section (2) of section 23;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 89]
89 
 (l) salary and allowances of the Director General or the Financial Commissioner  under sub -section 
(3), their powers and duties under sub -section ( 4) and maximum  monthly salary limit under the proviso 
to sub -section ( 7) of section 24;  
(m) the manner of investment of Employees' State Insurance Fund or any other  money which is held 
by Corporation under sub -section ( 4) of section 25;  
(n) limits for defraying of expenditure under clause ( k) of section 26;  
(o) conditions to acquire, hold, sell or otherwise transfer any movable or  immovable property under 
sub-section ( 1), conditions to invest moneys by the  Corporation under sub -section ( 2) and the terms to 
raise loans and taking measures  for discharging such loans under sub -section ( 3) of section  27; 
(p) manner of insurance of employees under sub -section ( 1) of section 28;  
(q) the rate of contributions under sub -section ( 2) of section 29;  
(r) the type of administrative expenses and percentage of income which may be  spent on expenses 
and the limits  for such expenses under section 30;  
(s) the limit for the amount of payment under the proviso to clause ( f) of sub-section ( 1), and the 
qualifications to claim benefits, conditions, rate and period  thereof under sub -section ( 3) of section 32;  
(t) the limi ts within which the Corporation may incur expenditure from the  Employees' State 
Insurance Fund under section 33;  
(u) the manner and time within which the Insured person or the Corporation  may file appeal under 
clause ( a) of sub -section ( 7) of section 37;  
(v) the rates, periods and conditions for payment of dependants' benefit under  sub-section ( 1) and to 
other dependants under sub -section ( 2), of section 38;  
(w) the qualification of an Insured Person and his family to claim medical benefit  and the conditions 
subject to which such benefit may be given and the scale and  period thereof, under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 39, and the payment of contribut
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 89]
 the scale and  period thereof, under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 39, and the payment of contribution  and other conditions under the third proviso thereof;  
(x) the structure, functions, powers and acti vities of the organisation for  providing certain benefits to 
employees in case of sickness, maternity and employment  injury, under sub -section ( 6) of section 40;  
(y) extended period for insurance, the manner of satisfaction and the manner of  calculation of  
capitalised value of benefit payable to the employee under sub -section ( 1) of section 42;  
(z) terms and conditions subject to which the scheme may be operated under  section 44;  
(za) the manner of obtaining an insurance by every employer, other than an  employer or an 
establishment belonging to, or under the control of, the Central  Government or a State Government 
under sub -section ( 1) and conditions to exempt  and manner of establishing an approved gratuity fund 
under sub -section ( 2) and the time  limit to ge t establishment registered by the employer under  
sub-section ( 3), of section 57;  
(zb) the form of notice under sub -section ( 1) and the proof of pregnancy and  proof of delivery under 
sub-section ( 5) of section 62;  
(zc) the proof of miscarriage or medical termination of pregnancy under  sub-section ( 1), the proof of 
tubectomy operation under sub -section ( 2) and the  proof of illness under sub -section ( 3) of section 65;  
(zd) the duration of breaks under section 66;  
(ze) the number of employees and distance for  crèche facility under sub -section ( 1) of section 67;  
(zf) gross misconduct under the second proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 68;  
(zg) rate of interest to be paid by the employer under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 3) of section 77;  
(zh) the manner of no tice under sub -section ( 1) and the manner of transmitting  money under  
sub-section ( 3), of section 92;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 89]
, of section 92;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 90]
90 
 (zi) the form, manner and fee for application for claim or settlement under  sub-section ( 3) of section 
93; 
(zj) the manner and time of collection of cess  under sub -section ( 2), manner of  deposit of the cess so 
collected under sub -section ( 3), and the uniform rate or rates of  advance cess under sub -section ( 4) of 
section 100;  
(zk) the rate of interest in case of delayed payment of cess under section 101;  
(zl) the manner of self -assessment of cess under sub -section ( 1) of section 103;  
(zm) the authority to inquire and impose penalty under section 104;  
(zn) time limit to prefer appeal, appellate authority, form and manner of appeal  under sub -section ( 1) 
of se ction 105;  
(zo) manner of registration as beneficiary under section 106;  
(zp) benefits of a beneficiary under sub -section ( 2) of section 107;  
(zq) eligible age for registration under clause ( a) and form and manner of  information under clause 
(b), of sub -section ( 1) and the form of application, documents  for registration and manner of self 
registration under sub -section ( 2), of section 113;  
(zr) carrying out the matters specified in clause ( i) of sub -section ( 7) of section 114;  
(zs) manner of compounding of offences under sub -section ( 1) of section 138;  
(zt) the manner of establishment and administration of the Social Security Fund  under sub -section ( 4) 
of section 141;  
(zu) eligibility conditions to be fulfilled prior to grant of exemption and the  conditions to be complied 
with after exemption under sub -section ( 1); and extension  period of exemption under  
sub-section ( 3) of section 143; and  
(zv) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed by the  Central Government under 
the provisions of t his Code.  
156. Power of State Government to make rules. — (1) The State Government may, by notification, 
and subject to the condition of  previous publication, make rules not inconsistent with this Code, for the 
purpose of giv
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 90]
dition of  previous publication, make rules not inconsistent with this Code, for the 
purpose of giving  effect to the provisions the reof. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such  rules may provide 
for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner of exercising the powers and performance of functions by State  Unorganised Worke rs' 
Board under sub -section ( 9), the manner of nomination of  members of the Board, their term of office 
and other conditions of service, the procedure  to be followed in the discharge of their functions by, and 
the manner of filling vacancies  among the memb ers of, the Board under sub -section ( 12), and the time, 
place and  rules of procedure relating to the transaction of business at its meetings under  sub-section 
(14) of section 6;  
(b) the terms and conditions of appointment and the salaries and other  allowances payable to the 
chairperson and the other members of the Building Workers'  Welfare Board and the manner of filling 
of casual vacancies of such members, under  sub-section ( 4), the terms and conditions of appointment 
and the salary and allowances  payable to the Secretary and the other officers and employees of the said 
Board under  clause ( c) of sub -section ( 5) of section 7;  
(c) procedure to be followed by the Employees' Insurance Court under  sub-section ( 2) and the rules 
under sub -section ( 3) of section 50;  
(d) the amount to be deposited towards the expenditure of the funeral of the  employee with the 
competent authority by the employer under sub -section ( 7) of section 76;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 91]
91 
 (e) conditions when application for review is made without certificate of a  medical practitioner under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 79;  
(f) the frequent interval for medical examination under the proviso to  sub-section ( 1) of section 84;  
(g) the form of statement to be submitted by the employer under sub -section ( 1) of section 88;  
(h) the manner in which matters may be dealt with by or before a competent  authority under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 92;  
(i) time -limit for disposal of application and costs incidental to the proceedings  under sub -section ( 4) 
of section 93;  
(j) the manner  of authentication of memorandum under section 97;  
(k) such other sources of funding and the manner of administering and  expending of the fund under 
sub-section ( 5) of section 141; and  
(l) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed by the State  Government under the 
provisions of this Code.  
157.Power of Corporation to make regulations. — (1) The Corporation may, by notification, and 
subject to the condition of previous  publication, make regulations, not inconsistent with this Code and the  
rules and schemes  made or framed thereunder, for the administration of the affairs of the Corporation and 
for carrying into effect the provisions of Chapter IV and the provisions of this Code relating to  that Chapter.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such  regulations may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the cases and matters to be submitted for the decision of the Corporation  under clause ( b) of sub -
section ( 4) and the com position of committees under  sub-section ( 6) of section 5;  
(b) the areas in respect of which the Corporation may appoint Regional Boards  and local committees 
and the manner in which such Boards and committees shall  perform the functions and exercise the 
powers under sub -section ( 2) of section 12;  
(c) such other function
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 91]
 functions and exercise the 
powers under sub -section ( 2) of section 12;  
(c) such other functions of the Director General and the Financial Commissioner  under sub -section 
(4), the method of recruitment, salary and allowances, discipline  and other conditions of service of the 
officers an d employees under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 8) and minimum qualifying service for 
promotion to next higher grade  under the second proviso to sub -section ( 9) of section 24;  
(d) the unit in respect of which all contribution shall be payable under  sub-sectio n (3), and the days 
on which the contributions shall fall due under  sub-section ( 4) of section 29;  
(e) maintenance of register of employees by or through the contractor under  sub-section ( 7), and any 
matter relating or incidental to the payment and collect ion of  contribution under sub -section ( 9) of 
section 31;  
(f) qualifications and experience of other person to certify sickness under  clause ( a), authority to 
certify eligibility of a woman under clause ( b), authority to  certify eligibility for payment under clause 
(c) of sub -section ( 1), the conditions for  extension of medical benefits under sub -section ( 2) and any 
matter relating or  incidental to the accrual and payment of benefits under sub -section ( 4) of section 32;  
(g) continuous period in which the  employee contracts occupational disease  under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 36;  
(h) constitution of medical board under sub -section ( 1) and constitution of  medical appeal tribunal 
under sub -section ( 5) of section 37;  
(i) the period and the nature of medical benefit which may be allowed to a  person under the first 
proviso, conditions for voluntary retirement scheme under the  second proviso, payment of contribution 
and other conditions for eligibility to receive  medical benefits under the second proviso and the  
conditions for grant of medical  benefits to the Insured Person during employment injury under the 
fourth
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 91]
ions for grant of medical  benefits to the Insured Person during employment injury under the 
fourth proviso, to  sub-section ( 3), the time for which students of medical education institutions shall  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 92]
92 
 serve the Corporation and the manner in which the bon d shall be furnished under  clause ( b) of sub -
section ( 4) and manner of carrying out occupational and  epidemiological surveys and studies for 
assessment of health and working conditions  of Insured Persons under sub -section ( 6) of section 39;  
(j) other autho rity for providing permission to leave the area in which medical  treatment provided 
under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 3), form of nomination under  sub-section ( 6) and the authority to 
determine benefits under sub -section ( 9) of section 41;  
(k) user charges to be paid by other beneficiaries for medical facilities under  clause ( c) of the 
Explanation to section 44;  
(l) time within which the claims, recovery or contribution, from employer by the  Corporation and 
recovery of contribution by the employer from the C ontractor, shall  be made under the second proviso 
to sub -section ( 1) of section 51;  
(m) the forms of records and registers and of returns to be filed under the  second proviso to clause 
(d) of section 123;  
(n) the appellate authority not below the rank of the Joint Director of the  Corporation before whom 
appeal shall be preferred and the interest to be refunded to  the employer by the Corporation under 
section 126;  
(o) manner of levy and recovery of damages from the employer who makes  default in the payment 
of any contribution which he is liable to pay under section 128;  
(p) the circumstances in which and the condition subject to which any regulation  may be relaxed, the 
extent of such relaxation, and the authority by whom such relaxation  may be granted; and  
(q) any matter in respect of which regulations are required or permitted to be  made by this Code.  
158. Prior publication of rules regulations, etc. —The power to make rules, regulations and schemes 
under this Code (except the  schemes to be framed under Chapter III), shall be subject to the condition of 
the previous  publication of the same b
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 92]
ed under Chapter III), shall be subject to the condition of 
the previous  publication of the same being made, in the following manner, namely: — 
(a) the date to be specified after a draft of such rules, regulations and schemes  under consideration, 
shall not be less t han forty -five days from the date on which the  draft of the proposed rules, regulations 
and schemes is published for general  information in the Official Gazette;  
(b) such rules, regulations and schemes shall finally be published in the Official  Gazette and , on 
such publication, shall have effect as if enacted in this Code:  
Provided that the Central Government may, in the circumstances of epidemic,  pandemic or disaster, 
dispense with the condition of previous publication under this  section.  
159. Rules to giv e effect to arrangements with other countries for the transfer of money paid as 
compensation. — (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for the transfer to  any 
foreign country of money deposited with a competent authority under Chapter VII which has been awarded 
to or may be due to, any person residing or about to reside in such  foreign country and for the receipt, 
distribution and administration in any State of any  money deposited under the law relating to employees' 
compensation in any  foreign country,  which has been awarded to, or may be due to any person residing or 
about to reside in any  State:  
Provided that no sum deposited under Chapter VII in respect of fatal accidents shall  be so transferred 
without the consent of the employer co ncerned after the competent  authority receiving the sum has passed 
orders determining its distribution and apportionment  under section 81.  
(2) Where money deposited with a competent authority has been so transferred in  accordance with the 
rules made under this section, the provisions elsewhere contained in  this Code regarding distribution by the 
competent authority of compensation deposited  with him s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 92]
  this Code regarding distribution by the 
competent authority of compensation deposited  with him shall cease to apply in respect of any such money.  
160.Laying of rules, regulations and schemes, etc. —(1) Eve ry rule, regulation, notification and 
scheme made or framed by the Central  Government or the Corporation, as the case may be, under this Code 
shall be laid, as soon  as may be after it is made or framed, before each House of Parliament, while it is in 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 93]
93 
 sessi on, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more  successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the  session or the successive 
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification  in the rule, regulation, notification or 
scheme, as the case may be, or both Houses agree that  the rule, regulation, notification or scheme, as the 
case may be, should not be made, such  rule, regulation, notification or scheme shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified  form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that  rule, 
regulation, notification or scheme, as the case may be.  
(2) Every rule and scheme made or framed, and every notification issued by, the State  Government 
under this Code, shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made or framed,  before the State Legislatures, 
where it consists of  two Houses, or where such legislature  consists of one House, before that House.  
161. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with this Code. —(1) The provisions of this Code 
shall have effect notwithstanding anything  inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time 
being in force, or in the terms  of any award, agreement or contract of service, whether made before or after 
the coming  into force of this Code:  
Provided that where under any such award, agreement, contract of service or otherwis e, a person is 
entitled to benefits in respect of any matter which are more favourable to him  than those to which he would 
be entitled under this Code, the person shall continue to be  entitled to the more favourable benefits in respect 
of that matter, notw ithstanding that he is  entitled to receive benefits in respect of other matters under this 
Code.  
(2) Nothing contained in this Code shall be construed to precl
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 93]
 of other matters under this 
Code.  
(2) Nothing contained in this Code shall be construed to preclude a person from  entering into an 
agreement with his employer for granting him rights or privile ges in respect  of any matter which are more 
favourable to him than those to which he would be entitled  under this Code.  
162.Delegation of powers. —The appropriate Government may, by notification, direct that all or any 
of the  powers and functions which may be exercised or performed by that Government may, in  relation to 
such matters and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified, be also  exercisable by the Central 
Board, the Corporation, the National Social Security Board, the  State Unorganised Workers' Board, 
Building Workers' Welfare Board or any officer or  authority subordinate to the Central Board, the 
Corporation, the National Social Security  Board, the State Unorganised Workers' Board, Building Workers' 
Welfare Board.  
163. Power to remove d ifficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Code, the  Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions,  
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Code, as may be necessary  or expedient for  removing the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a  period of two years 
from the commencement of this Code.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be a fter it is  made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
164. Repeal and savings. —(1) The following enactments are hereby repealed, namely: — 
1. The Employee's Compensation Act, 1923  (8 of 1923) ; 
2. The Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948  (34 of 1948) ; 
3. The Employees' Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952  (19 of 1952) ; 
4. The Employment Exchanges (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies)  Act, 1959  (31 of 1959) ; 
5. The Maternity Benefit Act, 1961  (53 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 93]
sory Notification of Vacancies)  Act, 1959  (31 of 1959) ; 
5. The Maternity Benefit Act, 1961  (53 of 1961) ; 
6. The Payment of Gratuity Act, 197 2 (39 of 1972) ; 
7. The Cine -Workers Welfare Fund Act, 1981  (33 of 1981) ; 
8. The Building and Other Construction Workers' Welfare Cess Act, 1996  (28 of 1996) ; 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 94]
94 
 9. The Unorganised Workers' Social Security Act, 2008  (33 of 2008) . 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, — 
(a) anything done or any action taken under the enactments so repealed  including any rule, regulation, 
notification (including the notifications issued by the  States), scheme, appointment, order or direction 
made thereunder or any benefit  provided  or given under any provision of such enactments, rules, 
regulations,  notifications or schemes made thereunder for any purpose shall be deemed to have  been 
done or taken or provided for such purpose under the corresponding provisions  of this Code including  
any rule, regulation, notification, scheme, appointment, order  or direction made thereunder and shall 
be in force to the extent they are not contrary  to the provisions of this Code including any rule, 
regulation, notification, scheme,  appointment, order o r direction made thereunder till they are repealed 
under the  corresponding provisions of this Code including any rule, regulation, notification,  scheme, 
appointment, order or direction made thereunder by the appropriate  Government;  
(b) the Employees' Provi dent Funds Scheme, 1952, the Employees' Deposit  Linked Insurance 
Scheme, 1976, the Employees' Pension Scheme, 1995 and the Tribunal  (Procedure) Rules, 1997 framed 
or made under the Employees' Provident Funds and  Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952  (19 of 19 52) 
and the rules, regulations and schemes made or  framed under the Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948  
(34 of 1948) , shall remain in force, to the  extent they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this 
Code for a period of one  year from the date of  commencement of this Code;  
(c) any exemption given under any enactments so repealed shall continue to be  in force till its validity 
expires or it ceases to be in operation under the provisions of  this Code or till any direction is made 
thereunder for such  purpose.  
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 94]
l any direction is made 
thereunder for such  purpose.  
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), the provisions of  section 6 of the General 
Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897) shall apply to the repeal of such enactments.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 95]
95 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See sections 1( 4), (8) and  152 ( 1)] 
APPLICABILITY  
Chapter No.  Chapter Heading  Applicability  
(1) (2) (3) 
III Employees' Provident 
Fund  Every establishment in which twenty or more 
employees are employed.  
IV Employees’ State 
Insurance Corporation  Every establishment in which ten or  more 
persons are employed other than a seasonal 
factory:  
Provided that Chapter IV shall also be 
applicable to an establishment, which carries on 
such hazardous or life threatening occupation as 
notified by the Central Government, in which 
even a single employee is employed:  
Provided further that an employer of a 
plantation, may opt the application of Chapter 
IV in respect of the plantation by giving 
willingness to the corporation, where the 
benefits available to the employees under that 
Chapter are bette r than what the employer is 
providing to them:  
Provided also that the contribution from the 
employers and employees of an establishment 
shall be payable under section 29 on and from 
the date on which any benefits under Chapter IV 
relating to the Employees State Insurance 
Corporation are provided by the Corporation to 
the employees of the establishment and such 
date shall be notified by the Central 
Government.  
V Gratuity  (a) every factory, mine, oilfield, plantation, port 
and railway company; and  
(b) every shop or establishment in which ten or 
more employees are employed, or were 
employed, on any day of the preceding twelve 
months; and such shops or establishments as 
may be notified by the appropriate Government 
from time to time.  
VI Maternity Benefit  (a) to every establishment being a factory, mine 
or plantation including any such establishment 
belonging to Government; and  
(b) to every shop or establishment in which ten 
or more employees are employed, or were 
employed, on any day of the preceding twelve 
months; and such other  shops or establishments 
notified by the appropriate  Government.  
   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 95]
 
months; and such other  shops or establishments 
notified by the appropriate  Government.  
   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 96]
96 
 VII Employee's Compensation  Subject to the provisions of the Second 
Schedule, it applies to the employers and 
employees to whom Chapter IV does not apply.  
VIII Social  Security and Cess 
in respect of Building and 
Other Construction 
Workers  Every establishment which falls under the 
building and other construction work.  
IX Social Security for 
Unorganised Workers'  Unorganised sector, unorganised workers', gig 
worker, plat form worker.  
XIII Employment Information 
and Monitoring  Career centres, vacancies, persons seeking 
services of career centres and employers.  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 97]
97 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
[See sections 2( 26), 74( 3), (5), 132 and 152( 2)] 
LIST OF PERSONS  WHO ARE EMPLOYEES WITHIN THE MEANING OF  
THE THIRD PROVISO TO CLAUSE ( 26) OF SECTION 2  
The following persons are employees within the meaning of third proviso to  clause ( 26) of section 2 
and subject to the said proviso, any person who is — 
(i) employed in railways, in connection with the operation, repair or maintenance  of a lift or a 
vehicle propelled by steam or other mechanical power or by electricity or  in connection with the loading 
or unloading of any such vehicle; or  
(ii) employed, in any premises wh erein or within the precincts whereof a  manufacturing process as 
defined in clause ( k) of section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948  (63 of 1948), is being carried on, or in any 
kind of work whatsoever incidental to or  connected with any such manufacturing proce ss or with the 
article made whether or  not employment in any such work is within such premises or precincts, and 
steam,  water or other mechanical power or electrical power is used; or  
(iii) employed for the purpose of making, altering, repairing, ornamenti ng, finishing or otherwise 
adapting for use, transport or sale any article or part of an  article in any premises; or  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this clause, persons employed outside  such premises or 
precincts but in any work incidental to, or connect ed with, the work  relating to making, altering, 
repairing, ornamenting, finishing or otherwise adapting  for use, transport or sale of any article or part 
of an article shall be deemed to be  employed within such premises or precincts; or  
(iv) employed in th e manufacture or handling of explosives in connection with  the employer's trade 
or business; or  
(v) employed, in any mine as defined in clause ( j) of section 2 of the Mines  Act, 1952 (35 of 1952), 
in any mining operation or in any kind of work, incidental to or  connected with any mining operation 
or with the min
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 97]
ation or in any kind of work, incidental to or  connected with any mining operation 
or with the mineral obtained, or in any kind of  work whatsoever below ground; or  
(vi) employed as the master or as a seaman of — 
(a) any ship which is propelled wholly or in part by steam or other  mechanical power o r by 
electricity or which is towed or intended to be towed by  a ship so propelled; or  
(b) any sea going ship not included in sub -clause ( a) provided with  sufficient area for 
navigation under sails alone; or  
(vii) employed for the purpose of — 
(a) loading, unloading, fuelling, constructing, repairing, demolishing,  cleaning or painting any 
ship of which he is not the master or a member of the  crew, or handling or transport within the 
limits of any port subject to the Ports  Act, 1908 (15 of 1908), or the Major  Port Trusts Act, 1963 
(38 of 1963), of goods  which have been discharged from or are to be loaded into any vessel; or  
(b) warping a ship through the lock; or  
(c) mooring and unmooring ships at harbour wall berths or in pier; or  
(d) removing or replacing dry dock caissons when vessels are entering or  leaving dry docks; or  
(e) the docking or undocking of any vessel during an emergency; or  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 98]
98 
 (f) preparing splicing coir springs and check wires, painting depth marks  on lock -sides, 
removing or replacing fenders w henever necessary, landing of  gangways, maintaining life -buoys 
up to standard or any other maintenance  work of a like nature; or  
(g) any work on jolly -boats for bringing a ship's line to the wharf; or  
(viii) employed in the construction, maintenance, repai r or demolition of — 
(a) any building which is designed to be or is or has been more than one  storey in height above 
the ground or twelve feet or more from the ground level  to the apex of the roof; or  
(b) any dam or embankment which is twelve feet or more i n height from its  lowest to its highest 
point; or  
(c) any road, bridge, tunnel or canal; or  
(d) any wharf, quay, sea -wall or other marine work including any moorings  of ships; or  
(ix) employed in setting up, maintaining, repairing or taking down any telegr aph or telephone line 
or post or any overhead electric line or cable or post or standard or  fittings and fixtures for the same; or  
(x) employed, in the construction, working, repair or demolition of any aerial  ropeway, canal, 
pipeline or sewer; or  
(xi) emp loyed in the service of any fire brigade; or  
(xii) employed upon a railway as defined in clause ( 31) of section 2 and  sub-section ( 1) of section 
197 of the Railways Act, 1989 (24 of 1989), either directly or  through a sub -contractor, by a person 
fulfilling  a contract with the railway  administration; or  
(xiii) employed as an inspector, mail guard, sorter or van peon in the Railway  Mail Service or as a 
telegraphist or as a postal or railway signaller, or employed in any  occupation ordinarily involving 
outdoor  work in the Indian Posts and Telegraphs  Department; or  
(xiv) employed, in connection with operation for winning natural petroleum or  natural gas; or  
(xv) employed in any occupation involving blasting operations; or  
(xvi) employed in the making of any exca vation for whi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 98]
cupation involving blasting operations; or  
(xvi) employed in the making of any exca vation for which explosives have been  used, or whose 
depth from its highest to its lowest point exceeds twelve feet; or  
(xvii) employed in the operation of any ferry boat capable of carrying more than  ten persons; or  
(xviii) employed on any estate which is  maintained for the purpose of growing  cardamom, 
cinchona, coffee, rubber or tea; or  
(xix) employed in the generating, transforming, transmitting or distribution of  electrical energy or 
in generation or supply of gas; or  
(xx) employed in a lighthouse as de fined in clause ( d) of section 2 of the Indian  Lighthouse Act, 
1927 (17 of 1927); or  
(xxi) employed in producing cinematograph pictures intended for public  exhibition or in exhibiting 
such pictures; or  
(xxii) employed in the training, keeping or working of  elephants or wild  animals; or  
(xxiii) employed in the tapping of palm -trees or the felling or logging of trees, or  the transport of 
timber by inland waters, or the control or extinguishing of forests  fires; or  
(xxiv) employed in operations for the catchin g or hunting of elephants or other  wild animals; or  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 99]
99 
 (xxv) employed as a diver; or  
(xxvi) employed in the handling or transport of goods in, or within the precincts  of,— 
(a) any warehouse or other place in which goods are stored; or  
(b) any market; or  
(xxvii) employed in any occupation involving the handling and manipulation of  radium or X -rays 
apparatus, or contact with radioactive substances; or  
(xxviii ) employed in or in connection with the construction, erection, dismantling,  operation or 
maintenance of an aircraft as defined in section 2 of the Indian Aircraft  Act, 1934 (22 of 1934); or  
(xxix) employed in horticultural operations, forestry, bee -keeping or farming by  tractors or other 
contrivances driven by steam or other mechanical power or by  electricity; or  
(xxx) employed in the construction, working, repair or maintenance of a  tube-well; or  
(xxxi) employed in the maintenance, repair or renewal of electric fittings in a  building; or  
(xxxii ) employed in a circus; or  
(xxxiii ) employed as watchman in any factory or establishment; or  
(xxxiv ) employed in any operation in the sea for catching fish; or  
(xxxv) employed in any employment which requires handling of snakes for the  purpose of 
extraction of venom or for the purpose of looking after s nakes or handling  any other poisonous animal 
or insect; or  
(xxxvi ) employed in handling animals like horses, mules and bulls; or  
(xxxvii ) employed for the purpose of loading or unloading any mechanically  propelled vehicle or 
in the handling or transport of  goods which have been loaded in  such vehicles; or  
(xxxviii ) employed in cleaning of sewer lines or septic tanks within the limits of  a local authority; 
or 
(xxxix ) employed on surveys and investigation, exploration or gauge or discharge  observation of 
rivers including drilling operations, hydrological observations and  flood forecasting activities, ground 
water surveys and exploration; or  
(xl) employed in cleaning of jungles or reclaiming land or ponds; or 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 99]
 surveys and exploration; or  
(xl) employed in cleaning of jungles or reclaiming land or ponds; or  
(xli) employed in cultivation of land or rearing and  maintenance of live -stock or  forest operations 
or fishing; or  
(xlii) employed in installation, maintenance or repair of pumping equipment  used for lifting of 
water from wells, tube -wells, ponds, lakes, streams and the like; or  
(xliii) employed in the cons truction, boring or deepening of an open well or  dug well, bore well, 
bore-cum-dug well, filter point and the like; or  
(xliv) employed in spraying and dusting of insecticides or pesticides in  agricultural operations or 
plantations; or  
(xlv) employed in mec hanised harvesting and threshing operations; or  
(xlvi) employed in working or repair or maintenance of bulldozers, tractors,  power tillers and the 
like; or  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 100]
100 
 (xlvii) employed as artist for drawing pictures on advertisement boards at a  height of 3.66 metres 
or more from the ground level; or  
(xlviii ) employed in any newspaper establishment as defined in the Working  Journalists and Other 
Newspaper Employees (Conditions of Service) and  Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955 (45 of 1955) 
and engaged in outdoor work; o r 
(xlix) employed as sales promotion employee; or  
(l) any other employee or class of employee employed in an establishment or  class of 
establishments to which the Employees' Compensation Act, 1923 (8 of 1923)  was applicable in any 
State immediately before the commencement of this Code.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 101]
101 
 THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
[See sections 2 ( 51), 36( 1), 74 ( 1), (3), (5), 131( 5), 132 and 152( 2)] 
LIST OF OCCUPATIONAL DISEASES  
Serial No.  Occupational disease  Employment  
(1) (2) (3) 
PART A  
1. Infectious and parasitic diseases contracted in 
an occupation where there is a particular risk of 
contamination  (a) all work involving exposure to health or  
laboratory work;  
(b) all work involving exposure to veterinary  
work;  
(c) work relating to handling animals, animal  
carcasses, part of such carcasses, or  merchandise 
which may have been  contaminated by animals or 
animal carcasses;  
(d) other work carrying a particular risk of  
contamination.  
2. Diseases caused by work in compressed air  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
3. Diseases caused by lead or its toxic compounds  3. All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
4. Poisoning by nitrous fumes  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
5. Poisoning by organo phosphorus compounds  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
PART B  
1. Diseases caused by phosphorus or  its toxic 
compounds  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
2. Diseases caused by mercury or its toxic 
compounds  All work involving exposure to the risk 
concerned.  
3. Diseases caused by benzene or its toxic 
homologues  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
4. Diseases caused by nitro and amido toxic 
derivatives of benzene or its  homologues  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
5. Diseases caused by chromium or its toxic 
compounds  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
6. Diseases caused by arsenic or its toxic 
compounds  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
7. Diseases caused by radioactive substances and 
ionising radiations  All work involving exposure to the action of 
radioactive substances or ionising radiations . 
8. Primary epitheliomatous cancer of the skin 
caused
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 101]
dioactive substances or ionising radiations . 
8. Primary epitheliomatous cancer of the skin 
caused by tar, pitch, bitumen, mineral oil, 
anthracene, or the compoun ds, products or 
residues of these substances  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
 
9. Diseases caused by the toxic halogen  
derivatives of hydrocarbons (of the aliphatic and 
aromatic series).  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
 
10. Diseases caused by carbon disulphide  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
11. Occupational cataract due to infra -red 
radiations  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 102]
102 
 12. Diseases caused by manganese or its toxic 
compounds  All work involving exposure to the risk 
concerned.  
13. Skin diseases caused by physical, chemical or 
biological agents not included in other items  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
14. Hearing impairment caused by noise  All wor k involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
15. Poisoning by dinitrophenol or a homologue or 
by substituted dinitro -phenol or by the salts of 
such substances  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
16. Diseases caused by beryllium or its toxic  
compounds  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
17. Diseases caused by cadmium or its toxic 
compounds  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
18. Occupational asthma caused by  recognised 
sensitising agents inherent to the work pr ocess  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
19. Diseases caused by fluorine or its toxic 
compounds  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
20. Diseases caused by nitroglycerin or other 
nitroacid esters  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
21. Diseases caused by alcohols and ketones  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
22. Diseases caused by asphyxiants, carbon 
monoxide and its toxic derivatives, hydrogen 
sulphide  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
 
23. Lung cancer and mesotheliomas caused by 
asbestos  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
24. Primary neoplasm of the epithelial lining of 
the urinary bladder or the kidney or the ureter  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
25. Snow blindness in snow bound areas  All work involving exposure to the risk 
concerned.  
26. Diseases due to effect of heat in extreme hot 
climate  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
27. Diseases due to effect of cold in extreme cold 
climate  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
PART 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 102]
ffect of cold in extreme cold 
climate  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
PART C  
1. Pneumoconioses caused by sclerogenic mineral 
dust (silicoses, anthraoosilicosis, asbestosis) and 
silico -tuberculosis provided that silicosis is an 
essential factor in causi ng the resultant incapacity  
or death  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
 
2. Bagassosis  All work involving exposure to the risk 
concerned.  
3. Bronchopulmonary diseases caused by cotton, 
flax hemp and sisal  dust (Byssionsis).  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
4. Extrinsic allergic alveelitis caused by the 
inhalation of organic dusts  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
5. Bronchopulmonary diseases caused by hard 
metals  All work involving exposure to the risk 
concerned.  
6. Acute Pulmonary oedema of high altitude.  All work involving exposure to the risk  
concerned.  
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 103]
103 
 THE FOURTH SCHEDULE  
[See sections 2( 55), (56), 76( 1) and 152( 1)] 
PART I  
LIST OF INJURIES DEEMED TO RESULT IN PERMANENT  
TOTAL DISABLEMENT  
Serial 
No. Description of Injury  Percentage of  
loss of earning capacity  
(1) (2) (3) 
1. Loss of both hands or amputation at higher sites  100 
2. Loss of a hand and a foot  100 
3. Double amputation through leg or thigh, or amputation 
through leg or thigh on one side and loss of other foot  100 
 
4. Loss of sight to such an extent as to render the claimant 
unable to perform any work for which eye -sight is essential  100 
5. Very severe facial disfigurement  100 
6. Absolute deafness  100 
 
PART II  
LIST OF INJURIES DEEMED TO RESULT IN PERMANENT  
PARTIAL DISABLEMENT  
Serial 
No. Description of Injury  Percentage of  
loss of earning capacity  
(1) (2) (3) 
1. Amputation through shoulder joint  90 
2. Amputation below shoulder with stump less than [20.32  
Cms.] from tip of acromion  80 
 
3. Amputation form [20.32 Cms.] from tip of acromion to less 
than [11.43 Cms.] below tip of olecranon  70 
 
4. Loss of a hand or of the thumb and four fingers of one hand 
or amputation from [11.43 Cms.] below tip of olecranon  60 
 
5. Loss of thumb  30 
6. Loss of thumb and its metacarpal bone  40 
7. Loss of four fingers of one hand  50 
8. Loss of three fingers of one hand  30 
9. Loss of two fingers of one hand  20 
10. Loss of terminal phalanx of thumb  20 
11. Guillotine amputation of tip of thumb without loss of bone  10 
Amputation cases -lower limbs  
12. Amputation of both feet resulting in end bearing stumps  90 
13. Amputation through both feet proximal to the metatarso -
phalangeal joint  80 
 
14. Loss of all toes of both feet through the metatarso -phalangeal 
joint 40 
 
15. Loss of all toes of both feet proximal to the proximal inter -
phalangeal joint  30 
 
16. Loss of all toes of both feet distal to the proximal inter -
phalangeal joint  20 
 
17. Amputation at hip  90 
18. Amputation below hip
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 103]
 to the proximal inter -
phalangeal joint  20 
 
17. Amputation at hip  90 
18. Amputation below hip with stump not exceeding [12.70 
Cms.] in length measured from tip of great trenchanter  
 80 
 
19. Amputation below hip with stump exceeding [12.70 Cms.] 
in length measured from tip of great trenchanter but not  
beyond middle thigh  70 
 
20. Amputation below middle thigh to [8.89 Cms.] below knee  60 
21. Amputation below knee with stump exceeding [8.89 Cms.] 
but not exceeding [12.70 Cms.]  50 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 104]
104 
 22. Amputation below knee with stump exceeding [12.70 Cms.]  50 
23. Amputation of one foot resulting in end bearing  50 
24. Amputation through one foot proximal to the metatarso -
phalangeal joint  50 
25. Loss of all toes of one foot through the metatarso -
phalangeal joint  20 
 
Other injuries  
26. Loss of one eye, without complications, the other being 
normal  40 
 
27. Loss of vision of one eye, without complications or 
disfigurement of eye -ball, the other being normal  30 
 
28. Loss of partial vision of one eye  
Loss of — 10 
 
A-Fingers of right or left hand  
Index finger  
29. Whole  14 
30. Two phalanges  11 
31. One phalanx  9 
32. Guillotine amputation of tip without loss of bone  5 
Middle finger  
33. Whole  12 
34. Two phalanges  9 
35. One phalanx  7 
36. Guillotine amputation of tip without loss of bone  4 
Ring or little finger  
37. Whole  7 
38. Two phalanges  6 
39. One phalanx  5 
40. Guillotine amputation of tip without loss of bone  2 
B-Toes of right or left foot  
Great toe  
41. Through metatarso -phalangeal joint  14 
42. Part, with some loss of bone  3 
Any other toe  
43. Through metatarso -phalangeal joint  3 
44. Part, with some loss of bone  1 
Two toes of one foot, excluding great toe  
45. Through metatarso -phalangeal joint  5 
46. Part, with some loss of bone  2 
Three toes of one foot, excluding great toe  
47. Through metatarso -phalangeal joint  6 
48. Part, with some loss of bone  3 
Four toes of one foot, excluding great toe  
49. Through metatarso -phalangeal joint  9 
50. Part, with some loss of bone  3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 105]
105 
 THE FIFTH SCHEDULE  
[See sections 15( 2) and 152( 1)] 
MATTERS THAT MAY BE PROVIDED FOR IN THE SCHEMES  
Any scheme framed under section 15 may provide for any or all of the matters as  
specified below, namely: — 
PART A  
 
Serial No.  Matters on which the Provident Fund Scheme may make provisions  
(1) (2) 
1. The employees or class of employees who shall join the Fund, and the conditions  
under which employees may be exempted from joining the Fund or from making  
any contribution.  
2. The time and manner in which contributions shall be made to the Fund by employers  
and by, or on behalf of, employees, (whether employe d by him directly or by or  
through a contractor), the contributions which an employee may, if he so desires,  
make under section 16, and the manner in which such contributions may be  
recovered.  
3. The manner in which employees' contributions may be recover ed by contractors  
from employees employed by or through such contractors.  
4. The payment by the employer of such sums of money as may be necessary to meet  
the cost of administering the Fund and the rate at which and the manner in which  
the payment shall be made.  
5. The constitution of any committee for assisting any board of trustees.  
6. The opening of regional and other offices of any board of trustees.  
7. The manner in which accounts shall be kept, the investment of moneys belonging  
to the Fund in ac cordance with any directions issued or conditions specified by  
the Central Government, the preparation of the budget, the audit of accounts and  
the submission of reports to the Central Government, or to any specified State  
Government.  
8. The conditions un der which withdrawals from the Fund may be permitted and any  
deduction or forfeiture may be made and the maximum amount of such deduction  
or forfeiture.  
9. The fixation by the Central Government in consultation with the boards of trustees  
concerned of the  rate of interest payable to members.  
10.
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 105]
sultation with the boards of trustees  
concerned of the  rate of interest payable to members.  
10. The form in which an employee shall furnish particulars about himself and his  
family whenever required.  
11. The nomination of a person to receive the amount standing to the credit of a  
member after his death and the cancellation or variation of such nomination.  
12. The registers and records to be maintained with respect to employees and the  
returns to be furnished by employers or contractors.  
13. The form or design of any identity card, token or disc for the purpose of identifying  
any employee, and for the issue, custody and replacement thereof.  
14. The fees to be levied for any of the purposes specified in this Schedule.  
15. The contraventions or defaults which shall be punishable under section 135.  
16. The further powers, if any, which may be exercised by Inspector -cum-Facilitators.  
17. The manner in which accumulations in any existing provident fund shall be  
transferred to the Fund and the mode of valuation of any assets which may be  
transferred by the e mployers in this behalf.  
18. The conditions under which a member may be permitted to pay premia on life  
insurance, from the Fund.  
19. Any other matter which is to be provided for in the Scheme or which may be  
necessary or proper for the purpose of implementing the Scheme.  
PART B  
MATTERS THAT MAY BE PROVIDED FOR IN THE PENSION SCHEME  
1. The employees or class of employees to whom the Pension Scheme shall apply.  
2. The portion of employers' contribution to the Provident Fund which shall be credited  
to the Pension Fund and the manner in which it is credited.  
3. The regulation of the manner in which and the period of service for which, no  
contribution is received.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 106]
106 
 4. The manner in which employees' interest will be protected against default i n payment  
of contribution by the employer.  
5. The manner in which the accounts of the Pension Fund shall be kept and investment  
of moneys belonging to Pension Fund to be made subject to such pattern of  
investment as may be determined by the Central Govern ment.  
6. The form in which an employee shall furnish particulars about himself and the  
members of his family whenever required.  
7. The forms, registers and records to be maintained in respect of employees, required  
for the administration of the Pension Scheme.  
8. The scale of pension and pensionary benefits and the conditions relating to grant  
of such benefits to the employees.  
9. The manner in which the exempted establishments have to pay contribution towards  
the Pension Scheme and the submission of r eturns relating thereto.  
10. The mode of disbursement of pension and arrangements to be entered into with  
such disbursing agencies as may be specified for the purpose.  
11. The manner in which the expenses for administering the Pension Scheme will be  
met from the income of the Pension Fund.  
12. Any other matter which is to be provided for in the Pension Scheme or which may  
be necessary or proper for the purpose of implementation of the Pension Scheme.  
PART C  
MATTERS THAT MAY BE PROVIDED FOR IN THE EMPLO YEES' DEPOSIT -LINKED  
INSURANCE SCHEME  
1. The employees or class of employees who shall be covered by the Insurance  
Scheme.  
2. The manner in which the accounts of the Insurance Fund shall be kept and the  
investment of moneys belonging to the Insurance Fund subject to such pattern of  
investment as may be determined, by order, by the Central Government.  
3. The form in which an employee shall furnish particulars about himself and the  
members of his family whenever required.  
4. The nomination of a person to receive the insurance amount due to the employee  
after his death and the c
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 106]
mination of a person to receive the insurance amount due to the employee  
after his death and the cancellation or variation of such nomination.  
5. The registers and records to be maintained in respect of employees; the form or  
design of any identity card, token or disc for the  purpose of identifying any  
employee or his nominee or member of his family entitled to receive the insurance  
amount.  
6. The scales of insurance benefits and conditions relating to the grant of such  
benefits to the employees.  
7. The manner in which the a mount due to the nominee or the member of the family of  
the employee under the scheme is to be paid including a provision that the amount  
shall not be paid otherwise than in the form of a deposit in a savings bank account,  
in the name of such nominee or me mber of family, in any corresponding new bank  
specified in the First Schedule to the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer  
of Undertakings) Act, 1970 (5 of 1970).  
8. Any other matter which is to be provided for in the Employees' Deposit -linked  
Insurance Scheme or which may be necessary or proper for the purpose of  
implementing that Scheme.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 107]
107 
 THE SIXTH SCHEDULE  
[See sections 75, 76( 1) and 152( 1)] 
FACTORS FOR WORKING OUT LUMP SUM EQUIVALENT OF COMPENSATION  
AMOUNT IN CASE OF PERMANENT DISABLEMENT AND DEATH  
                                                Completed years of age on the last birthday of the  
                                                employee immediately preceding the date on which  
                                                the compensation fell due  Factors  
(1) (2) (3) 
Not more than  16 228.54  
 17 227.49  
 18 226.38  
 19 225.22  
 20 224.00  
 21 222.71  
 22 221.37  
 23 219.95  
 24 218.47  
 25 216.91  
 26 215.28  
 27 213.57  
 28 211.79  
 29 209.92  
 30 207.98  
 31 205.95  
 32 203.85  
 33 201.66  
 34 199.40  
 35 197.06  
 36 194.64  
 37 192.14  
 38 189.56  
 39 186.90  
 40 184.17  
 41 181.37  
 42 178.49  
 43 175.54  
 44 172.52  
 45 169.44  
 46 166.29  
 47 163.07  
 48 159.80  
 49 156.47  
 50 153.09  
 51 149.67  
 52 146.20  
 53 142.68  
 54 139.13  
 55 135.56  
 56 131.95  
 57 128.33  
 58 124.70  
 59 121.05  
 60 117.41  
 61 113.77  
 62 110.14  
 63 106.52  
 64 102.93  
 65 or more  99.37  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2020.pdf - page 108]
108 
 THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 114( 4)] 
CLASSIFICATION OF AGGREGATORS  
Sl. No. Classification of Aggregator  
1. Ride sharing services  
2. Food and grocery delivery services  
3. Logistic services  
4. e-Market place (both market place and inventory model) for wholesale/  
retail sale of goods and/or services (B2B/B2C)  
5. Professional services provider  
6. Healthcare  
7. Travel and hospitality  
8. Content and media services  
9. Any other goods and services provider platform  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019  
_______________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS   
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Prohibition of discrimination on ground of gender.  
4. Decision as to disputes with regard to  same or similar nature of work.  
CHAPTER II  
MINIMUM WAGES  
5. Payment of minimum rate of wages.  
6. Fixation of minimum wages.  
7. Components of minimum wages.  
8. Procedure for fixing and revising minimum wages.  
9. Power of Central Government to fix floor wage.  
10. Wages of emp loyee who works for less than normal working day.  
11. Wages for two or more classes of work.  
12. Minimum time rate wages for piece work.  
13. Fixing hours of work for normal working day.  
14. Wages for overtime work.  
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF WAGES  
15. Mode of payment of wages.  
16. Fixation of wage period.  
17. Time limit for payment of wages.  
18. Deductions which may be made from wages.  
19. Fines.  
20. Deductions for absence from duty.  
21. Deductions for damage or loss . 
22. Deductions for services rendered.  
23. Deductions for recovery of advances.  
24. Deductions for  recovery of loans.  
25. Chapter not to apply to Government establishments.  
CHAPTER IV  
PAYMENT OF  BON US 
26. Eligibility for bonus, etc.  
27. Proportionate reduction in bonus in certain cases.  
28. Computation of number of working days.  
29. Disqualification for bonus.  
30. Establishme nts to include departments, undertakings and branches.  
31. Payment of bonus out of allocable surplus.  
32. Computation of gross profits.  
33. Computation of available surplus.  
34. Sums deductible from gross profits.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 2]
2 
 SECTIONS  
35. Calculation of direct tax payable by employer.  
36. Set on and set off of allocable surplus.  
37. Adjustment of customary or interim bonus against bonus payable under this Code.  
38. Deduction of certain amounts from bonus payable.  
39. Time limit for payment of bonus.  
40. Application of this Chapter to establishments in publ ic sector in certain cases.  
41. Non-applicability of this Chapter . 
CHAPTER V  
ADVISORY  BOARD  
 
42. Central Advisory Board and State Advisory Boards.  
CHAPTER VI  
PAYMENT OF DUES CLAIMS AND AUDIT  
 
43. Responsibility for payment of various dues . 
44. Payment of various undisbursed dues in case of death of employee.  
45. Claims under Code and procedure thereof . 
46. Reference of disputes under this Code.  
47. Presumption about accuracy of balance sheet and profit and loss account of corporations and 
companies.  
48. Audit of account of employ ers not being corporations or companies.  
49. Appeal.  
50. Records, returns and notices . 
CHAPTER VII  
INSPECTORY -CUM-FACILITATOR  
 
51. Appointment of Inspector -cum-Facilitators and their powers.  
 
CHAPTER VIII  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
52. Cognizance of offences.  
53. Power of officers of appropriate Government to impose penalty in certain cases.  
54. Penalties for offences . 
55. Offences by companies.  
56. Composition of offences . 
CHAPTER X  
MISCELLANEOUS  
57. Bar of suits . 
58. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
59. Burden of proof . 
60. Contracting out . 
61. Effect of laws agreements, etc., inconsistent with this Code . 
62. Delegation of powers . 
63. Exemption of employer from liability in certain cases . 
64. Protection against attachments of assets of employer with Government . 
65. Power of Central Government to give directions . 
66. Saving . 
67. Power of appropriate Government to make rules . 
68. Power to remove difficulties . 
69. Repeal and savings . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 2]
. 
69. Repeal and savings . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 3]
3 
 THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019  
ACT NO. 29 OF  2019  
[08th August , 2019.]  
An Act to amend and consolidate the laws relating to wages and bonus and matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Code on Wages, 2019.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Code and 
any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Code shall be construed as a ref erence 
to the coming into force of that provision.  
2. Definitions .—In this Code, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “accounting year ” means the year commencing on the 1st day of April;  
(b) “Advisory Board ” means the Central Advisory Board or,  as the case may be, the State 
Advisory Board, constituted under section 42;  
(c) “agricultural income tax law ” means any law for the time being in force relating to the levy of 
tax on agricultural income;  
(d) “appropriate Government ” means , — 
(i) in relation to, an establishment carried on by or under the authority of the Central 
Government or the establishment of railways, mines, oil field, major ports, air transport service, 
telecommunication, banking and insurance company or a corporation or other authority  
established by a Central Act or a central public sector undertaking or subsidiary companies set up 
by central public sector undertakings or autonomous bodies owned or controlled by the Central 
Government, including establishment of contractors for the pur poses of such establishment, 
corporation or other authority, central public sector undertakings, subsidiary companies or 
autonomous bodies, as the case may be, the Central Government;  
(ii) 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 3]
ngs, subsidiary companies or 
autonomous bodies, as the case may be, the Central Government;  
(ii) in relation to any other establishment, the State Government;  
(e) “company” means a company as defined in clause ( 20) of section 2  of the Companies Act, 
2013 (18 of 2013);  
(f) “contractor ”, in relation to an establishment, means a person, who — 
(i) undertakes to produce a given result for the establishment, other than a mere supply of 
goods or articles of manufacture to such establishment, through contract labour; or  
(ii) supplies contract labour for any work of the establishment as mere human reso urce and 
includes a sub -contractor;  
(g) “contract labour ” means a worker who shall be deemed to be employed in or in connection 
with the work of an establishment when he is hired in or in connection with such work by or through 
                                                           
1.18th December, 2020 ,--Sub-section (1), (2), (3), (10) and (11) of section 42 (to the extent relate to the central Advisory Board); 
clauses (s) and (t) of sub -section (2) of section 67 (to the extent they relate to the Central advisory Board); section 69 [to the 
extent it rela tes to section 7 and 9 (to the extent relate to the Central Government) and section 8 of the Minimum Wages Act, 
1948 (11 of 1948)], vide notification No. S.O. 4604(E), dated 18th December, 2020, see Gazette  of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3(ii).  
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 4]
4 
 a contractor, with or withou t the knowledge of the principal employer and includes inter -State 
migrant worker but does not include a worker (other than part -time employee) who — 
(i) is regularly employed by the contractor for any activity of his establishment and his 
employment is gov erned by mutually accepted standards of the conditions of employment 
(including engagement on permanent basis), and  
(ii) gets periodical increment in the pay, social security coverage and other welfare benefits in 
accordance with the law for the time being  in force in such employment;  
(h) “co-operative society ” means a society registered or deemed to be registered under the Co -
operative Societies Act, 1912 (2 of 1912), or any other law for the time being in force relating to co -
operative societies in any St ate; 
(i) “corporation ” means any body corporate established by or under any Central Act, or State Act, 
but does not include a company or a co -operative society;  
(j) “direct tax” means— 
(i) any tax chargeable under the — 
(A) Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961);  
(B) Companies (Profits) Surtax Act, 1964 (7 of 1964);  
(C) Agricultural income tax law; and  
(ii) any other tax which, having regard to its nature or incidence, may be declared by the 
Central Government, by notification, to be a direct tax for the purposes of this Code;  
(k) “employee ” means, any person (other than an apprentice engaged under the Apprentices Act, 
1961 (52 of 1961)), employed on wages by an establishment to do any skilled, semi -skilled or 
unskilled, manual, operational, supervisory, m anagerial, administrative, technical or clerical work for 
hire or reward, whether the terms of employment be express or implied, and also includes a person 
declared to be an employee by the appropriate Government, but does not include any member of the 
Armed Forces of the Union;  
(l) “employer ” means a person who employs, whether directly or through any person, or on his 
behalf or on be
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 4]
yer ” means a person who employs, whether directly or through any person, or on his 
behalf or on behalf of any person, one or more employees in his establishment and where the 
establishment is carried on by any department o f the Central Government or the State Government, 
the authority specified, by the head of such department, in this behalf or where no authority, is so 
specified the head of the department and in relation to an establishment carried on by a local 
authority,  the chief executive of that authority, and includes, — 
(i) in relation to an establishment which is a factory, the occupier of the factory as defined in 
clause ( n) of section 2  of the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948) and, where a person has been 
named as a  manager of the factory under clause ( f) of sub -section ( 1) of section 7  of the said Act, 
the person so named;  
(ii) in relation to any other establishment, the person who, or the authority which, has 
ultimate control over the affairs of the establishment a nd where the said affairs is entrusted to a 
manager or managing director, such manager or managing director;  
(iii) contractor; and  
(iv) legal representative of a deceased employer;  
(m) “establishment ” means any place where any industry, trade, business, ma nufacture or 
occupation is carried on and includes Government establishment;  
(n) “factory” means a factory as defined in clause ( m) of section 2  of the Factories Act, 1948 (63 
of 1948);  
(o) “Government establishment ” means any office or department of the Government or a local 
authority;  
(p) “Income -tax Act” means the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961);  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 5]
5 
 (q) “industrial dispute ” means,— 
(i) any dispute or difference between employers and employers, or between employers a nd 
workers or between workers and workers which is connected with the employment or non -
employment or the terms of employment or with the conditions of labour, of any person; and  
(ii) any dispute or difference between an individual worker and an employer c onnected with, 
or arising out of, discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or termination of such worker;  
(r) “Inspector -cum-Facilitator ” means a person appointed by the appropriate Government under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 51;  
(s) “minimum wage ” means the wage fixed under section 6;  
(t) “notification ” means a notification published in the Gazette of India or in the Official Gazette 
of a State, as the case may be, and the expression “notify” with its grammatical variations and cognate 
expressions shall be construed accordingly;  
(u) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made by the appropriate Government;  
(v) “same work or work of a similar nature ” means work in respect of which the skill, effort, 
experience and responsibility required are the same, when performed under similar working 
conditions by employees and the difference if any, between the skill, effort, experience and 
responsibility require d for employees of any gender, are not of practical importance in relation to the 
terms and conditions of employment;  
(w) “State” includes a Union territory;  
(x) “Tribunal” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (r) of  section 2  of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947);  
(y) “wages” means all remuneration whether by way of salaries, allowances or otherwise , 
expressed in terms of money or capable of being so expressed which would (42 of 2005), if the terms 
of employment, express or implied, were fulfilled, be payable to a person employed in respect of his 
employment or of work done in such employment, and includes,  — 
(i) basic pay; 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 5]
 in respect of his 
employment or of work done in such employment, and includes,  — 
(i) basic pay;  
(ii) dearness allowance; and  
(iii) retaining allowance, if any,   
but does not include — 
(a) any bonus pa yable under any law for the time being in force, which does not form 
part of the remuneration payable under the terms of employment;  
(b) the value of any house -accommodation, or of the supply of light, water, medical 
attendance or other amenity or of any s ervice excluded from the computation of wages by a 
general or special order of the appropriate Government;  
(c) any contribution paid by the employer to any pension or provident fund, and the 
interest which may have accrued thereon;  
(d) any conveyance allowance or the value of any travelling concession;  
(e) any sum paid to the employed person to defray special expenses entailed on him by 
the nature of his employment;  
(f) house rent allowance;  
(g) remuneration payable under any award or settlement betwee n the parties or order of a 
court or Tribunal;  
(h) any overtime allowance;  
(i) any commission payable to the employee;  
(j) any gratuity payable on the termination of employment;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 6]
6 
 (k) any retrenchment compensation or other retirement benefit payable to the employee or 
any ex gratia  payment made to him on the termination of employment:  
Provided that, for calculating the wages under this clause, if payments made by the 
employer to the e mployee under clauses ( a) to ( i) exceeds one -half, or such other per cent. as 
may be notified by the Central Government, of the all remuneration calculated under this 
clause, the amount which exceeds such  one-half, or the per cent. so notified, shall be de emed 
as remuneration and shall be accordingly added in wages under this clause:   
Provided further that for the purpose of equal wages to all genders and for the purpose of 
payment of wages, the emoluments specified in clauses (d), (f), (g) and (h) shall be  taken for 
computation of wage.  
Explanation. —Where an employee is given in lieu of the whole or part of the wages 
payable to him, any remuneration in kind by his employer, the value of such remuneration in 
kind which does not exceed fifteen per cent. of th e total wages payable to him, shall be 
deemed to form part of the wages of such employee;  
(z) “worker” means any person (except an apprentice as defined under clause (aa) of  section 2  of 
the Apprentices Act, 1961 (52 of 1961)) employed in any industry to do any manual, unskilled, 
skilled, technical, operational, clerical or supervisory work for hire or reward, whether the terms of 
employment be express or implied, and includes — 
(i) working journalists as defined in clause ( f) of section 2  of the Working Jo urnalists and 
other Newspaper Employees (Conditions of Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955 (45 
of 1955); and  
(ii) sales promotion employees as defined in clause (d) of  section 2  of the Sales Promotion 
Employees (Conditions of Service) Act, 1976  (11 of 1976), and for the purposes of any 
proceeding under this Code in relation to an industrial dispute, includes any such person who has 
been dismissed
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 6]
der this Code in relation to an industrial dispute, includes any such person who has 
been dismissed, discharged or retrenched or otherwise terminated in connection with, or as a 
consequence of, that d ispute, or whose dismissal, discharge or retrenchment has led to that 
dispute,   
but does not include any such person — 
(a) who is subject to the Air Force Act, 1950 (45 of 1950), or the Army Act, 1950 (46 of 
1950), or the Navy Act, 1957 (62 of 1957); or  
(b) who is employed in the police service or as an officer or other employee of a prison; 
or 
(c) who is employed mainly in a managerial or administrative capacity; or  
(d) who is employed in a supervisory capacity drawing wage of exceeding fifteen 
thousand rup ees per month or an amount as may be notified by the Central Government from 
time to time.  
3. Prohibition of discrimination on ground of gender .—(1) There shall be no discrimination in an 
establishment or any unit thereof among employees on the ground of gender in matters relating to wages 
by the same employer, in respect of the same work or work of a similar nature done by any employee.  
(2) No employer shall,  — 
(i) for the purposes of complying with the provisions of sub -section ( 1), reduce the rate of wa ges 
of any employee; and  
(ii) make any discrimination on the ground of sex while recruiting any employee for the same 
work or work of similar nature and in the conditions of employment, except where the employment 
of women in such work is prohibited or res tricted by or under any law for the time being in force.  
4. Decision as to disputes with regard to same or similar nature of work .—Where there is any 
dispute as to whether a work is of same or similar nature for the purposes of section 3, the dispute shall  be 
decided by such authority as may be notified by the appropriate Government.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 7]
7 
 CHAPTER II  
MINIMUM WAGES  
5. Payment of minimum rate of wages .—No employer shall pay to any employee wages less than 
the minimum rate of wages notified by the appropriate Government.  
6. Fixation of minimum wages .—(1) Subject to the provisions of section 9, the appropriate 
Government shall fix the minimum rate of wages payable to employees in accordance with the provisions 
of section 8.  
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), the appropriate Government shall fix a minimum rate of 
wages— 
(a) for time work; or  
(b) for piece work.  
(3) Where employees are employed on piece work, for the purpose of sub -section ( 1), the appropriate 
Government shall fix a minimum rate of wages for securing such employees a minimum rate of wages on 
a time work basis.  
(4) The minimum rate of wages on time work basis may be fixed in accordance with any one or more 
of the following wage periods, namely: — 
(i) by the hour; or  
(ii) by the day; or  
(iii) by the month.  
(5) Where the rates of wages are fixed by the hour or by the day or by the month, the manner of 
calculating the wages shall be such, as may be prescribed.  
(6) For the purpose of fixation of minimum rate of wages under this section, the appropriate 
Government, — 
(a) shall primarily take into account the skill of workers required for working under the 
categories of unskilled, skilled, semi -skilled and highly -skilled or geographical area or both; and  
(b) may, in addition to such minimum rate  of wages for certain category of workers, take into 
account their arduousness of work like temperature or humidity normally difficult to bear, 
hazardous occupations or processes or underground work as may be prescribed by that 
Government; and  
(c) the norm s of such fixation of minimum rate of wages shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(7) The number of minimum rates of wages referred to in sub -section ( 6) may, as far as possible, be 
kept at minimum by the appropriate Government.  
7.  Compone
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 7]
ction ( 6) may, as far as possible, be 
kept at minimum by the appropriate Government.  
7.  Components of minimum wag es.—(1) Any minimum rate of wages fixed or revised by the 
appropriate Government under section 8 may consist of — 
(a) a basic rate of wages and an allowance at a rate to be adjusted, at such intervals and in such 
manner as the appropriate Government may dir ect, to accord as nearly as practicable with the 
variation in the cost of living index number applicable to such workers (hereinafter referred to as 
“cost of living allowance ”); or 
(b) a basic rate of wages with or without the cost of living allowance, and the cash value of the 
concessions in respect of supplies of essential commodities at concession rates, where so authorised; 
or 
(c) an all -inclusive rate allowing for the basic rate, the cost of living allowance and the cash value 
of the concessions, if any.  
(2) The cost of living allowance and the cash value of the concessions in respect of supplies of 
essential commodities at concession rate shall be computed by such authority, as th e appropriate 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 8]
8 
 Government may by notification, appoint, at such intervals and in accordance with such directions as may 
be specified or given by the appropriate Government from time to time.  
8. Procedure for fixing and revising minimum wages .—(1) In fixing minimum rates of wages for 
the first time or in revising minimum rates of wages under this Code, the appropriate Government shall 
either— 
(a) appoint as many committees as it considers necessary to hold enquiries and recommend in 
respect of such fixation o r revision, as the case may be; or  
(b) by notification publish its proposals for the information of persons likely to be affected 
thereby and specify a date not less than two months from the date of the notification on which the 
proposals shall be taken in to consideration.  
(2) Every committee appointed by the appropriate Government under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) 
shall consist of persons — 
(a) representing employers;  
(b) representing employees which shall be equal in number of the members specified in clause 
(a); and  
(c) independent persons, not exceeding one -third of the total members of the committee.  
(3) After considering the recommendation of the committee appointed under clause ( a) of sub -section 
(1) or, as the case may be, all representations received by it before the date specified in the notification 
under clause ( b) of that sub -section, the appropriate Government shall by notification fix, or as the case 
may be, revise the minimum rates of wages and unless such notification otherwise provide s, it shall come 
into force on the expiry of three months from the date of its issue:  
Provided that where the appropriate Government proposes to revise the minimum rates of wages in 
the manner specified in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1), it shall also consu lt concerned Advisory Board 
constituted under section 42.  
(4) The appropriate Government shall review or revise minimum rates of wages ordinarily at an 
interval not exceeding
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 8]
te Government shall review or revise minimum rates of wages ordinarily at an 
interval not exceeding five years.  
9. Power of Central Government to fix floor wage .—(1) The Central Gov ernment shall fix floor 
wage taking into account minimum living standards of a worker in such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that different floor wage may be fixed for different geographical areas.  
(2) The minimum rates of wages fixed by the appropr iate Government under section 6 shall not be 
less than the floor wage and if the minimum rates of wages fixed by the appropriate Government earlier is 
more than the floor wage, then, the appropriate Government shall not reduce such minimum rates of 
wages f ixed by it earlier.  
(3) The Central Government may, before fixing the floor wage under sub -section ( 1), obtain the 
advice of the Central Advisory Board constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 42 and consult State 
Governments in such manner as may be p rescribed.  
10.  Wages of employee who works for less than normal working day .—If an employee whose 
minimum rate of wages has been fixed under this Code by the day works on any day on which he was 
employed for a period of less than the requisite number of h ours constituting a normal working day, he 
shall, save as otherwise hereinafter provided, be entitled to receive wages in respect of work done on that 
day, as if he had worked for a full normal working day:  
Provided that  he shall not be entitled to receive wages for a full normal working day,  — 
(i) in any case where his failure to work is caused by his unwillingness to work and not by the 
omission of the employer to provide him with work; and  
(ii) in such other cases and circumstances, as may be prescribed.  
11. Wages for two or more classes of work .—Where an employee does two or more classes of work 
to each of which a different minimum rate of wages is applicable, the employer shall pay to such 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 8]
 wages is applicable, the employer shall pay to such 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 9]
9 
 employee in respect of the t ime respectively occupied in each such class of work, wages at not less than 
the minimum rate in force in respect of each such class.  
12. Minimum time rate wages for piece work .—Where a person is employed on piece work for 
which minimum time rate and not a  minimum piece rate has been fixed under this Code, the employer 
shall pay to such person wages at not less than the minimum time rate.  
13. Fixing hours of work for normal working day .—(1) Where the minimum rates of wages have 
been fixed under this Code, t he appropriate Government may — 
(a) fix the number of hours of work which shall constitute a normal working day inclusive of one 
or more specified intervals;  
(b) provide for a day of rest in every period of seven days which shall be allowed to all 
employees  or to any specified class of employees and for the payment of remuneration in respect of 
such days of rest;  
(c) provide for payment for work on a day of rest at a rate not less than the overtime rate.  
(2) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall, in relation to the following classes of employees apply, 
only to such extent and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, namely: — 
(a) employees engaged in any emergency which could not have been foreseen or prevented;  
(b) employees engaged in work of  the nature of preparatory or complementary work which must 
necessarily be carried on outside the limits laid down for the general working in the employment 
concerned;  
(c) employees whose employment is essentially intermittent;  
(d) employees engaged in any  work which for technical reasons has to be completed before the 
duty is over; and  
(e) employees engaged in a work which could not be carried on except at times dependent on the 
irregular action of natural forces.  
(3) For the purposes of clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2), employment of an employee is essentially 
intermittent when it is declared to be so by the appropriate Government on the
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 9]
loyee is essentially 
intermittent when it is declared to be so by the appropriate Government on the ground that the daily hours 
of duty of the employee, or if there be no daily hours of duty as such for the employee, the ho urs of duty 
normally include periods of inaction during which the employee may be on duty but is not called upon to 
display either physical activity or sustained attention.  
14. Wages for overtime work .—Where an employee whose minimum rate of wages has been  fixed 
under this Code by the hour, by the day or by such a longer wage -period as may be prescribed, works on 
any day in excess of the number of hours constituting a normal working day, the employer shall pay him 
for every hour or for part of an hour so wo rked in excess, at the overtime rate which shall not be less than 
twice the normal rate of wages.  
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF WAGES  
15. Mode of payment of wages .—All wages shall be paid in current coin or currency notes or by 
cheque or by crediting the wages in  the bank account of the employee or by the electronic mode:  
Provided that the appropriate Government may, by notification, specify the industrial or other 
establishment, the employer of which shall pay to every person employed in such industrial or other 
establishment, the wages only by cheque or by crediting the wages in his bank account.  
16. Fixation of wage period .—The employer shall fix the wage period for employees either as daily 
or weekly or fortnightly or monthly subject to the condition that no wa ge period in respect of any 
employee shall be more than a month:  
Provided that different wage periods may be fixed for different establishments.  
17. Time limit for payment of wages .—(1) The employer shall pay or cause to be paid wages to the 
employees, eng aged on— 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 10]
10 
 (i) daily basis, at the end of the shift;  
(ii) weekly basis, on the last working day of the week, that is to say, before the weekly holiday;  
(iii) fortnightly basis, before the end of the second day after the end of the fortnight;  
(iv) monthly basis, before the expiry of the seventh day of the succeeding month.  
(2) Where an employee has been — 
(i) removed or dismissed from service; or  
(ii) retrenched or has resigned from service, or became unemployed due to closure of the 
establishment,   
the wage s payable to him shall be paid within two working days of his removal, dismissal, retrenchment 
or, as the case may be, his resignation.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the appropriate 
Government may, provide an y other time limit for payment of wages where it considers reasonable 
having regard to the circumstances under which the wages are to be paid.  
(4) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall affect any time limit for payment of 
wages prov ided in any other law for the time being in force.  
18. Deductions which may be made from wages .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any 
other law for the time being in force, there shall be no deductions from the wages of the employee, except 
those as are authorised under this Code.  
Explanation .— For the purposes of this sub -section,  — 
(a) any pa yment made by an employee to the employer or his agent shall be deemed to be a 
deduction from his wages;  
(b) any loss of wages to an employee, for a good and sufficient cause, resulting from — 
(i) the withholding of increment or promotion, including the sto ppage of an increment; or  
(ii) the reduction to a lower post or time -scale; or  
(iii) the suspension,  shall not be deemed to be a deduction from wages in a case where the 
provisions made by the employer for such purposes are satisfying the requirements spec ified in 
the notification issued by the appropriate Gove
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 10]
poses are satisfying the requirements spec ified in 
the notification issued by the appropriate Government in this behalf.  
(2) Deductions from the wages of an employee shall be made in accordance with the provisions of 
this Code, and may be made only for the following purposes, namely: — 
(a) fines imposed on him;  
(b) deductions for his absence from duty;  
(c) deductions for damage to or loss of goods expressly entrusted to the employee for custody; or 
for loss of money for which he is required to account, where such damage or loss is directly 
attributable to his neglect or default;  
(d) deductions for house -accommodation supplied by the employer or by appropriate Government 
or any housing board set up under any law for the time being in force, whether the Government or 
such board is the employer  or not, or any other authority engaged in the business of subsidising 
house -accommodation which may be specified in this behalf by the appropriate Government by 
notification;  
(e) deductions for such amenities and services supplied by the employer as the a ppropriate 
Government or any officer specified by it in this behalf may, by general or special order, authorise 
and such deduction shall not exceed an amount equivalent to the value of such amenities and services.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this clau se, the expression “services” does not include the 
supply of tools and raw materials required for the purposes of employment;  
(f) deductions for recovery of — 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 11]
11 
 (i) advances of whatever nature (including advances for travelling allowance or conveyance 
allowan ce), and the interest due in respect thereof, or for adjustment of overpayment of wages;  
(ii) loans made from any fund constituted for the welfare of labour, as may be prescribed by 
the appropriate Government, and the interest due in respect thereof;  
(g) deductions for recovery of loans granted for house -building or other purposes approved by the 
appropriate Government and the interest due in respect thereof;  
(h) deductions of income -tax or any other statutory levy levied by the Central Government or 
State  Government and payable by the employee or deductions required to be made by order of a court 
or other authority competent to make such order;  
(i) deductions for subscription to, and for repayment of advances from any social security fund or 
scheme constit uted by law including provident fund or pension fund or health insurance scheme or 
fund known by any other name;  
(j) deductions for payment of co -operative society subject to such conditions as the appropriate 
Government may impose;  
(k) deductions made, wi th the written authorisation of the employee, for payment of the fees and 
contribution payable by him for the membership of any Trade Union registered under the Trade 
Unions Act, 1926 (16 of 1926);  
(l) deductions for recovery of losses sustained by the rai lway administration on account of 
acceptance by the employee of counterfeit or base coins or mutilated or forged currency notes;  
(m) deductions for recovery of losses sustained by the railway administration on account of the 
failure of the employee to invo ice, to bill, to collect or to account for the appropriate charges due to 
the railway administration whether in respect of fares, freight, demurrage, wharf age and cranage or 
in respect of sale of food in catering establishments or in respect of commoditie s in grain shops or 
otherwise;  
(n) deductions for recovery of l
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 11]
ments or in respect of commoditie s in grain shops or 
otherwise;  
(n) deductions for recovery of losses sustained by the railway administration on account of any 
rebates or refunds incorrectly granted by the employee where such loss is directly attributable to his 
neglect or default;  
(o) deductions, made with the written authorisation of the employee, for contribution to the Prime 
Minister's National Relief Fund or to such other fund as the Central Government may, by notification, 
specify.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code and subject to the provisions of any other law 
for the time being in force, the total amount of deductions which may be made under sub -section ( 2) in 
any wage period from the wages of an employee shall not exceed fifty per cent. of such wages.  
(4) Where th e total deductions authorised under sub -section ( 2) exceed fifty per cent. of the wages, 
the excess may be recovered in such manner, as may be prescribed.  
(5) Where any deduction is made by the employer from the wages of an employee under this section 
but not deposited in the account of the trust or Government fund or any other account, as required under 
the provisions of the law for the time being in force, such employee shall not be held responsible for such 
default of the employer.  
19. Fines .—(1) No fine  shall be imposed on any employee save in respect of those acts and omissions 
on his part as the employer, with the previous approval of the appropriate Government or of such 
authority as may be prescribed, may have specified by notice under sub -section ( 2). 
(2) A notice specifying such acts and omissions shall be exhibited in such manner as may be 
prescribed, on the premises in which the employment is carried on.  
(3) No fine shall be imposed on any employee until such employee has been given an opportunity  of 
showing cause against the fine or otherwise than in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed 
for the imposition of fin
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 11]
 or otherwise than in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed 
for the imposition of fines.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 12]
12 
 (4) The total amount of fine which may be imposed in any one wage -period on any employee shall 
not exceed an amount equ al to three per cent. of the wages payable to him in respect of that wage -period.  
(5) No fine shall be imposed on any employee who is under the age of fifteen years.  
(6) No fine imposed on any employee shall be recovered from him by installments or after t he expiry 
of ninety days from the day on which it was imposed.  
(7) Every fine shall be deemed to have been imposed on the day of the act or omission in respect of 
which it was imposed.  
(8) All fines and all realisations thereof shall be recorded in a regis ter to be kept in such manner and 
form as may be prescribed; and all such realisations shall be applied only to such purposes beneficial to 
the persons employed in the establishment as are approved by the prescribed authority.  
20. Deductions for absence fr om duty .—(1) Deductions may be made under clause ( b) of sub -
section ( 2) of section 18 only on account of the absence of an employee from the place or places where by 
the terms of his employment, he is required to work, such absence being for the whole or any part of the 
period during which he is so required to work.  
(2) The amount of such deduction shall in no case bear to the wages payable to the employed person 
in respect of the wage -period for which the deduction is made in a larger proportion than the period for 
which he was absent bears to the total period within such wage -period during which by the terms of his 
employment he was required to work:  
Provided that, subject to any rules made in this behalf by the appropriate Government, if ten or more 
empl oyed persons acting in concert absent themselves without due notice (that is to say without giving 
the notice which is required under the terms of their contracts  of employment) and without reasonable 
cause, such deduction from any such person may include such amount not exceeding his wages for eig
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 12]
 
cause, such deduction from any such person may include such amount not exceeding his wages for eight 
days as may by any such terms be due to the employer in lieu of due notice.  
Explanation. — For the purposes of this section, an employee shall be deemed to be absent from the 
place where he is required to work i f, although present in such place, he refuses, in pursuance of a stay -in 
strike or for any other cause which is not reasonable in the circumstances, to carry out his work.  
21. Deductions for damage or loss .—(1) A deduction under clause ( c) or clause ( n) of sub-section 
(2) of section 18 for damage or loss shall not exceed the amount of the damage or loss caused to the 
employer by negligence or default of the employee.  
(2) A deduction shall not be made under sub -section ( 1) until the employee has been given a n 
opportunity of showing cause against the deduction or otherwise than in accordance with such procedure 
as may be prescribed for the making of such deductions.  
(3) All such deductions and all realisations thereof shall be recorded in a register to be kept  in such 
form as may be prescribed.  
22. Deductions for services rendered .—A deduction under clause ( d) or clause ( e) of sub -section ( 2) 
of section 18 shall not be made from the wages of an employee, unless the house -accommodation amenity 
or service has been accepted by him as a term of employment or otherwise and such deduction shall not 
exceed an amount equivalent to the value of the house -accommodation amenity or service supplied and 
shall be subject to such conditions as the appropriate Government may  impose.  
23. Deductions for recovery of advances .—Deductions under clause ( f) of sub -section ( 2) of section 
18 for recovery of advances given to an employee shall be subject to the following conditions, namely: — 
(a) recovery of advance of money given to an  employee before the employment began shall be 
made from the first payment of wages to him in respect o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 12]
loyee before the employment began shall be 
made from the first payment of wages to him in respect of a complete wage -period but no recovery 
shall be made of such advances given for travelling expenses;  
(b) recovery of advance of money given to an emplo yee after the employment began shall be 
subject to such conditions as may be prescribed;  
(c) recovery of advances of wages to an employee not already earned shall be subject to such 
conditions as may be prescribed.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 13]
13 
 24. Deductions for recovery of loans .—Deductions under clause ( g) of sub -section ( 2) of section 18 
for recovery of loans granted to an employee, regulating the extent to which such loans may be granted 
and the rate of interest payable thereon, shall be such as may be prescribed.  
25. Chapter not to apply to Government establishments .—The provisions of this Chapter shall not 
apply to the Government establishments unless the appropriate Government, by notification, applies such 
provisions to the Government establishments specified in th e said notification.  
CHAPTER IV  
PAYMENT OF BON US 
26. Eligibility for bonus, etc .—(1) There shall be paid to every employee, drawing wages not 
exceeding such amount per mensem, as determined by notification, by the appropriate Government, by 
his employer, who has put in at least thirty days work in an accounting year, an annual minimum bo nus 
calculated at the rate of eight and one -third per cent. of the wages earned by the employee or one hundred 
rupees, whichever is higher whether or not the employer has any allocable surplus during the previous 
accounting year.  
(2) For the purpose of cal culation of the bonus where the wages of the employee exceeds such 
amount per mensem, as determined by notification by the appropriate Government, the bonus payable to 
such employee under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 3) shall be  calculated as if his wage were suc h amount, so 
determined by the appropriate Government or the minimum wage fixed by the appropriate Government, 
whichever is higher.  
(3) Where in respect of any accounting year referred to in sub -section ( 1), the allocable surplus 
exceeds the amount of mini mum bonus payable to the employees under that sub -section, the employer 
shall, in lieu of such minimum bonus, be bound to pay to every employee in respect of that accounting 
year, bonus which shall be an amount in proportion to the wages earned by the empl oyee during the 
accounting year, subject to 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 13]
n amount in proportion to the wages earned by the empl oyee during the 
accounting year, subject to a maximum of twenty per cent. of such wages.  
(4) In computing the allocable surplus under this section, the amount set on or the amount set off 
under the provisions of section 36 shall be taken into account in ac cordance with the provisions of that 
section.  
(5) Any demand for bonus in excess of the bonus referred to in sub -section ( 1), either on the basis of 
production or productivity in an accounting year for which the bonus is payable shall be determined by an 
agreement or settlement between the employer and the employees, subject to the condition that the total 
bonus including the annual minimum bonus referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall not exceed twenty per 
cent. of the wages earned by the employee in the acco unting year.  
(6) In the first five accounting years following the accounting year in which the employer sells the 
goods produced or manufactured by him or renders services, as the case may be, from such establishment, 
bonus shall be payable only in respect  of the accounting year in which the employer derives profit from 
such establishment and such bonus shall be calculated in accordance with the provisions of this Code in 
relation to that year, but without applying the provisions of section 36.  
(7) For the sixth and seventh accounting years following the accounting year in which the employer 
sells the goods produced or manufactured by him or renders services, as the case may be, from such 
establishment, the provisions of section 36 shall apply subject to the  following modifications, namely: -- 
(i) for the sixth accounting year set on or set off, as the case may be, shall be made, in the manner 
as may be prescribed by the Central Government, taking into account the excess or deficiency, if any, 
as the case may be, of the allocable surplus set on or set off in respect of the fifth and sixth accounting 
years;  
(ii) for the seven
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 13]
 surplus set on or set off in respect of the fifth and sixth accounting 
years;  
(ii) for the seventh accounting year set on or set off, as the case may be, shall be made, in the 
manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government, taki ng into account the excess or 
deficiency, if any, as the case may be, of the allocable surplus set on or set off in respect of the fifth, 
sixth and seventh accounting years.  
(8) From the eighth accounting year following the accounting year in which the emp loyer sells the 
goods produced or manufactured by him or renders services, as the case may be, from such establishment, 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 14]
14 
 the provisions of section 36 shall apply in relation to such establishment as they apply in relation to any 
other establishment.  
Explana tion 1.—For the purpose of sub -section ( 6), an employer shall not be deemed to have derived 
profit in any accounting year, unless — 
(a) he has made provision for depreciation of that year to which he is entitled under the Income -
tax Act or, as the case may be, under the agricultural income tax law; and  
(b) the arrears of such depreciation and losses incurred by him in respect of the establishment for 
the previous accounting years have been fully set off against his profits.  
Explanation  2.—For the purposes of  sub-sections ( 6), (7) and ( 8), sale of the goods produced or 
manufactured during the course of the trial running of any factory or of the prospecting stage of any 
mine or an oil -field shall not be taken into consideration and where any question arises wit h regard to 
such production or manufacture, the appropriate Government may, after giving the parties a 
reasonable opportunity of representing the case, decide upon the issue.  
(9) The provisions of sub -sections ( 6), (7) and ( 8) shall, so far as may be, appl y to new departments or 
undertakings or branches set up by existing establishments.  
27. Proportionate reduction in bonus in certain cases .—Where an employee has not worked for all 
the working days in an accounting year, the minimum bonus under sub -section (1) of section 26, if such 
bonus is higher than eight and one third per cent. of the salary or wage of the days such employee has 
worked in that accounting year, shall be proportionately reduced.  
28. Computation of number of working days .—For the purposes of section 27, an employee shall 
be deemed to have worked in an establishment in any accounting year also on the days on which, — 
(a) he has been laid off under an agreement or as permitted by standing orders under the 
Industrial Employment (Standing Orders ) Act, 1946 (20 of 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 14]
s permitted by standing orders under the 
Industrial Employment (Standing Orders ) Act, 1946 (20 of 1946), or under the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), or under any other law applicable to the establishment;  
(b) he has been on leave with salary or wages;  
(c) he has been absent due to temporary disablement caused by accident  arising out of and in the 
course of his employment; and  
(d) the employee has been on maternity leave with salary or wages, during the accounting year.  
29. Disqualification for bonus .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, an employee 
shall be di squalified from receiving bonus under this Code, if he is dismissed from service for — 
(a) fraud; or  
(b) riotous or violent behaviour while on the premises of the establishment; or  
(c) theft, misappropriation or sabotage of any property of the establishment; or  
(d) conviction for sexual harassment.  
30. Establishments to include departments, undertakings and branches .—Where an 
establishment consists of different departments or undertakings or has branches, whether situated in the 
same place or in  different places, all such departments or undertakings or branches shall be treated as 
parts of the same establishment for the purpose of computation of bonus under this Code:  
Provided that where for any accounting year a separate balance sheet and profit  and loss account are 
prepared and maintained in respect of any such department or undertaking or branch, then, such 
department or undertaking or branch shall be treated as a separate establishment for the purpose of 
computation of bonus, under this Code f or that year, unless such department or undertaking or branch 
was, immediately before the commencement of that accounting year treated as part of the establishment 
for the purpose of computation of bonus.  
31. Payment of bonus out of allocable surplus .—(1) The bonus shall be paid out of the allocable 
surplus which shall be an amount equal to sixty per c
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 14]
 The bonus shall be paid out of the allocable 
surplus which shall be an amount equal to sixty per cent. in case of a banking company and sixty -seven 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 15]
15 
 per cent. in case of other establishment, of the available surplus and the available surplus shall be the 
amount calculated in accordance with section 33.  
(2) Audited accounts of companies shall not normally be questioned.  
(3) Where there is any dispute regarding the quantum of bonus, the authority notified by the 
appropriate Government having jurisdiction may c all upon the employer to produce the balance sheet 
before it, but the authority shall not disclose any information contained in the balance sheet unless agreed 
to by the employer.  
 
32. Computation of gross profits .—The gross profits derived by an employer from an establishment 
in respect of the accounting year shall, — 
(a) in the case of a banking company, be calculated in the manner as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government;  
(b) in any other case, be calculated in the manner as may be prescribed by the  Central 
Government.  
33. Computation of available surplus .—The available surplus in respect of any accounting year 
shall be the gross profits for that year after deducting there from the sums referred to in section 34:  
Provided that the available surplus i n respect of the accounting year commencing on any day in a year 
after the commencement of this Code and in respect of every subsequent accounting year shall be the 
aggregate of — 
(a) the gross profits for that accounting year after deducting there from the  sums referred to in 
section 34; and  
(b) an amount equal to the difference between — 
(i) the direct tax, calculated in accordance with the provisions of section 35, in respect of an 
amount equal to the gross profits of the employer for the immediately prece ding accounting year; 
and 
(ii) the direct tax, calculated in accordance with provisions of section 35, in respect of an 
amount equal to the gross profits of the employer for such preceding accounting year after 
deducting there from the amount of bonus which the employer has paid or is liable to pay to his 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 15]
er 
deducting there from the amount of bonus which the employer has paid or is liable to pay to his 
employees in accordance with the provisions of this Code for that year.  
34. Sums deductible from gross profits .—The following sums shall be deducted from the gross 
profits as prior charges, namely: — 
(a) any amount by way of depreciation admissible in accordance with the provisions of sub -
section ( 1) of section 32  of the Income -tax Act or in accordance with the provisions of the agricultural 
income -tax law, for the time being in force, as the case may be ; 
(b) subject to the provisions of section 35, any direct tax which the employer is liable to pay for 
the accounting year in respect of his income, profits and gains during that year;  
(c) such further sums in respect of the employer as may be prescribed by  the Central Government.  
35. Calculation of direct tax payable by employer .—For the purposes of this Code, any direct tax 
payable by the employer for any accounting year shall, subject to the following provisions, be calculated 
at the rates applicable to t he income of the employer for that year, namely :— 
(a) in calculating such tax no account shall be taken of, — 
(i) any loss incurred by the employer in respect of any previous accounting year and carried 
forward under any law for the time being in force relating to direct taxes;  
(ii) any arrears of depreciation which the employer is entitled to add to the amount of the 
allowance for depreciation for any succeeding accounting year or years under sub -section (2) 
of section 32  of the Income -tax Act;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 16]
16 
 (b) wher e the employer is a religious or a charitable institution to which the provisions of  section 
41 do not apply and the whole or any part of its income is exempt from the tax under the Income -tax 
Act, then, with respect to the income so  exempted, such institu tion shall be treated as if it were a 
company in which the public are substantially interested within the meaning of that Act;  
(c) where the employer is an individual or a Hindu undivided family, the tax payable by such 
employer under the Income -tax Act sh all be calculated on the basis that the income derived by him 
from the establishment is his only income;  
(d) where the income of any employer includes any profits and gains derived from the export 
of any goods or merchandise out of India and any rebate on such income is allowed under any 
law for the time being in force relating to direct taxes, then, no account shall be taken of such 
rebate;  
(e) no account shall be taken of any rebate other than development rebate or investment 
allowance or development allo wance or credit or relief or deduction (not hereinbefore mentioned in 
this section) in the payment of any direct tax allowed under any law for the time being in force 
relating to direct taxes or under the relevant annual Finance Act, for the development of  any industry.  
36. Set on and set off of allocable surplus .—(1) Where for any accounting year, the allocable 
surplus exceeds the amount of maximum bonus payable to the employees in the establishment under 
section 26, then, the excess shall, subject to a limit of twenty per cent. of the total salary or wage of the 
employees employed in the establishment in that accounting year, be carried forward for being set on in 
the succeeding accounting year and so on up to and inclusive of the fourth accounting year to be utilised 
for the purpose of payment of bonus in such manne r as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(2) Where for any accounting year, there is no
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 16]
e r as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(2) Where for any accounting year, there is no available surplus or the allocable surplus in respect of 
that year falls short of the amount of minimum bonus payable to the employees in the establishment und er 
section 26, and there is no amount or sufficient amount carried forward and set on under sub -section (1) 
which could be utilised for the purpose of payment of the minimum bonus, then, such minimum amount 
or the deficiency, as the case may be, shall be c arried forward for being set off in the succeeding 
accounting year and so on up to and inclusive of the fourth accounting year in such manner as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government.  
(3) The principle of set on and set off as may be provided in rule s by the Central Government under 
this Code shall apply to all other cases not covered by sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) for the purpose of 
payment of bonus under this Code.  
(4) Where in any accounting year any amount has been carried forward and set o n or set off under this 
section, then, in calculating bonus for the succeeding accounting year, the amount of set on or set off 
carried forward from the earliest accounting year shall first be taken into account.  
37. Adjustment of customary or interim bonu s against bonus payable under this Code .—Where 
in any accounting year, — 
(a) an employer has paid any puja bonus or other customary bonus to employee; or  
(b) an employer has paid a part of the bonus payable under this Code to an employee before the 
date on which such bonus becomes payable,   
then, the employer shall be entitled to deduct the amount of bonus so paid from the amount of bonus 
payable by him to the employee under this Code in respect of that accounting year and the employee shall 
be entitled to r eceive only the balance.  
38. Deduction of certain amounts from bonus payable .—Where in any accounting year, an 
employee is found guilty of misconduct causing fina
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 16]
onus payable .—Where in any accounting year, an 
employee is found guilty of misconduct causing financial loss to the employer, then, it shall be lawful for 
the employer to deduct the amount of loss from the amount of bonus payable by him to the employee 
under this Code in respect of that accounting year only and the employee shall be entitled to receive the 
balance, if any.  
 39 .Time limit for payment of bonus .—(1) All amounts payable to an empl oyee by way of bonus 
under this Code shall be paid by crediting it in the bank account of the employee by his employer within a 
period of eight months from the close of the accounting year:  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 17]
17 
 Provided that the appropriate Government or such authority as the appropriate Government may 
specify in this behalf may, upon an application made to it by the employer and for sufficient reasons, by 
order, extend the said period of eight months to such further period or periods as it thinks fit; so, however, 
that the tot al period so extended shall not in any case exceed two years.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where there is a dispute regarding 
payment of bonus pending before any authority, such bonus shall be paid, within a period of one mont h 
from the date on which the award becomes enforceable or the settlement comes into operation, in respect 
of such dispute:  
Provided that if, there is a dispute for payment at the higher rate, the employer shall pay eight and 
one-third per cent. of the wage s earned by the employee as per the provisions of this Code within a period 
of eight months from the close of the accounting year.  
40. Application of this Chapter to establishments in public sector in certain cases .—(1) If in any 
accounting year an establi shment in public sector sells any goods produced or manufactured by it or 
renders any services, in competition with an establishment in private sector, and the income from such 
sale or services or both, is not less than twenty per cent. of the gross income  of the establishment in public 
sector for that year, then, the provisions of this Chapter shall apply in relation to such establishment in 
public sector as they apply in relation to a like establishment in private sector.  
(2) Save as otherwise provided in  sub-section ( 1), nothing in this Chapter shall apply to the 
employees employed by any establishment in public sector.  
41. Non-applicability of this Chapter .—(1) Nothing in this Chapter shall apply to — 
(a) employees employed by the Life Insurance Corporati on of India;  
(b) seamen as defined in clause ( 42) of section 3  of the Merchant Shipping Act, 19
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 17]
 on of India;  
(b) seamen as defined in clause ( 42) of section 3  of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 (44 of 
1958);  
(c) employees registered or listed under any scheme made under the Dock Workers (Regulation 
of Employment) Act, 1948 (9 of 1948), and employed by registered or listed employers;  
(d) employees employed by an establishment under the authority of any department of the Central 
Government or a State Government or a local authority;  
(e) employees employed by — 
(i) the Indian Red Cross Society or any oth er institution of a like nature including its 
branches;  
(ii) universities and other educational institutions;  
(iii) institutions including hospitals, chamber of commerce and social welfare institutions 
established not for purposes of profit;  
(f) employees employed by the Reserve Bank of India;  
(g) employees employed by public sector financial institution other than a banking company, 
which the Central Government may, by notification, specify, having regard to — 
(i) its capital structure;  
(ii) its objectives and the nature of its activities;  
(iii) the nature and extent of financial assistance or any concession given to it by the 
Government; and  
(iv) any other relevant factor;  
(h) employees employed by inland water transport establishments operating on routes p assing 
through any other country; and  
(i) employees of any other establishment which the appropriate Government may, by notification, 
exempt having regard to the overall benefits under any other scheme of profit sharing available in 
such establishments to the employees.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 18]
18 
 (2) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 1) and notwithstanding anything contained in any other 
provisions of this Chapter, the provisions of this Chapter shall apply to such establishment in which 
twenty or more persons are employed or  were employed on any day during an accounting year.  
CHAPTER V  
ADVISORY  BOARD  
42. Central Advisory Board and State Advisory Boards .—(1) The Central Government shall 
constitute the Central Advisory Board which shall consist of persons to be nominated by the  Central 
Government — 
(a) representing employers;  
(b) representing employees which shall be equal in number of the members specified in clause 
(a); 
(c) independent persons, not exceeding one -third of the total members of the Board; and  
(d) five representati ves of such State Governments as may be nominated by the Central 
Government.  
(2) One -third of the members referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be women and a member specified in 
clause ( c) of the said sub -section shall be appointed by the Central Governmen t as the Chairperson of the 
Board.  
(3) The Central Advisory Board constituted under sub -section ( 1) shall from time to time advise the 
Central Government on reference of issues relating to — 
(a) fixation or revision of minimum wages and other connected matt ers; 
(b) providing increasing employment opportunities for women;  
(c) the extent to which women may be employed in such establishments or employments as the 
Central Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf; and  
(d) any other matter relating to this Code,   
and on such advice, the Central Government may issue directions to the State Government as it deems fit 
in respect of matters relating to issues referred to the Board.  
(4) Every State Government shall constitute a State Advisory Board for ad vising the State 
Government — 
(a) in fixation or revision of minimum wages and other connected matters;  
(b) for the purpose of providing increasing employmen
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 18]
f minimum wages and other connected matters;  
(b) for the purpose of providing increasing employment opportunities for women;  
(c) with regard to  the extent to which women may be employed in such establishments or 
employments as the State Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf; and  
(d) in any other matter relating to this Code, which the State Government may refer from time to 
time to the Board.  
(5) The State Advisory Board may constitute one or more committees or sub -committees to look into 
issues pertaining to matters specified in clauses ( a) to ( d) of sub -section ( 4). 
(6) The State Advisory Board and each of the committees and su b-committees thereof shall consist of 
persons .— 
(a) representing employers;  
(b) representing employees which shall be equal in number of the members specified in 
clause ( a); and  
(c) independent persons, not exceeding one -third of the total members of the Board or 
committee or sub -committee, as the case may be.  
(7) One -third of the members referred to in sub -section ( 6) shall be women and one among the 
members specified in clause ( c) of the said sub -section shall be — 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 19]
19 
 (a) appointed by the State Government as  the Chairperson of the Board;  
(b) appointed by the State Advisory Board as the Chairperson of the committee or sub -
committee, as the case may be.  
(8) In tendering its advice in the matters specified in clause ( b) or clause ( c) of sub -section ( 4), the 
State Advisory Board shall have regard to the number of women employed in the concerned 
establishment, or employment, the nature of work, hours of work, suitability of women for employment, 
as the case may be, the need for providing increasing employment oppor tunities for women, including 
part time employment, and such other relevant factors as the Board may think fit.  
(9) The State Government may, after considering the advice tendered to it by the State Advisory 
Board and after inviting and considering the rep resentations from establishment or employees or any 
other person which that Government thinks fit, issue such direction as may be deemed necessary.  
(10) The Central Advisory Board referred to in sub -section ( 1) and the State Advisory Board referred 
to in s ub-section ( 4) shall respectively regulate their own procedure including that of the committees and 
sub-committees constituted by the State Advisory Board, in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(11) The terms of office of the Central Advisory Board referred  to in sub -section ( 1) and the State 
Advisory Board referred to in sub -section ( 4) including that of the committees and sub -committees 
constituted by the State Advisory Board, shall be such as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER VI  
PAYMENT OF DUES , CLAIMS AND AUDIT  
43. Responsibility for payment of various dues .—Every employer shall pay all amounts required to 
be paid under this Code to every employee employed by him:  
Provided that where such employer fails to make such payment in accordance with this Code, then, 
the company or firm or association or any other person who is the proprietor of the establishment, in 
which the e
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 19]
 firm or association or any other person who is the proprietor of the establishment, in 
which the employee is employed, shall be responsible for such payment.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section the expression “firm” shall have the same meaning as 
assigned to it in the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 (9 of 1932).  
44. Payment of various undisbursed dues in case of death of employee .—(1) Subject to the other 
provisions of this Code, all amounts payable to an employee under  this Code shall, if such amounts could 
not or cannot be paid on account of his death before payment or on account of his whereabouts not being 
known,— 
(a) be paid to the person nominated by him in this behalf in accordance with the rules made under 
this C ode; or  
(b) where no such nomination has been made or where for any reasons such amounts cannot be 
paid to the person so nominated, be deposited with the such authority, as may be prescribed, who 
shall deal with the amounts so deposited in the manner as ma y be prescribed.  
(2) Where in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 1), all amounts payable to an employee 
under this Code — 
(a) are paid by the employer to the person nominated by the employee; or  
(b) are deposited by the employer with the authority referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1),  
then, the employer shall be discharged of his liability to pay those amounts.  
45. Claims under Code and procedure thereof .—(1) The appropriate Government may, by 
notification, appoint one or more aut horities, not below the rank of a Gazetted Officer, to hear and 
determine the claims which arises under the provisions of this Code.  
(2) The authority appointed under sub -section ( 1), while deciding the claim under that sub -section, 
may order, having regar d to the circumstances under which the claim arises, the payment of compensation 
in addition to the claim determined, which may extend to ten times of the claim determined and 
endeavour shall be ma
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 19]
e claim determined, which may extend to ten times of the claim determined and 
endeavour shall be made by the authority to decide the claim within a period of three months.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 20]
20 
 (3) If an employer fails to pay the claim determined and compensation ordered to be paid under sub -
section ( 2), the authority shall issue a certificate of recovery to the Collector or District Magistrate of the 
district where the establishmen t is located who shall recover the same as arrears of land revenue and remit 
the same to the authority for payment to the concerned employee.  
(4) Any application before the authority for claim referred to in sub -section ( 1) may be filed by, — 
(a) the employee concerned; or  
(b) any Trade Union registered under the Trade Unions Act, 1926 (16 of 1926) of which the 
employee is a member; or  
(c) the Inspector -cum-Facilitator.  
(5) Subject to such rules as may be made, a single application may be filed un der this section on 
behalf or in respect of any number of employees employed in an establishment.  
(6) The application under sub -section ( 4) may be filed within a period of three years from the date on 
which claims referred to in sub -section ( 1) arises:  
Provided that the authority referred to in sub -section ( 1) may, entertain the application after three 
years on sufficient cause being shown by the applicant for such delay.  
(7) The authority appointed under sub -section ( 1) and the appellate authority appointe d under sub -
section ( 1) of section 49 , shall have all the powers of a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908 (5 of 1908), for the purpose of taking evidence and of enforcing the attendance of witnesses and 
compelling the production of document s, and every such authority or appellate authority shall be deemed 
to be a civil court for all the purposes of  section 195  and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
46. Reference of disputes under this Code .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, 
where any dispute arises between an employer and his employees with respect to — 
(a) fixation of bonus or eligibility for payment of bonus under
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 20]
and his employees with respect to — 
(a) fixation of bonus or eligibility for payment of bonus under the provisions of this Code; or  
(b) the application of this Code, in respect of  bonus, to an establishment in public sector,   
then, such dispute shall be deemed to be an industrial dispute within the meaning of the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947).  
47. Presumption about accuracy of balance sheet and profit and loss account of corporations 
and companies .—(1) Where, during the course of proceedings before — 
(a) the authority under section 45; or  
(b) the appellate authority under section 49; or  
(c) a Tribunal; or  
(d) an arbitrator referred to in clause ( aa) of section 2  of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 
1947),   
in respect of any dispute of the nature specified in sections 45 and 46 or in respect of an appeal under 
section 49, the balance sheet and the profit and loss account of an employer, being a corporation or a 
company (other than a banking company), duly audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of 
India or by auditors duly qualified to act as auditors of companies under  section 141  of the 
Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013), are produced before it, then, the sai d authority, appellate 
authority, Tribunal or arbitrator, as the case may be, may presume the statements and particulars 
contained in such balance sheet and profit and loss account to be accurate and it shall not be 
necessary for the corporation or the com pany to prove the accuracy of such statements and particulars 
by the filing of an affidavit or by any other mode:  
Provided that where the said authority, appellate authority, Tribunal or arbitrator, as the case may be, 
is satisfied that the statements and particulars contained in the balance sheet or the profit and loss account 
of the corporation or the company are not accurate, it may take such steps as it thinks necessary to find 
out the accuracy of such statements and particulars.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 20]
eps as it thinks necessary to find 
out the accuracy of such statements and particulars.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 21]
21 
 (2) When an application  is made to the authority, appellate authority, Tribunal or arbitrator, as the 
case may be, referred to in sub -section ( 1), by any Trade Union being a party to the dispute or as the case 
may be, an appeal, and where there is no Trade Union, by the employee s being a party to the dispute, or 
as the case may be, an appeal, requiring any clarification relating to any item in the balance sheet or the 
profit and loss account, then such authority, appellate authority, Tribunal or arbitrator, may, after 
satisfying itself that such clarification is necessary, by order, direct the corporation or, as the case may be, 
the company, to furnish to the Trade Union or the employees such clarification within such time as may 
be specified in the direction and the corporation o r, as the case may be, the company, shall comply with 
such direction.  
48. Audit of account of employers not being corporations or companies .—(1) Where any claim, 
dispute or appeal with respect to bonus payable under this Code between an employer, not being  a 
corporation or a company, and his employees is pending before any authority, appellate authority, 
Tribunal or arbitrator, as the case may be, as referred to in sub -section (1) of section 47 and the accounts 
of such employer audited by any auditor duly q ualified to act as auditor of companies under the 
provisions of  section 141  of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013), are produced before such authority, 
appellate authority, Tribunal or arbitrator, then the provisions of section 47 shall, so far as may be,  apply 
to the accounts so audited.  
(2) When the authority, appellate authority, Tribunal or arbitrator, referred to in sub -section (1), as the 
case may be, finds that the accounts of such employer have not been audited by any such auditor and it is 
of opinion that an audit of the accounts of such employer is necessary for deciding the question referred to 
it, then, such authority, appellate authori
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 21]
oyer is necessary for deciding the question referred to 
it, then, such authority, appellate authority, Tribunal or arbitrator, may, by order, direct the employer to 
get his accounts audited within such time  as may be specified in the direction or within such further time 
as it may allow by such auditor or auditors as it thinks fit and thereupon the employer shall comply with 
such direction.  
(3) Where an employer fails to get the accounts audited under sub -section ( 2), the authority, appellate 
authority, Tribunal or arbitrator, referred to in sub -section ( 1), as the case may be, may, without prejudice 
to the provisions of section 54, get the accounts audited by such auditor or auditors as it thinks fit.  
(4) Wh en the accounts are audited under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3), the provisions of section 
47 shall, so far as may be, apply to the accounts so audited.  
(5) The expenses of, and incidental to, any audit under sub -section ( 3) including the remuneration  of 
the auditor or auditors shall be determined by the authority, appellate authority, Tribunal or arbitrator, 
referred to in sub -section ( 1), as the case may be, and paid by the employer and in default of such 
payment shall be recoverable by the authority  referred to in sub -section ( 3) of section 45 from the 
employer in the manner provided in that sub -section.  
49. Appeal .—(1) Any person aggrieved by an order passed by the authority under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 45 may prefer an appeal, to the appellate authority having jurisdiction appointed by the 
appropriate Government, by notification, for such purpose, within ninety days from the date of such 
order, in such form and manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the appellate authority may entertain the appeal after ninety days if it satisfied that the 
delay in filing the appeal has occurred due to sufficient cause.  
(2) The appellate authority shall be appointed from the officers of the appropriate Government
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 21]
se.  
(2) The appellate authority shall be appointed from the officers of the appropriate Government 
holding the post at least one rank higher than  the authority referred under sub -section ( 1) of section 45.  
(3) The appellate authority shall, after hearing the parties in the appeal, dispose of the appeal and 
endeavour shall be made to dispose of the appeal within a period of three months.  
(4) The out standing dues under the orders of the appellate authority shall be recovered by the 
authority referred to in section 45, by issuing the certificate of recovery in the manner specified in sub -
section ( 3) of that section.  
50. Records, returns and notices .—(1) Every employer of an establishment to which this Code 
applies shall maintain a register containing the details with regard to persons employed, muster roll, 
wages and such other details in such manner as may be prescribed.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 22]
22 
 (2) Every employer shall displa y a notice on the notice board at a prominent place of the 
establishment containing the abstract of this Code, category -wise wage rates of employees, wage period, 
day or date and time of payment of wages, and the name and address of the Inspector -cum-Facil itator 
having jurisdiction.  
(3) Every employer shall issue wage slips to the employees in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed.  
(4) The provisions of sub -sections ( 1) to ( 3) shall not apply in respect of the employer to the extent he 
employs not more than five persons for agriculture or domestic purpose:  
Provided that such employer, when demanded, shall produce before the Inspector -cum-Facilitator, the 
reasonable proof of the payment of wages to the persons so employed.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of  this sub -section, the expression “domestic purpose ” means the 
purpose exclusively relating to the home or family affairs of the employer and does not include any affair 
relating to any establishment, industry, trade, business, manufacture or occupation.  
CHAPTER VII  
INSPECTORY -CUM-FACILITATOR  
51. Appointment of Inspector -cum-Facilitators and their powers .—(1) The appropriate 
Government may, by notification, appoint Inspector -cum-Facilitators for the purposes of this Code who 
shall exercise the powers confe rred on them under sub -section ( 4) throughout the State or such 
geographical limits assigned in relation to one or more establishments situated in such State or 
geographical limits or in one or more establishments, irrespective of geographical limits, assi gned to him 
by the appropriate Government, as the case may be.  
(2) The appropriate Government may, by notification, lay down an inspection scheme which may also 
provide for generation of a web -based inspection and calling of information relating to the ins pection 
under this Code electronically.  
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), the appropriate 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 22]
ode electronically.  
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), the appropriate Government may, by 
notification, confer such jurisdiction of randomised selection of inspection for the purposes of this Code 
to the Inspect or-cum-Facilitator as may be specified in such notification.  
(4) Every Inspector -cum-Facilitator appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to be public 
servant within the meaning of  section 21  of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
(5) The Inspector -cum-Facilitator may — 
(a) advice to employers and workers relating to compliance with the provisions of this Code (45 
of 1860);  
(b) inspect the establishments as assigned to him by the appropriate Government,   
subject to the instructions or guidelines issued by the appropriate Government from time to time.  
(6) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 4), the Inspector -cum-Facilitator may, — 
(a) examine any person who is found in any premises of the establishment, whom the Inspector -
cum-Facili tator has reasonable cause to believe, is a worker of the establishment;  
(b) require any person to give any information, which is in his power to give with respect to the 
names and addresses of the persons;  
(c) search, seize or take copies of such register , record of wages or notices or portions thereof as 
the Inspector -cum-Facilitator may consider relevant in respect of an offence under this Code and 
which the Inspector -cum-Facilitator has reason to believe has been committed by the employer;  
(d) bring to the notice of the appropriate Government defects or abuses not covered by any law 
for the time being in force; and  
(e) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 23]
23 
 (7) Any person required to produce any document or to give any information required by a  Inspector -
cum-Facilitator under sub -section ( 5) shall be deemed to be legally bound to do so within the meaning of  
section 175  and section 176  of the Indian Penal Code.  
(8) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) shall, so far a s may be, apply 
to the search or seizure under sub -section ( 5) as they apply to the search or seizure made under the 
authority of a warrant issued under  section 94  of the said Code.  
CHAPTER VIII  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
52. Cognizance of offences .—(1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under 
this Code, save on a complaint made by or under the authority of the appropriate Government or an 
officer authorised in this behalf, or by an employee or a registered Trade Union registered u nder the Trade 
Unions Act, 1926 (16 of 1926) or an Inspector -cum-Facilitator.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), no 
court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate of the f irst class shall try the 
offences under this Code.  
53. Power of officers of appropriate Government to impose penalty in certain cases .—(1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in section 52, for the purpose of imposing penalty under clauses ( a) 
and ( c) of su b-section ( 1) and sub -section ( 2) of section 54 and sub -section ( 7) of section 56, the 
appropriate Government may appoint any officer not below the rank of Under Secretary to the 
Government of India or an officer of equivalent rank in the State Government,  as the case may be, for 
holding enquiry in such manner, as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(2) While holding the enquiry, the officer referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall have the power to 
summon and enforce attendance of any person acquainte d with the facts and circumstances of the case to 
give evidence 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 23]
attendance of any person acquainte d with the facts and circumstances of the case to 
give evidence or to produce any document, which in the opinion of such officer, may be useful for or 
relevant to the subject matter of the enquiry and if, on such enquiry, he is satisfied that the person ha s 
committed any offence under the provisions referred to in sub -section ( 1), he may impose such penalty as 
he thinks fit in accordance with such provisions.  
54. Penalties for offences .—(1) Any employer who — 
(a) pays to any employee less than the amount due  to such employee under the provisions of this 
Code shall be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees;  
(b) having been convicted of an offence under clause ( a) is again found guilty of similar offence 
under this clause, within five ye ars from the date of the commission of the first or subsequent offence, 
he shall, on the second and the subsequent commission of the offence, be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months or with fine which may extend to one 
lakh rupees, or with both;  
(c) contravenes any other provision of this Code or any rule made or order made or issued there 
under shall be punishable with fine which may extend to twenty thousand rupees;  
(d) having been convicted of an offence under clause ( c) is again found guilty of similar offence 
under this clause, within five years from the date of the commission of the first or subsequent offence, 
he shall, on the second and the subsequent commission of the offence under this clause, be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month or with fine which may extend to forty 
thousand rupees, or with both.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), for the offences of non -maintenance or 
improper maintenance of records in  the establishment, the employer shall be punishable with fine which 
may extend to ten thousand rupees.  
(3) Notwithstanding anythin
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 23]
hall be punishable with fine which 
may extend to ten thousand rupees.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the 
Inspector -cum-Facilitator shall, before initiation of pr osecution proceeding for the offences under the said 
clause or sub -section, give an opportunity to the employer to comply with the provisions of this Code by 
way of a written direction, which shall lay down a time period for such compliance, and, if the em ployer 
complies with  the direction within such period, the Inspector -cum-Facilitator shall not initiate such 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 24]
24 
 prosecution proceeding and, no such opportunity shall be accorded to an employer, if the violation of the 
same nature of the provisions under this Code is repeated within a period of five years from the date on 
which such first violation was committed and in such case the prosecution shall be initiated in accordance 
with the provisions of this Code.  
55. Offences by companies .—(1) If the person commit ting an offence under this Code is a company, 
every person who, at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to the 
company for the conduct of business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be 
guilty of t he offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Code has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company” means anybody corporate and includes — 
(i) a firm; or  
(ii) a limited liability partnership registered under the Limited Liability  Partnership Act, 2008 
(6 of 2009); or  
(iii) other association of individuals; and  
(b) “director” in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.  
56. Composition of offences .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974),
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 24]
ences .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), any offence punishable under this Code, not being an offence punishable 
with imprisonment only, or with imprisonment and also with fine, may, on an application of the  accused 
person, either before or after the institution of any prosecution, be compounded by a Gazetted Officer, as 
the appropriate Government may, by notification, specify, for a sum of fifty per cent. of the maximum 
fine provided for such offence, in the  manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) shall apply to an offence committed by a person for the 
second time or thereafter within a period of five years from the date — 
(i) of commission of a similar offence which was earlier c ompounded;  
(ii) of commission of similar offence for which such person was earlier convicted.  
(3) Every officer referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall exercise the powers to compound an offence, 
subject to the direction, control and supervision of the approp riate Government.  
(4) Every application for the compounding of an offence shall be made in such manner as may be 
prescribed.  
(5) Where any offence is compounded before the institution of any prosecution, no prosecution shall 
be instituted in relation to su ch offence, against the offender in relation to whom the offence is so 
compounded.  
(6) Where the composition of any offence is made after the institution of any prosecution, such 
composition shall be brought by the officer referred to in sub -section ( 1) in writing, to the notice of the 
court in which the prosecution is pending and on such notice of the composition of the offence being 
given, the person against whom the offence is so compounded shall be discharged.  
(7) Any person who fails to comply with an order made by the officer referred to in sub -section ( 1), 
shall be punishable with a sum equivalent to twenty per cent. of the maximum fine provided for th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 24]
, 
shall be punishable with a sum equivalent to twenty per cent. of the maximum fine provided for the 
offence, in addition to such fine.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 25]
25 
 (8) No offence punishable under the provisions of this Code shal l be compounded except under and in 
accordance with the provisions of this section.  
CHAPTER X  
MISCELLANEOUS  
57. Bar of suits .—No court shall entertain any suit for the recovery of minimum wages, any 
deduction from wages, discrimination in wages and payment  of bonus, in so far as the sum so claimed — 
(a) forms the subject of claims under section 45;  
(b) has formed the subject of a direction under this Code;  
(c) has been adjudged in any proceeding under this Code;  
(d) could have been recovered under this Code.  
58. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or any other legal proceeding 
shall lie against the appropriate Government or any officer of that Government for anything which is in 
good faith done or intended to be done under this Code . 
59. Burden of proof .—Where a claim has been filed on account of non -payment of remuneration or 
bonus or less payment of wages or bonus or on account of making deductions not authorised by this Code 
from the wages of an employee, the burden to prove that the said dues have been paid shall be on the 
employer.  
60. Contracting out .—Any contract or agreement whereby an employee relinquishes the right to any 
amount or the right to bonus due to him under this Code shall be null and void in so far as it purports to 
remove or reduce the liability of any person to pay such amount under this Code.  
61. Effect of laws agreements, etc., inconsistent with this Code .—The provisions of this Code shall 
have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in  any other law for the time being 
in force or in the terms of any award, agreement, settlement or contract of service.  
62. Delegation of powers .—The appropriate Government may, by notification, direct that any power 
exercisable by it under this Code shall,  in relation to such matters and subject to such conditions, if any, 
as may be specified in
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 25]
 shall,  in relation to such matters and subject to such conditions, if any, 
as may be specified in the notification, be also exercisable — 
(a) where the appropriate Government is the Central Government, by such officer or authority 
subordinate to the Central Gover nment or by the State Government or by such officer or authority 
subordinate to the State Government, as may be specified in the notification;  
(b) where the appropriate Government is a State Government, by such officer or authority 
subordinate to the State  Government as may be specified in the notification.  
63. Exemption of employer from liability in certain cases .—Where an employer is charged with an 
offence under this Code, he shall be entitled upon complaint duly made by him, to have any other person 
whom he charges as the actual offender, brought before the court at the time appointed for hearing the 
charge; and if, after the commission of the offence has been proved, the employer proves to the 
satisfaction of the court — 
(a) that he has used due diligenc e to enforce the execution of this Code; and  
(b) that the said other person committed the offence in question without his knowledge, consent 
or connivance,  that other person shall be convicted of the offence and shall be liable to the like 
punishment as if  he were the employer and the employer shall be discharged from any liability under 
this Code in respect of such offence:  
Provided that in seeking to prove, as aforesaid, the employer may be examined on oath, and the 
evidence of the employer or his witness , if any, shall be subject to cross -examination by or on behalf 
of the person whom the employer charges as the actual offender and by the prosecution.  
64. Protection against attachments of assets of employer with Government .—Any amount 
deposited with the a ppropriate Government by an employer to secure the due performance of a contract 
with that Government and any other amount due to such employer from that Governm
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 25]
ance of a contract 
with that Government and any other amount due to such employer from that Government in respect of 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 26]
26 
 such contract shall not be liable to attachment under any decree or order of any court in respect of any 
debt or liability incurred by the employer other than any debt or liability incurred by the employer 
towards any employee employed in connection with the contract aforesaid.  
65. Power of Central Government to give directions .—The Central Government may, for carrying 
into execution of the provisions of this Code in the State give directions to the State Government, and the 
State Government shall abide by such directions.  
66. Saving .—Nothing contained in this Code shall be deemed  to affect the provisions of the Mahatma 
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 (42 of 2005) and the Coal Mines Provident 
Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1948 (46 of 1948), or of any scheme made there under.  
67. Power of appropriate Go vernment to make rules .—(1) The appropriate Government may, 
subject to the condition of previous publication, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Code.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such ru les may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner of calculating the wages under sub -section ( 4) of section 6;  
(b) the arduousness of work to be taken into account  in addition to minimum rate of wages for 
certain category of workers under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 6) of section 6;  
(c) the norms under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 6) of section 6;  
(d) the cases and circumstances in which an employee employed for a period of less than the 
requisite number of hours shall not be entitled to receive wages for a full normal working day, under 
section 10;  
(e) the extent and conditions, which shall apply in relation to certain classes of employees under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 13;  
(f) the longer wage period for fixation of minimum rate of wages as referred to in section 14;  
(g) the manner of deducting loans mad
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 26]
ation of minimum rate of wages as referred to in section 14;  
(g) the manner of deducting loans made from any fund constituted for the welfare of labour under 
sub-clause ( ii) of clause ( f) of sub -section ( 2) of section 18;  
(h) the manner of recovery of excess of amount under sub -section ( 4) of section 18;  
(i) the authority to provide approval for imposition of fine under sub -section ( 1) of section 19;  
(j) the manner of exhibition of the acts and omissions to be s pecified in the notice under sub -
section ( 2) of section 19;  
(k) the procedure for the imposition of fines under sub -section ( 3) of section 19;  
(l) the form of the register to record all fines and all realisations thereof under sub -section ( 8) of 
section 19 ; 
(m) the procedure for making deductions for absence from duty under sub -section ( 2) of section 
20; 
(n) the procedure for making deductions for damage or loss under sub -section ( 2) of section 21;  
(o) the form of the register to record all deductions and all realisations thereof under sub -section 
(3) of section 21;  
(p) conditions for recovery of advance of money given to an employee after the employment 
began under clause ( b) of section 23;  
(q) condit ions for recovery of advances of wages to an employee not already earned under clause 
(c) of section 23;  
(r) deductions for recovery of loans and the rate of interest payable thereon under section 24;  
(s) the manner of regulating the procedure by the Centr al Advisory Board and the State Advisory 
Board, including that of the committees and sub -committees constituted by the State Advisory Board, 
under sub -section ( 10) of section 42;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 27]
27 
 (t) the terms of office of members of the Central Advisory Board, the State A dvisory Board, 
including that of the committees and sub -committees constituted by the State Advisory Board, under 
sub-section ( 11) of section 42;  
(u) the authority and manner of depositing with such authority, various undisbursed dues under 
clause (b) of s ub-section ( 1) of section 44;  
(v) the form of single application in respect of a number of employees under sub -section ( 5) of 
section 45;  
(w) the form for making an appeal to the appellate authority under sub -section ( 1) of section 49;  
(x) the manner of ma intenance of a register by the employer under sub -section ( 1) of section 50;  
(y) the form and manner of issuing wage slips under sub -section ( 3) of section 50;  
(z) the other powers to be exercised by the Inspector -cum-Facilitator under sub -section ( 5) of 
section 51;  
(za) the manner of imposing fine under sub -section ( 1) of section 56;  
(zb) the manner of composition of offence by a Gazetted Officer specified under sub -section ( 4) 
of section 56;  
(zc) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed under the provisions of this 
Code.  
(3) The Central Government may, subject to the condition of previous publication, make rules for, — 
(a) the manner of fixing floor wage under sub -section ( 1) of section 9;  
(b) the manner of consultation with Sta te Government under sub -section ( 3) of section 9;  
(c) the manner of making set on or set off for the sixth accounting year under clause (i) of sub -
section ( 7) of section 26;  
(d) the manner of making set on or set off for the seventh accounting year under c lause ( ii) of 
sub-section ( 7) of section 26;  
(e) the manner of calculating gross profit under clauses ( a) and ( b) of section 32;  
(f) such further sums in respect of employer under clause ( c) of section 34;  
(g) the manner of utilising  the excess of allocable surplus to be carried forward for being set on in 
t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 27]
he manner of utilising  the excess of allocable surplus to be carried forward for being set on in 
the succeeding accounting year and so on up to and inclusive of the fourth accounting year under sub -
section ( 1) of section 36;  
(h) the manner of utilising the minimum amount or the  deficiency to be carried forward for being 
set off in the succeeding accounting year and so on up to and inclusive of the fourth accounting year 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 36; and  
(i) the manner of holding an enquiry under sub -section ( 1) of section  53. 
(4) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions as aforesaid, both Houses agree 
in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that rule should not be made,  the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or amendment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule.  
(5) Every  rule made by the State Government under this section shall, as soon as possible after it is 
made, be laid before the State Legislature.  
68. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Code, the Cen tral Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CODE ON WAGES, 2019.pdf - page 28]
28 
 not inconsistent with the provisions of this Code, as may appear to be necessary for removing the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section  after the expiry of a period of three years 
from the commencement of this Code.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
69. Repeal and savings .—(1) The Payment of Wages Act, 1936 (4 of 1936), the Minimum Wages 
Act, 1948 (11 of 1948), the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965 (21 of 1965) and the Equal Remuneration Act, 
1976 (25 of 1976) are hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the  enactments so repealed 
including any notification, nomination, appointment, order or direction made there under or any amount 
of wages provided in any provision of such enactments for any purpose shall be deemed to have been 
done or taken or provided for such purpose under the corresponding provisions of this Code and shall be 
in force to the extent they are not contrary to the provisions of this Code till they are repealed under the 
corresponding provisions of this Code or by the notification to that effe ct by the Central Government.  
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), the provisions of  section 6  of the General 
Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897) shall apply to the repeal of such enactments.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND ABOLITION) ACT, 1970.pdf - page 1]
1 THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND ABOLITION) ACT, 1970                                                                                                                                        
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                            
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
THE ADVISORY BOARDS  
3. Central Advisory Board.  
4. State Advisory Board.  
5. Power to constitute committees.  
CHAPTER III  
REGISTRATION OF ESTABLISHMENTS EMPLOYING CONTRACT LABOUR  
6. Appointment of registering officers.  
7. Registration of certain establishments.  
8. Revocation of registration in certain cases.  
9. Effect of non -registration.  
10. Prohibition of employment of contract labour.  
CHAPTER IV  
LICENSING OF CONTRACTORS  
11. Appointment of licensing officers.  
12. Licensing of contractors.  
13. Grant of licences.  
14. Revocation, suspension and amendment of licences.  
15. Appeal.  
CHAPTER V  
WELFARE AND HEALTH OF CONTRACT LABOUR  
16. Canteens.  
17. Rest -rooms.  
18. Other facilities.  
19. First -aid facilities.  
20. Liability of principal employer in certain cases.  
21. Respon sibility for payment of wages.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND ABOLITION) ACT, 1970.pdf - page 2]
2 CHAPTER VI  
PENALTIES AND PROCEDUR E 
SECTIONS  
22. Obstructions.  
23. Contravention of provisions regarding employment of contract labour.  
24. Other offences.  
25. Offences by companies.  
26. Cognizance of offences.  
27. Limitation of prosecutions.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
28. Inspecting staff.  
29. Registers and other records to be maintained.  
30. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with this Act.  
31. Power to exempt in special cases.  
32. Protection of action taken  under this Act.  
33. Power to give directions.  
34. Power to remove difficulties.  
35. Power to make rules.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND ABOLITION) ACT, 1970.pdf - page 3]
3  
THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND ABOLITION) ACT, 1970  
ACT NO. 37 OF 1970  
[5th September, 1970.]  
An Act to regulate the employment of contract l abour in certain establishments and to provide 
for its abolition in certain circumstances and f or matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -first Year of t he Republic of India as follows :— 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application. —(1) This Act may be called the Contract 
Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shal l come into force on such date1as the Central Government may, by notification in the  
Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act.  
(4) It applies — 
(a) to every establishment in which twenty or more workmen are employed or were employed on 
any day of the preceding twelve months as co ntract labour;  
(b) to every contractor who employ ees or who employed on any day of the preceding twelve 
months twenty or more workmen:  
Provided that the appropriate Government may, after giving not less than two months ’ notice of its 
intention so to do, by n otification in the Official Gazette, apply the provisions of this Act to any 
establishment or contractor employing such number of workmen less than twenty as may be specified in 
the notification.  
(5) (a) It shall not apply to establishments in which work o nly of an intermittent or casual nature is 
performed.  
(b) If a question arises whether work performed in an establishment is of an intermittent or casual 
nature, the appropriate Government shall decide that question after consultation with Central Board or , as 
the case may be, a State Board, and its decision shall be final.  
Explanation. —For the purpose of this sub -section, work performed in an establishment shall not be 
deemed to be of an intermittent nature — 
(i) if it was performed for more than one hun
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND ABOLITION) ACT, 1970.pdf - page 3]
hall not be 
deemed to be of an intermittent nature — 
(i) if it was performed for more than one hundred and twenty days in the preceding twelve 
months, or  
(ii) if it is of a seasonal character and is performed for more than sixty days in a year.  
 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
 
Amendment of section 1 of 37 of 1970. —In Section  1 of the Contract Labour  (Regulation and 
Abolition) Act, 1970, in its application to the State of Maharashtra, in sub -section ( 4),— 
 
(a) in clause ( a),  for the words “twenty or more workmen” the  words “fifty or more workmen” 
shall be substituted ; 
                                                           
1. 10th February, 1971 , vide notification No.  G.S.R. 190 , dated 1 st February, 1971, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( i). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND ABOLITION) ACT, 1970.pdf - page 4]
4  
(b) in clause ( b), for the words “twenty or more workmen” the words “fifty or more workmen” 
shall be substituted;  
 
(c) in the proviso, for the words “less than twenty” the words “less than fifty” shall be substituted . 
 
[Vide Maharashtra Act 2 of 2017, s. 2. ] 
 
Andhra Pradesh  
 
Amendme nt of section 1 central Act 37 of 1970. —In the Contract Labour (Regulation and 
Abolition) Act, 1970, in section 1, in sub -section ( 4), in clauses ( a), (b) and the provisio thereunder, for 
the word “twenty” the word “fifty” shall be substituted.  
 
[Vide Andhra Pradesh Act 21 of 2015, s. 2.]   
 
Uttar Pradesh  
In section 1 of the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970 hereinafter referred 
to as the principal Act, for sub -section (4) the following sub -section shall be substituted — 
 
“(4) It appli es— 
(a) to every establishment in which fifty or more workmen are employed or were employed 
on any day of the preceding twelve months as contract labour;  
(b) to every contractor who employs or who employed on any day of the preceding twelve 
months fifty or  more workmen.  
Provided that the State Government may,  after giving not less than two months’ notice of its 
intention so to do, by notification in the Official Gazette, apply the provisions of this Act to any 
establishment or contractor employing such numb er of workmen less than fifty as may be 
specified in the notification.”  
 
[Vide the Uttar Pradesh Act 14 of 2018, s. 2]  
Union Territory Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh  
Section 1 .—In sub -section (4), in clause (a), for "twenty", substitute "forty".  
[Vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, 
Notification no. S.O. 3465 (E), dated  (5-10-2020)  and vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation 
(Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, Notification No. S .O. 3774(E), dated (23-10-2020 ).] 
Rajasthan  
Amendment of section 1, Central Act No. 37 of  1970. —For the existing sub -section (4) 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND ABOLITION) ACT, 1970.pdf - page 4]
Rajasthan  
Amendment of section 1, Central Act No. 37 of  1970. —For the existing sub -section (4) of section 
1 of the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970  (Central Act No. 37 of 1970),  in its 
application to the State of Rajasthan, the following shall be substituted, namely: - 
“(4) It applies - 
(a) to every establishment in which fifty or more workmen are employed or were employed on 
any day of the preceding twelve months as contract labour;  
(b) to every contractor who employs or who employed on any day of the preceding twelve 
months fifty or more workmen:  
Provided that the State Government may, after giving not less than two months’ notice of its intention 
so to do, by notification in the Official Gazette, apply the provisions of this Act to any establishment or 
contractor employing such number of workmen less than fifty as may be specified in the notification.”  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 19 of 2014, s. 2]  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND ABOLITION) ACT, 1970.pdf - page 5]
5 Gujarat  
Amendment of section 1 of 37 of 1970 .—In the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970, in its 
application to the State of Gujarat  (hereinafter referred to as “the principal Act”), in section 1, sub -section (4) ,— 
(i) in clause (a), for the word “twenty”, the word “fifty” shall be substituted;  
(ii) in clause (b), for the word “twenty”, the word “fifty” shall be substituted;  
(iii) in the proviso, for the word “twenty”, the word “fifty” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Gujarat  Act 2 of 2021, s. 2]  
2. Def initions. —(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
1[(a) “appropriate Government ” means, — 
(i) in relation to an establishment in respect of which the appropriate Government under the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), is the Central Government, the Central Government;  
(ii) in relation to any other establishment, the Government of the State in which that other 
establishment is situate;]  
(b) a workman shall be deemed to be employed as “contract labour ” in or in connection with t he 
work of an establishment when he is hired in or in connection with such work by or through a 
contractor, with or without the knowledge of the principal employer;  
(c) “contractor ”, in relation to an establishment, means a person who undertakes to produce  a 
given result for the establishment, other than a mere supply of goods of articles of manufacture to 
such establishment, through contract labour or who supplies contract labour for any work of the 
establishment  and includes a sub -contractor;  
(d) “control led industry ” means any industry the control of which by the Union has been declared 
by any Central Act to be expedient in the public interest;  
(e) “establishment ” means — 
(i) any office or department of the Government or a local authority, or  
(ii) any place where any industry, trade, business, manufacture or occupation is carried on;  
(f) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  

<|CHUNK|>
[THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND ABOLITION) ACT, 1970.pdf - page 5]
e or occupation is carried on;  
(f) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(g) “principal employer ” means— 
(i) in relation to any office or department of the Government or a local aut hority, the head of 
that office or department or such other officer as the Government or the local authority, as the 
case may be, may specify in this behalf,  
(ii) in a factory, the owner or occupier of the factory and where a person has been named as 
the m anager of the factory under the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948) , the person so named,  
(iii) in a mine, the owner or agent of the mine and where a person has been named as the 
manager of the mine, the person so named,  
(iv) in any other establishment, any p erson responsible for the supervision an d control of the 
establishment.  
Explanation. —For the purpose of sub -clause ( iii) of this clause, the expressions “mine ”, “owner ” and 
“agent ” shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in clause ( j), clause  (l) and clause ( c) of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 2 of th e Mines Act, 1952 (35 of 1952);  
(h) “wages ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( vi) of section 2 of the Payment of 
Wages Act, 1936 (4 of 1936);  
(i) “workman ” means any person employed in  or in connection with the work of any 
establishment to do any skilled, semi -skilled or un -skilled manual, supervisory, technical or clerical 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 14 of 1986, s. 2, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 28 -1-1986).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND ABOLITION) ACT, 1970.pdf - page 6]
6 work for hire or reward, whether the terms of employment be express or implied, but does not include 
any such pers on— 
(A) who is employed mainly in a managerial or administrative capacity; or  
(B) who, being employed in a superviory capacity draws wages exceeding five hundred 
rupees per mensem or exercises, either by the nature of the duties attached to the office or b y 
reason of the powers vested in him, functions ma inly of a managerial nature; or  
(C) who is an out -worker, that is to say, a person to whom any articles or materials are given 
out by or on behalf of the principal employer to be made up, cleaned, washed, a ltered, 
ornamented, finished, repaired, adapted or otherwise processed for sale for the purposes of the 
trade or business of the principal employer and the process is to be carried out either in the home 
of the out -worker or in some other premises, not bei ng premises under the control and 
management of the principal employer.  
(2) Any reference in this Act to a law which is not in force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir * shall, 
in relation to that State, be construed as a reference to the corresponding law, if any, in force in that State.  
CHAPTER II  
THE ADVISORY BOARDS  
3. Central Advisory Board. —(1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, constitute a 
board to be called the Central Advisory Contract Labour Board (hereinafter referred to as the Central 
Board) to advise the Central Government on such matters arising out of the administration of this Act as 
may be referred to it and to carry out other functions assigned to it under this Act.  
(2) The Central Board shall consist of — 
(a) a Chairman to be appointed by the Central Government;  
(b) the Chief Labour Commissioner (Central), ex officio ; 
(c) such number of members, not exceeding seventeen but not less than eleven, as the Central 
Government may nominate to represent that Government, the Railways, the coal industry, the mining 
industry, the contrac
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND ABOLITION) ACT, 1970.pdf - page 6]
ate to represent that Government, the Railways, the coal industry, the mining 
industry, the contractors, the workmen and any other interests wh ich, in the opinion of the Central 
Government, ought to be represented on the Central Board.  
(3) The number of persons to be appointed as members from each of the categories specified in                 
sub-section ( 2), the term of office and other conditi ons of service of, the procedure to be followed in the 
discharge of their functions by, and the manner of filling vacancies among, the members of the Central 
Board shal l be such as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the number of members nominated to represe nt the workmen shall not be less than the 
number of members nominated to represent the principal employers and the contractors.  
4. State Advisory Board. —(1) The State Government may constitute a board to be called the State 
Advisory Contract Labour Board ( hereinafter referred to as the State Board) to advise the State 
Government on such matters arising out of the administration of this Act as may be referred to it and to 
carry out other functions assigned to it under this Act.  
(2) The State Board shall cons ist of — 
(a) a Chairman to be appointed by the State Government;  
(b) the  Labour Commissioner, ex officio , or in his absence any other officer nominated by the 
State Government in that behalf;  
*. Vide notification No . S.O. 3912(E), dated 30th October,  2019, this Act is made applicable to the Union territory of Jammu 
and Kashmir and the Union territory of Ladakh.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND ABOLITION) ACT, 1970.pdf - page 7]
7 (c) such number of members, not exceeding eleven but not less than nine, as the State 
Government may nominate to represent that Government, t he industry, the contractors, the workmen 
and any other interests which, in the opinion of the State Government, ought to be represented on the 
State Board.   
(3) The number of persons to be appointed as members from each of the categories specified in                  
sub-section ( 2), the term of office and other conditions of service of, the procedure to be followed in the 
discharge of their functions by, and the manner of filling vacancies among the , members of the State 
Board shall be such as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the number of members nominated to represent the workmen shall not be less than the 
number of members nominated to represent the principal employers and the contractors.  
5. Power  to constitute committees. —(1) The Central Board or the State Board, as the case may be, 
may constitute such committees and for such purpose or purposes as it may think fit.  
(2) The committe e constituted under sub -section ( 1) shall meet at such times and p laces and shall 
observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as may be 
prescribed.  
(3) The members of a committee shall be paid such fees and allowances for attending its meetings as 
may be prescribed:  
Provided t hat no fees shall be payable to a member who is an officer of Government or of any 
corporation established by any law for the time being in force.  
CHAPTER III  
REGISTRATION OF ESTABLISHMENTS EMPLOYING CONTRACT LABOUR  
6. Appointment of registering officers. —The appropriate Government may, by an order notified in 
the Official Gazette — 
(a) appoint such persons, being Gazetted Officers of Government, as it thinks fit to be registering 
officers for th e purposes of this Chapter; and  
(b) define the limits, within which a registering officer shall exercise the powers conferred on him 
by
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND ABOLITION) ACT, 1970.pdf - page 7]
define the limits, within which a registering officer shall exercise the powers conferred on him 
by or under this Act.  
7. Registration  of certain establishments. —(1) Every principal employer of an establishment to 
which this Act applies shall, within such period as the appropriate Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, fix in this behalf with respect to establishments generally or with respect to any class of 
them, make an application to the registering officer in the prescribed manner for registration of the 
estab lishment:  
Provided that the registering officer may entertain any such application for registration after expiry of 
the period fixed in this behalf, if the registering officer is sati sfied that the applicant was prevented by 
sufficient cause from making th e application in time.  
(2) If the application for registration is complete in all respects, the registering officer shall register 
the establishment and issue to the principal employer of the establishment a certificate of registration 
containing such particulars as may be prescribed.  
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Uttar Pradesh  
In section 7 of the principal Act, after sub -section (2) the following sub -section shall be inserted, 
namely: - 
“(3) On submission of application in all respect the registering officer shall grant or refuse to grant or 
object to grant registration within one day from the date of submission of application and in such manner 
as may be prescribed. On the expiration of the said period the registration shall be deemed to be granted.”  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND ABOLITION) ACT, 1970.pdf - page 8]
8 Applicant may submit his application on departmental web portal along with necessary documents 
and payment of fee. In such case if the application is complete in all respect and the applicant is eligible, 
automatic registration shall be granted by the web  portal and reg istration certificate be sent through e -
mail;  
Provided that if the registration is obtained by the misrepresentation of fact or concealment of fact or 
on the basis of forged document then such registration shall be deemed null and void and can be cancelled  
by registering officer and legal action shall be taken against applicant.”  
[Vide the Uttar Pradesh Act 14 of 2018, s. 3]  
8. Revocation of registration in certain cases. —If the registering officer is satisfied, either on a 
reference made to him in this beh alf or otherwise, that the registration of any establishment has been 
obtained by misrepresentation or suppression of any material fact, or that for any other reason the 
registration has become useless or ineffective and, therefore, requires to be revoked,  the registering 
officer may, after giving an opportunity to the principal employer of the establishment to be heard and 
with the previous approval of the appropriate Government, revoke the registration.  
9. Effect of non -registration. —No principal employer  of an establishment, to which this Act applies, 
shall — 
(a) in the case of an establishment required to be registered under section 7, but which has not 
been registered within the time fixed for the purpose under that section,  
(b) in the case of an establi shment the registration in respect of which has been revoked under 
section 8,  
employ contract labour in the establishment after the expiry of the period referred to inclause ( a) or after 
the revocation of registration referred to in clause ( b), as the case  may be.  
10. Prohibition of employment of contract labour. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
this Act, the appropriate Government may, aft
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND ABOLITION) ACT, 1970.pdf - page 8]
ct labour. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
this Act, the appropriate Government may, after consultation with the Central Board or, as the case may 
be, a State Board, prohibit, by notification in the Official Gazette, employment of contract labour in any 
proce ss, operation or other work in any establishment.  
(2) Before issuing any notification under sub -section ( 1) in relation to an establishment, the 
appropriate Government shall have regard to the conditions of work and benefits provided for the contract 
labou r in that establishment and other relevant factors, such as — 
(a) whether the process, operation or other work is incidental to, or necessary for the industry, 
trade, business, manufacture or occupation that is carried on in the establishment ; 
(b) whether i t is of perennial nature, that is to say, it is of sufficient duration having regard to the 
nature of industry, trade, business, manufacture or occupation carried on in that establishment;  
(c) whether it is done ordinarily through , regular workmen in that establishment or an 
establishment similar thereto;  
(d) whether it is sufficient to employ considerable number of wholetime workmen.  
Explanation. —If a question arises whether any process or operation or other work is of perennial 
nature, the decision of the  appropriate Government thereon shall be final.  
CHAPTER IV  
LICENSING OF CONTRACTORS  
11. Appointment of licensing officers. —The appropriate Government may, by an order notified in 
the Official Gazette, — 
(a) appoint such persons, being Gazetted  Officers of Government, as it thinks fit to be licensing 
officers for th e purposes of this Chapter; and  
(b) define the limits, within which a licensing officer shall exercise the powers conferred on 
licensing officers by or under this Act.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND ABOLITION) ACT, 1970.pdf - page 9]
9 12. Licensing o f contractors .—(1) With effect from such date as the appropriate Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, no contractor to whom this Act applies, shall undertake or 
execute any work through contract labour except under and in accor dance with a licence issued in that 
behalf by the licensing officer.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, a l icence under sub -section ( 1) may contain such conditions 
including, in particular, conditions as to hours of work, fixation of wages and other essential amenities in 
respect of contract labour as the appropriate Government may deem fit to impose in accordance with the 
rules, if any,  made under section 35 and shall be issued on payment of such fees and on the deposit of 
such sum, if any, as security for the due performance of the conditions as may be prescribed.  
13. Grant of licences. —(1) Every application for the grant of a licence u nder sub -section ( 1) of 
section 12 shall be made in the prescribed form and shall contain the particulars regarding the location of 
the establishment, the nature of process, operation or work for which contract labour is to be employed 
and such other parti culars as may be prescribed.  
(2) The licensing officer may make such investigation in respect of the application received under 
sub-section ( 1) and in making any such investigation the licensing officer shall follow such procedure as 
may be prescribed.  
(3) A licence granted under this Chapter shall be valid for the period specified therein and may be 
renewed from time to time for such period and on payment of such fees and on such conditions as may be 
prescribed.  
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of  Section  13.—In section 13  of the principal Act, after sub -section (3) the following 
sub section shall be inserted, namely: — 
“(4) If an application for licenses is complete in all respects and the licensing officer fails to make any 
order within a period of
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND ABOLITION) ACT, 1970.pdf - page 9]
es is complete in all respects and the licensing officer fails to make any 
order within a period of one day then it shall be deemed that the license has been granted to him.”  
[Vide the Uttar Pradesh Act 14 of 2018, s. 4]  
14. Revocation, suspension and amendment of licences. —(1) If the licensing officer is satisfied, 
either on a reference made to him i n this behalf or otherwise, that — 
(a) alicence granted under section 12 has been obtained by misrepresentation or suppression of 
any material fact, or  
(b) the holder of a licence has, without reasonable cause , failed to comply with the conditions 
subject to which the licence has been granted or has contravened any of the provisions of this Act or 
the rules made thereunder,  
then, without prejudice to any other penalty to which the holder of the licence may be li able under this 
Act, the lice nsing officer may, after giving  the holder of the licence an opportunity of showing cause, 
revoke or suspend the licence or forfeit the sum, if any, or any portion thereof deposited as security for 
the due performance of the co nditions subject to which the licence has been granted.  
(2) Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, the licensing officer may vary or amend a 
licence granted under section 12.  
15. Appeal. —(1) Any person aggrieved by an order made under section 7, section 8, section 12 or 
section 14 may, within thirty days from the date on which the order is communicated to him, prefer an 
appeal to an appellate officer who shall be a person nominated in this b ehalf by the appropriate 
Government:  
Provided that the appellate officer may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty 
days, if he is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time.  
(2) On receipt of an appeal under sub -section ( 1), the appellate officer shall, after giving the appellant 
an opportunity of being heard , dispose of the appeal as exped
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND ABOLITION) ACT, 1970.pdf - page 9]
er shall, after giving the appellant 
an opportunity of being heard , dispose of the appeal as expeditiously as possible.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND ABOLITION) ACT, 1970.pdf - page 10]
10 CHAPTER V  
WELFARE AND HEALTH OF CONTRACT LABOUR  
16. Canteens. —(1) The appropriate Government may make rules requiring that in every 
establishment — 
(a) to which this Act applies,  
(b) wherein work requiring employment of contract labour is likely to continue for such period as 
may be prescribed, and  
(c) wherein contract la bour numbering one hundred or more is ordinarily employed by a 
contractor,  
one or more canteens shall be provided and maintained by the contractor for the use of such contract 
labour.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rul es may provide for — 
(a) the date by which the canteens shall be provided;  
(b) the number of canteens that shall be provided, and the standards in respect of construction, 
accommodation, furniture and other  equipment of the canteens; and  
(c) the foodstuffs which may be served therein and the charges which may be made therefor.  
17. Rest -rooms.—(1) In every place wherein contract labour is required to halt at night in connection 
with the work of an establishment — 
(a) to which this Act applies, and  
(b) in which work requiring employment of contract labour is likely to continue for such period as 
may be prescribed,  
there shall be provided and maintained by the contractor for the use of the contract labour such number of 
rest-rooms or such other suitable  alternative accommodation within such time as may be prescribed.  
(2) The rest -rooms or the alternative accommodation to be provided under sub -section ( 1) shall be 
sufficiently lighted and ventilated and shall be maintained in a clean and comfortable condi tion. 
18. Other facilities. —It shall be the duty of every contractor employing contract labour in connection 
with the work of an establishment to which this Act applies, to provide and maintain — 
(a) a sufficient supply of wholesome drinking water for the c ontract labour at convenient places;  
(b) a sufficient number of latrines and urinals of the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND ABOLITION) ACT, 1970.pdf - page 10]
the c ontract labour at convenient places;  
(b) a sufficient number of latrines and urinals of the prescribed types so situated as to be 
convenient and accessible to the contract l abour in the establishment; and  
(c) washing facilities.  
19. First -aid facilities. —There shall be provided and maintained by the contractor so as to be readily 
accessible during all working hours a first -aid box equipped with the prescribed contents at every place 
where contract labour is employed by him.  
20. Liability of principal employ er in certain cases. —(1) If any amenity required to be provided 
under section 16, section 17, section 18 or section 19 for the benefit of the contract labour employed in an 
establishment is not provided by the contractor within the time prescribed therefor , such amenity shall be 
provided by the principal employer within such time as may be prescribed.  
(2) All expenses incurred by the principal employer in providing the amenity may be recovered by the 
principal employer from the contractor either by deductio n from any amount payable to the contractor 
under any contract or as a debt payable by the contractor.  
21. Responsibility for payment of wages. —(1) A contractor shall be responsible for payment of 
wages to each worker employed by him as contract labour  and such wages shall be paid before the expiry 
of such period as may be prescribed.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND ABOLITION) ACT, 1970.pdf - page 11]
11 (2) Every principal employer shall nominate a representative duly authorised by him to be present at 
the time of disbursement of wages by the contractor and it shall be th e duty of such representative to 
certify the amounts paid as wages in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) It shall be the duty of the contractor to ensure the disbursement of wages in the presence of the 
authorised representative of the principal employe r. 
(4) In case the contractor fails to make payment of wages within the prescribed period or makes short 
payment, then the principal employer shall be liable to make payment of wages in full or the unpaid 
balance due, as the case may be, to the contract la bour employed by the contractor and recover the 
amount so paid from the contractor either by deduction from any amount payable to the contractor under 
any contract or as a debt payable by the contractor.  
CHAPTER VI  
PENALTIES AND PROCEDUR E 
22. Obstructions. —(1) Whoever obstructs an inspector in the discharge of his duties under this Act 
or refuses or wilfully neglects to afford the inspector any reasonable facility for making any inspection, 
examination, inquiry or investigation authorised by or under this A ct in relation to an establishment to 
which, or a contractor to whom, this Act applies, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.  
(2) Whoever wilfu lly refuses to produce on the demand of an inspector any register or other 
document kept in pursuance of this Act or prevents or attempts to prevent or does anything which he has 
reason to believe is likely to prevent any person from appearing before or be ing examined by an inspector 
acting in pursuance of his duties under this Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.  
23. Contravention of prov
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND ABOLITION) ACT, 1970.pdf - page 11]
ths, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.  
23. Contravention of provi sions regarding employment of contract labour. —Whoever 
contravenes any provision of this Act or of any rules made thereunder prohibiting, restricting or 
regulating the employment of contract labour, or contravenes any condition of a licence  granted under this 
Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months , or with fine 
which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both, and in the case of a continuing contravention 
with an additional fine which may extend to one hundred rupees for every day during which such 
contravention continues after conviction for the first such contravention.  
24. Other offences. —If any person contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or of any rules made 
thereunder for whic h no other penalty is elsewhere provided, he shall be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or 
with both.  
25. Offences by companies. —(1) If the person committing an o ffence under this Act is a company, 
the company as well as every person in charge of, and responsible to, the company for the conduct of its 
business at the time of the commission of the offence shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall 
be liab le to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this  sub-section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all 
due di ligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivanc e of, or that the commission of the offence is attributable to any neglect on the par
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND ABOLITION) ACT, 1970.pdf - page 11]
 or 
connivanc e of, or that the commission of the offence is attributable to any neglect on the part of any 
director, manager, managing agent or any other officer of the company, such director, manager, managing 
agent or such other officer shall also be deemed to be gui lty of that offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purpose of this section — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND ABOLITION) ACT, 1970.pdf - page 12]
12 (b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Insertion of new Section 25 -A.—After section -25 of the principal Act the following section shall be 
inserted, namely: — 
“25-A. (1) Any offence committed under this Act, punishable with fine or imprisonment up to six 
months or with both may, on an application of the accuses person, either before or after institution of any 
prosec ution, be compounded by such Competent Officer, as the State Government may by notification, 
specify for a sum of fifty percent of the maximum fine provided for such offence, in such manner as may 
be prescribed:  
Provided that the provision of compounding under this section shall be available only for commission 
of first offence.  
(2) Every applicatio n for the compounding of an offence shall be made in such manner as may be 
prescribed.  
(3) Where any offence is compounded before the institution of any prosecution, no prosecution shall 
be instituted in relation to such offence, against the offender in re lation to whom the offence is so 
compounded.  
(4) Where the composition of any offence is made after the institution of any prosecution, such 
composition shall be brought by the officer referred to in sub -section (1) in writing to the notice of the 
court in  which prosecution is pending and on such notice of the composition of the offence being given, 
the person against whom the offence is so compounded shall be discharged.”  
[Vide the Uttar Pradesh Act 14 of 2018, s. 5]  
Union Territory Of Ladakh  
After section  25, insert - 
"25A. Compounding of offences. --(1) Any offence punishable under sub -sections (1) and (2) of 
section  22 and section  24 may, either before or after the institution of the persecution, on an 
application by the alleged offender, be compounded by such officer or authority as the appropriate 
Government may by notification in the official Gazette, specify in this behalf for such amount as 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND ABOLITION) ACT, 1970.pdf - page 12]
 
Government may by notification in the official Gazette, specify in this behalf for such amount as 
specified in the Table below: -- 
TABLE  
S. No.  Section  Compounding amount  
1 2 3 
1 22(1), 22(2) and 24  Number of workmen employed in the 
industry  Amount not exceeding  
1 to 50  Rs. 5000/ - 
51 to 100  Rs. 8,000/ - 
101 to 500  Rs. 12,000/ - 
More than 500  Rs. 16,000/ -: 
Provided that the appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the  
said specified compounding amount:  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND ABOLITION) ACT, 1970.pdf - page 13]
13 Provided further that the offences of the same nature committed by the same offender for more 
than three occasions shall not be compoundable:  
Provided also that such offences shall be compounded only after the alleged offender has acted to 
the satisfaction of such officer or authority that such offence is not continued any further:  
Provided also that when an offence is compounded on an application by the principal employer or 
contractor, then seventy -five per cent. of t he compounding amount received from him, shall be paid 
to the concerned employee or equally amongst the employees and if any employees are not 
identifiable, then the remaining amount shall be deposited in such manner as may be notified by the 
appropriate G overnment.  
(2) Where an offence has been compounded under sub -section (1), no further proceedings shall 
be taken against the offender in respect of such offence and the offender, if in custody, shall be 
released or discharged."  
[Vide Union Territory of Lad akh Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, Notification 
no. S.O. 3465 (E), dated  (5-10-2020)  and vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of 
Central Laws) Order, 2020, Notification no. S.O. 3774(E), dated (23 -10-2020).]  
26. Cognizance of offences. —No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act except on 
a complaint made by, or with the previous sanction in writing of, the inspector and no court inferior to 
that of a Presidency Magistrate or a magistrate of t he first class shall try any offence punishable under this 
Act. 
27. Limitation of prosecutions. —No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this 
Act unless the complaint thereof is made within three months from the date on which the alleg ed 
commission of the offence came to the knowledge of an inspector:  
Provided that where the offence consists of disobeying a written order made by an inspector, 
complaint thereof may be made within six m
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND ABOLITION) ACT, 1970.pdf - page 13]
ists of disobeying a written order made by an inspector, 
complaint thereof may be made within six months of the date on which the offence is alleged to have 
been committed.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
28. Inspecting staff. —(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
appoint such persons as it thinks fit to be inspectors for the purposes of this Act, and define the local 
limits within which they shall exercise their powers under this Act.  
(2) Subject to any rules made in this behalf, an inspector may, within the local limits for which he is 
appointed — 
(a) enter, at all reasonable hours, with such assistance (if any), being  persons in the service of the 
Government or any local or other public authority as he thinks fit, any premises or place where 
contract labour is employed, for the purpose of examining any register or record or notices required to 
be kept or exhibited by o r under this Act or rules made thereunder, and require the production thereof 
for inspection;  
(b) examine any person whom he finds in any such premises or place and who, he has reasonable 
cause to believe, is a workman employed therein;  
(c) require any person giving out work and any workman, to give any information, which is in his 
power to give with respect to the names and addresses of the persons to, for and from whom the work 
is given out or received , and with respect to the payments to be made for t he work;  
(d) seize or take copies of such register, record of wages or notices or portions thereof as he may 
consider relevant in respect of an offence under this Act which he has reason to believe has been 
committed by the principal employer or contractor ; and  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND ABOLITION) ACT, 1970.pdf - page 14]
14 (e) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed.  
(3) Any person required to produce any document or thing or to give any information required by an 
inspector under sub -section ( 2) shall be deemed to be legally bound to do so within the meaning of  
section 175 and section 176 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
(4) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), shall, so far as may be, apply 
to any search or seizure under sub -section ( 2) as they apply to any search or seizure  made under the 
authority of a warrant issued under section 98 of the said Code.  
29. Registers and other records to be maintained .—(1) Every principal employer and every 
contractor shall maintain such registers and records giving such particulars of  contract labour employed, 
the nature of work performed by the contract labour, the rates of wages paid to the contract labour and 
such other particulars in such form as may be prescribed.  
(2) Every principal employer and every contractor shall keep exhibi ted in such manner as may be 
prescribed within the premises of the establishment where the contract labour is employed, notices in the 
prescribed form containing particulars about the hours of work, nature of duty and such other information 
as may be presc ribed.  
30. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with this Act. —(1) The provisions of this Act shall 
have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law or in the terms of 
any agreement or contract of service, or in any standing orders applicable to the establishment whether 
made before or after the commencement of this Act:  
Provided that where under any such agreement, contract of service or standing orders the contract 
labour employed in the establishment are entitl ed to benefits in respect of any matter which are more 
favourable to them than those to which they would be entitled under this Act, the contract labour shall 
continue to be enti
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND ABOLITION) ACT, 1970.pdf - page 14]
those to which they would be entitled under this Act, the contract labour shall 
continue to be entitled to the more favourable benefits in respect of that matter, notwithstandin g that they 
receive benefits in respect o f other matters under this Act.  
(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed as precluding any such contract labour from 
entering into an agreement with the principal employer or the contractor, as the case may be, for granting 
them rights or privileges in respect of any matter which are more favourable to them than those to which 
they would be entitled under this Act.  
31. Power to exempt in special cases. —The appropriate Government may, in the case of an 
emergency, direct, by notification in the Official Gazette, that subject to such conditions and restrictions , 
if any, and for such period or periods, as may be specified in the notification, all or any of the provisions 
of this Act or the rules made thereunde r shall not apply to any establishment or class of establishmen ts or 
any class of contractors.  
32. Protection of action taken under this Act. —(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings 
shall lie against any registering officer, licensing officer o r any other Government servant or against any 
member of the Central Board or the State Board, as the case may be, for anything which is in good faith 
done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any  rule or order made thereunder.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding s shall lie against the Government for any damage caused or 
likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this 
Act or any rule or order made thereunder.  
33. Power to give directions. —The Central Government may give directions to the Government of 
any State as to the carrying into execution in the State of the provisions contained in this Act.  
34. Power to remove difficulties. —If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND ABOLITION) ACT, 1970.pdf - page 14]
in this Act.  
34. Power to remove difficulties. —If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the  provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the 
difficulty.  
35. Power to make rules. —(1) The appropriate Government may, subject to the condition of 
previous publication, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND ABOLITION) ACT, 1970.pdf - page 15]
15 (2) In particular, and  without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the number of persons to be appointed as members representing various interests on the 
Central Board and the State Boa rd, the term of their office and other conditions of service, the 
procedure to be followed in the discharge of their functions and the manner of filling vacancies;  
(b) the times and places of the meetings of any committee constituted under this Act, the 
procedure to be followed at such meetings including the quorum necessary for the transaction of 
business, and the fees and allowances that may be paid to the members of a committee;  
(c) the manner in which establishments may be registered under section 7, th e levy of a fee 
therefor and the form of certificate of registration;  
(d) the form of application for the grant or renewal of a licence under section 13 and the 
particulars it may contain;  
(e) the manner in which an investigation is to be made in respect o f an application for the grant of 
a licence and the matters to be taken into account in granting or refusing a licence;  
(f) the form of a licence which may be granted or renewed under section 12 and the conditions 
subject to which the licence may be grante d or renewed, the fees to be levied for the grant or renewal 
of a licence and the deposit of any sum as security for the performance of such conditions;  
(g) the circumstances under which licences may be varied or amended under section 14;  
(h) the form and manner in which appeals may be filed under section 15 and the procedure to be 
followed by appellate officers in disposing of the appeals;  
(i) the time within which facilities required by this Act to be provided and maintained may be so 
provided by the cont ractor and in case of default on the part of the contractor, by the principal 
employer;  
(j) the number and types of canteens, rest -rooms, latri
<|CHUNK|>
[THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND ABOLITION) ACT, 1970.pdf - page 15]
e contractor, by the principal 
employer;  
(j) the number and types of canteens, rest -rooms, latrines and urinals that should be provided and 
maintained;  
(k) the type of equipment that should be provided in the first-aid boxes;  
(l) the period within which wages payable to contract labour should be paid by the contractor 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 21;  
(m) the form of registers and records to be maintained by principal employers and contractors;  
(n) the submi ssion of returns, forms in which, and the authorities to which, such returns may be 
submitted;  
(o) the collection of any information or statistics in relation to contract labour; and  
(p) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed under this Ac t. 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two succe ssive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session in which 
it is so laid or the session immediately following, both Houses agree in making any modification in the 
rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter h ave effect only in 
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
1[(4) Every rule made by the State Go vernment under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before the State Legislature.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 4 of 2005, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 11-1-2005) . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 1]
 
 
  
1 
 THE COURT -FEES ACT, 1870  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
Extent  of Act . 
Commencement of Act.  
1A. Definition of “appropriate Government ”. 
2. [Repealed. ]. 
CHAPTER II  
FEES IN THE  HIGH COURTS  AND IN  THE COURTS  OF SMALL  CAUSES  
 AT THE  PRESIDENCY -TOWNS  
3. Levy of fees in High Courts on their original sides.  
 Levy of fees in Presidency Small Cause Courts.  
4. Fees on documents filed, etc., in High Courts in their extraordinary jurisdiction.  
In their appe llate jurisdiction.  
As courts of reference and revision.  
5. Procedure in case of difference as to necessity or amount of fee.  
CHAPTER III  
FEES IN OTHER  COURTS  AND IN  PUBLIC  OFFICES  
6. Fees on documents filed, etc., in Mufassal  Courts or in public offices . 
7. Computation of fees payable in certain suits.  
(i)  for money.   
(ii)  for maintenance and annuities .   
(iii)  for other movable p roperty having a market -value .  
(iv)  (a) for movable property  of no market -value.    
(b) to enforce a right to share in joi nt family property.   
(c) for a declaratory decr ee and consequential relief.   
(d) for an injunction.   
(e) for easements .  
(f) for accounts .  
(v) for possessio n of land, houses and gardens .  
Proviso as to Bombay Presidency .  
for houses and gardens .   
(vi)  to enforce a right of pre -emption .  
(vii) for interes t of assignee of land -revenue.   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 2]
 
 
  
2 
 SECTIONS  
(viii) to set aside an attachment.  
(ix)  to redeem.  
 to foreclose.  
(x)  for specific performance .   
(xi)  between landlord and tenant.  
8. Fee on memorandum of appea l against order relating to compensation . 
9. Power to ascertain net profits or market -value . 
10. Procedure where net profits or market -value wrongly estimated.  
11. Procedure in suits for mesne profits or account when amount decreed exceeds  amount 
claimed.  
12. Decision of questions as to valuation.  
13. Refund of fee paid on memorandum of appeal . 
14. Refund of fee on application for review of judgment . 
15. Refund where Court reverses or modifies its former decision on ground of mistake.  
16. Refund of fee . 
17. Multifarious suits . 
18. Written examinations of complainants . 
19. Exemption of certain documents.   
CHAPTER IIIA 
PROBATES , LETTERS  OF ADMINISTRATION  AND CERTIFICATES  OF ADMINISTRATION  
19A.  Relief where too high a court -fee has been pai d. 
19B.  Relief where  debts due from a deceased person have been paid out of his estate . 
19C.  Relief in case of several grants . 
19D.  Probates declared valid as to trust -property though not covered by court -fee. 
19E. Provision for case where too low a court -fee has been paid on  probates, etc . 
19F. Administrator to give proper security before letters stamped under section  19E. 
19G.  Executors, etc., not paying full court -fee on probates, etc., within six months  after 
discovery of under -payment.  
19H.  Notice of applications for prob ate or letters of administration to be given to Revenue -
authorities, and procedure thereon.  
19I. Payment of court -fees in respect of probates and letters of administration.  
19J. Recovery of penalties,  etc. 
19K.  Sections 6 and 28 not to apply to probates or  letters of administration.  
CHAPTER IV  
PROCESS -FEES  
20. Rules as to cost of process es. 
 Confirmation and publication of rules.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 2]
s. 
 Confirmation and publication of rules.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 3]
 
 
  
3 
 SECTIONS  
21. Tables of process -fees. 
22. Number of peons in District and subordinate Courts.  
 Number of peons in M ufassal Small  cause Courts.  
23. Number of peons in Revenue Courts.  
24. [Repealed. ]. 
CHAPTER V  
OF THE MODE OF LEVYING  FEES 
25. Collection of fees by stamps.  
26. Stamps to be impressed or adhesive.  
27. Rules for supply, number, renewal and keeping accounts of stamps.  
28. Stamping documents inadvertently received.  
29. Amended document.  
30. Cancellation of stamp.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
31. [Repealed .]. 
32. [Repealed .]. 
33. Admission in criminal cases of documents for which proper fee has not been paid.  
34. Sale of stamps.  
35. Power to reduce or remit fees . 
36. Saving of fees to certain officers of High Courts.   
 SCHEDULE   I.— AD VALOREM  FEES 
TABLE OF RATES OF AD VALOREM  FEES LEVIABLE  ON THE  
    INSTITUTION OF SUITS .  
SCHEDULE II. — FIXED  FEES 
SCHEDULE III. — FORM OF VALUAT ION (TO BE USED WITH SUCH MODIFICATION S, IF ANY, 
       AS MAY BE NECESSARY)  
 
ANNEXURE A. — VALUATION OF THE MOVABLE AND IMMOVABLE  
PROPERTY  OF DECEASED.  
    ANNEXURE B. —SCHEDULE OF DEBTS, ETC.  
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 4]
 
 
  
4 
 THE COURT -FEES ACT, 1870  
ACT NO. 7 O F 18701 
[11th March,  1870.] 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title. —This Act may be called the Court -fees Act, 1870.  
Extent of Act .—It extend s to the whole of India except 2[the territories which, immediately before 
the 1st November, 1956, were comprised in Part B States];  
Commence ment of Act .—And it shall come into force on the first day of April, 1870.  
3[1A. Definition of “appropriate Government ”.—In this Act “the appropriate Government ” 
means, in relation to fees or stamps relating to documents presented or to be presented before  any 
officer serving under the Central Government, that Government, and in relation to any other fees 
or stamps, the State Government.] 
42. [“Chief Controlling Revenue -authority ” defined. ] Rep. by the A. O. 1937. 
 
                                                      
1. It has been declared inapplicable to proceedings before officer s making a settlement, and in certain other cases under the S onthal 
Parganas Settlement Regulation , 1872  (Reg. 3 of 1872), s. 8, as amended by the S onthal Parganas Justice and Laws Regulation, 1899 
(Reg. 3 of 1899).  
   It has been extended to and brought into f orce in Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and Sch. I          
(w.e.f. 1 -7-1965) , to Goa, Daman and Diu by Reg. 11 of 1963, s. 3 and Sch., and to the whole of Union territory of 
Lakshadweep by Reg. 8 of 1 863, s. 3 and Sch., with modification (w .e.f. 1 -10-1967).  
  It has been amended in —  
  Ajmer -Merwara by Act 31 of 1930;  
  Assam by Assam Acts 4 of 1922, 3 of 1932, 18 of 1947, 8 of 1950, 27 of 1954 , 22 of 1955, 3 of 1958 , 19 of 1958, 12 of 1960 
and 28 of 1972;  
  Bengal by Bengal Acts 3 of 1898, 4 of 1922, 6 of 1922, 7 of 1935, 11 of 1935 and 3 of 1941;  
  Bihar by Bihar Acts 17 of 1939 and 7 of 19 58. 
  Bihar and Orissa by B. & O. Act 2 of 1922;  
  Bombay by Bombay Acts 2 of 1932 and 15 of 1943;  
  C.P. by C.P. Act 16 of 1935;  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 4]
 2 of 1922;  
  Bombay by Bombay Acts 2 of 1932 and 15 of 1943;  
  C.P. by C.P. Act 16 of 1935;  
  C.P. and Berar by C.P . and Berar Acts 9 of 1938, 16 of 1940, 9 of 1941, 5 of 1945 and 7 of 1948 and M.P. Acts 4 and 38 of 
1950, 13 and 22 of 1951 and 9 of 1953;  
  Himachal Pradesh by H.P. Act 4 of 1952;  
  Madras by Madras Acts 5 of 1922 and 17 of 1945;  
  Orissa by Orissa Acts 5 of 1939, 4 of 1945, 13 of 1957, 12 of 1974 and 55 of 1975;  
  Punjab by Act 17 of 1887 and Punjab Acts 7 of 1922, 1 of 1942, E.P. Act 26 of 1949 and Pun. Act 31 of 1953,  
19 of 1957, 20 of 1960 and 9 of 1979;  
  U.P. by U.P. Acts 12 of 1922, 3 of 1933, 2 of  1936, 19 of 1938, 9 of 1941, 14 of 1942, 8 of 1943, 5 of 1944, 14 of 
1948, 28 of 1957, 10 of 1959, 34 of 1970 and 9 of 1975;  
  Andaman and Nicobar Islands by Reg. 2 of 1957;  
  Meghalaya by Meghalaya Acts 2 of 1973 and 5 of 1973;  
  Madhya Pradesh by Madhya  Pradesh Acts 24 of 1975 and 4 of 1976;  
  Delhi by Central Act 28 of 1967; and  
  Haryana by Haryana Acts 11 of 1974 and 22 of 1974.  
The Act has been repealed in its application to Bombay area and Coorg district of Mysore by Mysore Act 16 of 1958.  
It has be en rep ealed in part in partially excluded areas in Madras and Koraput by Madras Reg. 6 of 1940 and Orissa Reg. 7 of 1943, 
respectively.  
2. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956, for “Part B States”.   
3. Ins. by the A.O. 1937.  
4. The Original  s. 2 relating to repeal of enactments was rep. by the Repealing Act, 1870 (14 of 1870). A section defining “Chief 
Controlling Revenue -authority” was added by s. 2 of the Court -fees (Amendment) Act, 1901 (10 of 1901), and was slightly amended 
by the Repeali ng and Amending Act, 1917 (24 of 1917). For the definition of the “Chief Controlling Revenue -authority” see now the 
General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), s. 3 (10). 
 The A.O. 1937 rep. s. 2 as in force elsewhere than in Bengal. In that Province the secti on subs. by the Court -fees (Bengal 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 4]
s in force elsewhere than in Bengal. In that Province the secti on subs. by the Court -fees (Bengal 
Amendment) Act, 1935 (Ben. 7 of 1935), s. 3 contains definitions of “appeal”, “Chief Controlling Revenue -authority”, 
“Collector” and “Suit”.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 5]
 
 
  
5 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
Orissa  
Amendment of sectio n 2 of Act (7 of 1870). —For section 2 of the Court Fees Act, 1870, hereinafter  
called the principal Act, the following section shall  be substituted: — 
“2. Definition .—In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant  in the subject or context, — 
(1) ‘appeal ’ includes a cross objection;  
(2) ‘suit’ includes an appeal from a decree except in section 8 -A.” 
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939 , s. 3] 
CHAPTER II  
FEES IN THE HIGH COURTS  AND IN THE COURTS OF SMALL  CAUSES  
AT THE  PRESIDENCY -TOWNS  
3. Levy of fees in High Courts on their original sides. —The fees payable for the time being to the 
clerks and officers (other than the Sheriffs and attorneys) of 1[the 2[High Courts other than those of 
Kerala, Mysore and Rajasthan]],  
or chargeable in each of such Courts under No. 11 of the first, and Nos. 7, 12, 14,  3*** 
20 and 21 of the second, schedule to this Act annexed;  
Levy of fees in Presidency Small Cause Courts. —and the fees for the time being chargeable in the 
Courts of Small Causes at  the 4presidency -towns, and their several o ffices;  
shall be collected in manner hereinafter appearing.  
4. Fees on documents filed, etc., in High Courts,  in their extraordinary jurisdic tion. —No 
document of any of the kinds specified in the first or second schedule to this Act annexed, as chargeable 
with fees, shall be filed, exhibited or recorded in, or shall be received or furnished by, any of the  said 
High Courts in any case coming before such Court in the exercise of its extra ordinary original civil 
jurisdiction;  
or in the exercise of its extraor dinary original criminal jurisdiction;  
In their appellate jurisdiction. —or in the exercise of its jurisdiction as regards appeals from the 
5[judgments (other than judgments passed in the exercise of the ordinary original civil jurisdiction  of the 
Court) of  one] or more Judges of the said Court, or of a Division Court;  
or in the exercise of it
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 5]
Court) of  one] or more Judges of the said Court, or of a Division Court;  
or in the exercise of its jurisdiction as regards appeals from the Courts subject to its superintendence;  
As Courts of reference and revision. —or in the exercise of its jurisdiction as a Court  of reference or 
revision;  
unless in respect of such document there be paid a fee of an amount not less than that indicated by 
either of the said schedules as the proper fee for such document.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 4 of Act VII  of 1870 .—In the marginal heading to the first clause of             
section 4 of the Court Fees Act, 1870, as amended from time to time in its application to Uttar Pradesh for 
the words “in the High Courts in their ordinary or extraordinary jurisdiction “  shall be substitution.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act X of 1959, s. 2]  
                                                      
1. Subs by the A.O. 1950, for “the Courts which are High Courts for the purposes  of the Government of India Act, 1935”.  
2. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956, for “High Courts for Part A States”.  
3. The number “16” rep. by Act 12 of 1891.  
4. See the Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882  (15 of 1882), Ch. X.  
5. Subs.  by Act 19 of 1922, s. 2, for “ judgment of two” . 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 6]
 
 
  
6 
 Amendment of section 4 of Act VII of 1870. —In section 4 of the Court Fees Act, 1870, as amended 
from time to time in its application to Uttar Pradesh — 
 (1) for the words “any of the said High  Courts”, the words “the High Court of Judicature at 
Allahabad” shall be substituted;  
(2) between the words “in the exercise of its” and the words “extraordinary original civil 
jurisdiction”, the words “ordinary or” shall be inserted;  
(3) between the words  “in the exercise of its” and the words “extraordinary original criminal 
jurisdiction”, the words “ordinary or” shall be inserted; and  
(4) after the sub -paragraph “or in the exercise of its jurisdiction as a Court of reference or 
revision”, the following sub-paragraphs shall be added — 
“Or in the exercise of its jurisdiction to issue directio n the exercise of nation, orders or writs 
under the jurisdiction to issue Constitution of India;  
Or in the exercise  of jurisdiction in any other in the exercise of any other jurisdiction matter.”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act  X of 1959, s. 3]  
5. Procedure in case of difference as to necessity or amount of fee. —When any difference arises 
between the officer whose duty it is to see that any fee is paid under this Chapter and any  suitor or 
attorney, as to the necessity of paying a fee or the amount thereof, the question shall, when the difference 
arises in any of the said High Courts, be referred to the taxing -officer, whose decision thereon shall be 
final, except when the questio n is, in his opinion, one of general importance, in which case he shall refer 
it to the final decision of the Chief Justice of such High Court, or of such Judge of the High Court as the 
Chief Justice shall appoint either generally or specially in this beha lf. 
When any such difference arises in any of the said Courts of Small Causes, the question shall be 
referred to the Clerk of the Court, whose decision thereon shall be final, except when the question is, in 
his opinion,
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 6]
k of the Court, whose decision thereon shall be final, except when the question is, in 
his opinion, one of general importance, in which  case he shall refer it to the final decision of the first 
Judge of such Court.  
The Chief Justice shall declare who shall be taxing -officer within the meaning of the first paragraph 
of this section.  
CHAPTER III  
FEES IN OTHER  COURTS AND IN PUBLIC  OFFICES  
6. Fees on documents filed, etc., in Mufassal Courts or in public offices. —Except in the  
Court s hereinbefore mentioned, no document of any of the kinds specified as chargeable in the first 
or second schedule to this Act annexed shall be filed, exhibited or r ecorded in any Court of Justice, 
or shall be received or furnished by any public officer, unless in respect of such document there be 
paid a fee of an amount not less than that indicated by either of the said schedules as the proper fee 
for such document.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Orissa  
Amendment of section 6 of Act (7 of 1870) .--Section 6 of the principal Act shall be re -numbered as 
sub-section (1) of section 6 and , after the said sub -section, the following sub -section shall be inserted: — 
“(2) Notwithstanding anyt hing contained in sub -section (1), the Provincial Government may, by 
notification, direct that  a copy of a document, specified as chargeable in Schedules I and II to this 
Act annexed,  shall be furnished by a public officer without payment of the  fee ind icated by either of 
the said Schedules  as the proper fee for such copy and the copy so furnished shall be chargeable  
with the requisite  fee only when it is filed, exhibited or recorded in any Court of justice or received 
by a public officer as mentioned  in sub -section  (1).” 
[Vide  Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 4]  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 7]
 
 
  
7 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 6 of Act (7 of 1870) .—In section 6 of the Court Fees Act, 1870 as 
amended in its application to Uttar Pradesh, hereinafter, in this Chapter referred to as the principal 
Act,— 
(a) in sub -section ( 1), in the first proviso, for the words “the United” Provinces Tenancy Act, 
1939, or the United Provinces Land Revenue Act, 1901”, the words “any law relation to land 
tenures or land revenue shall be substitute d; 
(b) in sub -section ( 6), for the words “Chief Inspector of Stamps” the words “Commission  of 
Stamps” shall be substituted.  
[Vide  Uttar Pradesh Act 6 of 1980, s. 2]  
Amendment of section 6 -A.—In section 6 -A of the principal Act, in sub -section ( 3), for the 
words  “Chief Inspector of Stamps”, the words  “Commissioners of Stamps” shall be substituted.  
[Vide  Uttar Pradesh Act 6 of 1980, s. 3]  
Amendment of section 6 -B.—In section 6 -B of the principal Act, in sub -section ( 1), for the 
words “Chief Inspector of Stamp s”, the words “Commissioner of Stamps” shall be substituted.  
[Vide  Uttar Pradesh Act 6 of 1980, s. 4]  
7. Computation of fees payable in certain suits. —The amount of fee payable under this Act in the 
suits next hereinafter mentioned shall be computed as fol lows: —  
for money. —(i) In suits for money (including suits for damages or compensation, or arrears of 
maintenance, of annuities, or of other sums payable periodically) —according to the amount claimed : 
for maintenance and annuities. —(ii) In suits for mainte nance and annuities or other sums 
payable periodically —according to the value of the subject -matter of the suit, and such value shall be 
deemed to be ten times the amount claimed to be payable for one year:  
for other movable property having a market -value .—(iii) In suits for movable property other 
than money, where the subject -matter has a market -value —according to such value at the date of 
presenting the plaint : 
(iv) In suits —  
f
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 7]
 market -value —according to such value at the date of 
presenting the plaint : 
(iv) In suits —  
for movable property of no market -value. —(a) for movable property where the sub ject-
matter has no market -value, as, for instance, in the case of documents relating to title,  
to enforce a right to share in joint family property. —(b) to enforce the right to share in 
any property on the ground that it is joint family property,  
for a dec laratory decree and consequential relief. —(c) to obtain a declaratory decree or 
order, where consequential relief is prayed,  
for an injunction. —(d) to obtain an injunction,  
for easements. —(e) for a right to some benefit (not herein otherwise provided for) to arise 
out of land, and  
for accounts. —(f) for accounts —  
according to the amount at which the relief sought is valued in the plaint or memorandum 
of appeal:  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 8]
 
 
  
8 
 In all such suits the plaintiff shall state the amount at which he values the relief 
sought 1***: 
for possession of land, houses and gardens. —(v) In suits for the possession of land, houses and 
gardens —according to the value of the subject -matter; and such value shall be deemed  to be—  
where the subject -matter is land, and —  
(a) where the land forms a n entire estate, or a definite share of an estate, paying annual 
revenue to Government,  
or forms part of such an estate and is recorded in the Collector ’s register as separately 
assessed with such revenue,  
and such revenue is permanently settled —  
ten time s the revenue so payable:  
(b) where the land forms an entire estate, or a definite share of an estate, paying annual 
revenue to Government, or forms part of such estate and is recorded as aforesaid;  
and such revenue is settled, but not permanently —  
five t imes the revenue so payable:  
(c) where the land pays no such revenue, or has been partially exempted from such payment, or is 
charged with any fixed payment in lieu of such revenue,  
and nett profits have arisen from the land during the year next before the  date of present ing the plaint —  
fifteen times such nett profits:  
but where no such nett profits have arisen therefrom — the amount at which the Court shall 
estimate the land with reference to the value of similar land in the neigh bourhood :  
 (d) where th e land forms part of an estate paying revenue to Government, but is not a definite 
share of such estate and is not separately assessed as above -mention ed—the market -value of the land:  
Proviso as to Bombay Presidency. —Provided  that, in the 2territories sub ject to the Governor of 
Bombay in Council, the value of the land shall be deemed to be —  
(1) where the land is held on settlement for a period not exceeding thirty years and pays the 
full assessment to Government —a sum equal to five times the survey -assess ment;  
(2) where the land is held on a 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 8]
to Government —a sum equal to five times the survey -assess ment;  
(2) where the land is held on a permanent settlement, or on a settlement for any period 
exceeding thirty years, and pays the full assessment to Government —a sum equal to ten times the 
survey -assessment; and  
(3) where the whole or any part of the annu al survey -assessmen t is remitted —a sum 
computed under paragraph (1) or paragraph (2) of this proviso, as the case may be, in 
addition to ten times the assessment, or the portion of assessment, so remitted . 
Explanation. —The word “estate ”, as used in this pa ragraph, means any land subject to the 
payment of revenue, for which the proprietor or a farmer or raiyat shall have executed a separate 
engagement to Government, or which, in the absence of such engagement, shall have been separately 
assessed with revenue : 
  
                                                      
1. The words “and the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, section thirty -one, shall apply as if, for the word ‘claim’, the 
words ‘relief sought’, were substituted” omitted  by Act 12 of 1891 , s. 3 an d the First Schedule . 
2. See para.8 of the A. O. 1937. In view of this provision the expressi on “Governor of Bombay in Counc il” has been left 
unmodified.  
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 9]
 
 
  
9 
 for houses and gardens. —(e) Where the subject -matter is a house or garden according to the 
market -value of the house or garden:  
to enforce a right of pre -emption. —(vi) In suits to enforce a right of pre -emption -according to the 
value (computed in accor dance with paragraph ( v) of this section) of the land, house or garden in respect 
of which the right is claimed:  
for interest of assignee of land revenue. —(vii) In suits for the interest of an assignee of land 
revenue —fifteen times his net profits as such for the year next before the date of present ing the plaint : 
to set aside an attachment. —(viii) In suits to set aside an attachment of land or of an interest in land 
or revenue —according to the amount for which the land or interest was attached:  
Provided t hat, where such amount exceeds the value of the land or interest, the amount of fee shall be 
computed as if the suit were for the possession of such land or interest.  
to redee m.—(ix) In suits against a mortgagee for the recovery of the property mortgaged . 
to foreclose. —and in suits by a mortgagee to foreclose the mortgage, or, where the mortgage is made 
by conditional sale, to have the sale declared absolute —  
according to the principal money expressed to be secured by the instrument of mortgage :  
for speci fic performance. —(x) In suits for specific performance —  
(a) of a contract of sale —according to the amount of the consideration :  
(b) of a contract of mortgage —according to the amount agreed to be secured :  
(c) of a contract of lease —according to the aggre gate amount of the fine or premium (if any) and 
of the rent agreed to be paid during the first year of the term :  
(d) of an award —according to the amount or value of the property in dispute :  
between landlord and tenant. — (xi) In the following suits betwe en landlord and tenant :— 
(a) for the delivery by a tenant of the counterpart of a lease,  
(b) to enhance the rent of a tenant having a right
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 9]
very by a tenant of the counterpart of a lease,  
(b) to enhance the rent of a tenant having a right of occupancy,  
(c) for the delivery by a landlord of a lease,  
1[(cc) for the recovery of immovable property from a te nant, including a tenant holding over after 
the determination of a tenancy,] 
(d) to contest a notice of ejectment,  
(e) to recover the occupancy of 2[immovable property] from which a tenant has been illegally 
ejected by the landlord, and  
(f) for abatement o f rent —  
according to the amount of the rent of the 2[immovable property] to which the suit refers, 
payable for the year next before the date of presenting the plaint.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Orissa  
Amendment of section 7 of Act (7 of 1870). —In section 7 of the  principal Act, for the words “ in the 
suits next her einafter mentioned” the words “ in the suits next hereinafter mentioned except suits for relief 
under section 14 of the Religious Endowments Act, 1863, or under section 91 or section 92 of the Code of 
Civil P rocedure, 1908”, shall be substituted.  
[Vide  Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 5]  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 6 of 1905, s. 2  (1). 
2. Subs. by s. 2  (2), ibid., for “land”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 10]
 
 
  
10 
 Amendment of section 7 of Act (7 of 1870). —In section 7ii of the p rincipal Act, after the words 
“shall be deemed to be the words ” “in suits for maintenance five times and in other su its” shall be 
inserted.  
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 6]  
Amendment of section iv of Act (7 of 1870). —Clause (b) of section 7iv of the principal Act shall be 
omitted.  
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 7] 
Insertion new paragraph in  section 7 of Act (7 of 1870) .—In section 7 of the principal Act after 
paragraph iv the following paragraph shall be inserted: — 
“iv-A. in a suit  for cancellation of a decree for money or other property having a money –value , 
or other document securing money or other property having such value,  
According to the value of the subject -matter of the suit, and such value shall be deemed to be — 
if the whole decree or other document is sought to be cancelled, the amount or the value of the 
property  for which the decree was passed or the oth er document executed,  
if a part of the decree or other document is sought to be cancelled, such part of the amount or 
value of the property.  
Explanation .—In any case where a suit for the cancellation of a whole decree for money  or other 
property having a money value, or other document securing  money or other property having such 
value has to be instituted, but the substantial relief claimed is only in respect of a part of the amount 
or the decree was passed or the other document as executed, the value of the subject matter of the suit 
shall be deemed to be such part of the amount or value of the property in respect of which the relief is 
sought.”  
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 8]  
Amendment  paragraph v  of section 7 of Act (7 of 1870). —In paragraph v of sect ion 7 of the 
principal Act,  
      (1) in clause (a), for the word “ten” the word “ten” shall be substituted;  
       (2) in clause (b), for the word “five” the word “ten” shall be substituted;  
       (3) the following
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 10]
) in clause (b), for the word “five” the word “ten” shall be substituted;  
       (3) the following proviso shall be inserted after the exi sting proviso: — 
“Provided further that in suits for possession of land if rules are framed under section 3 of the 
Suits Valuation  Act, 1887  (7 of 1887) , for determining the value for the purposes of jurisdiction, the 
value so determined shall be deemed to  be the value of the  hand for the purposes of this paragraph ; 
and 
(4) the existing Explanation shall be re -numbered as Explanation  I, and, after the 
Explanation so re -numbered, the following Explanation shall be added, namely: — 
“Explanation  II.—In this paragraph, ‘building’ includes a house, out -house, stable, privy, urinal, 
shed, hut, wall, and any other such structure, whether of masonry, bricks, wood, mud, metal or any 
other material whatsoever.”  
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 9] 
Insertion of new para graph vi -A in section 7 of Act (7 of 1870). —In section 7 of the principal Act 
after paragraph vi the following paragraph shall be inserted: — 
“vi-A. In suits for partition and separate possession of a share of joint family property or of joint 
property, or to enforce a right to a share in any property on the ground that it is joint family property 
or joint property — 
if the plaintiff alleges that he has been excluded from possession of the property of which he 
claims to be a coparcener or co -owner -according t o the  market -value of the share in respect of which 
the suit is instituted.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 11]
 
 
  
11 
 Explanation .—The word “possession” for the purposes of this paragraph includes constructive 
possession.”  
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 10]  
Haryana  
Amendment of section 7 of Act 7  of 1870 .— In section 7 of the Court Fees Act, 1870 (hereinafter 
referred to as the principal Act), — 
(a) in the first proviso to clause (iv), for the words "thirteen rupees", the words `twenty -five 
rupees' shall be substituted ; and  
(b) for clause (v), the  following clause shall be substituted, namely : — 
"(v) in suits for the possession of land, houses and gardens, according  to the value of the 
subject matter ; and such value shall  be deemed to be, — 
(a) where the subject matter is land, according to the mar ket value thereof which shall be 
deemed to be, — 
(i) in the case of land which is irrigated by perennial canal, two thousand rupees per 
acre ;  
(ii) in the case of land which is irrigated by non -perennial cana l or by well, one 
thousand and five hundred rupee s per acre ;  
(iii) in the case of land which is Barani, one thousand rupees per acre ;  
(iv) in the case of land which is Sailab or Bhud, seven hundred and fifty rupees per 
acre ; and  
(v) in the case of land which is Thur, Sem, Banjar or of like nature, fiv e hundred 
rupees per acre ; and  
(b) where the subject matter is house or garden, according to its  market value ;" . 
[Vide Haryana Act 11 of 1974, s. 2]  
Haryana  
Amendment of section 7 of Act 7 of 1870 .—In section 7 of the Court Fees Act, 1870 (hereinafter 
referred to as the principal Act), for sub -clauses (a) and (b) of clause (r), the (following sub -clauses shall 
be substituted, namely : — 
"(a) where  the subject matter is land other than land situated within  municipal limits or Abadi 
Deh whether under cultiva tion or not  according to the market value thereof which shall be deemed  to 
be,— 
(i) in the case of land which is irrigated by perennial canal, sixty rupees per acre ;  
(ii) in the case of land which is i
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 11]
which is irrigated by perennial canal, sixty rupees per acre ;  
(ii) in the case of land which is irrigated by non -perennial canal or by well, fifty rupe es per 
acre ; and  
(iii) in the case of land which is Barani, Sailab, Bhud, Thur, Sem, Banjar or of like nature, 
thirty rupees per acre ; and  
(b) where the subject matter is house, garden, or land situated within  municipal limits or Abadi 
Deh whether under cultivation or not,  according to its market value  ; ", 
[Vide Haryana Act 22 of 1974, s. 2]  
8. Fee on memorandum of appeal against order relating to compensation. —The amount 
of fee payable under this Act on a memorandum of appeal against an order relating t o 
compensation under any Act for t he time being in force for the 1acquisition of land for public 
                                                      
1. See now the Land Acqu isition Act, 1894 (1 of 1894).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 12]
 
 
  
12 
 purposes, shall be computed according to the difference between the amount awarded and the 
amount claimed by the appellant.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Orissa  
Insertion of  new section 8A in Act (7 of 1870 ).--After section 8 of the principal Act, the following 
section shall be inserted: — 
“8A. Statement of particulars of subject -matters of suits and plaintiff’s valuation thereof. —In 
every suit in which an ad valorem  court -fee is payable under this Act on the plaint, the plaint iff shall file 
with the plaint a statement of particulars of the subject -matter of the suit ad his own valuation thereof 
unless such particulars and the valuation are contained in the plaint. The statemen t shall be in such form 
and shall contain such particulars as may be prescribed by the Provincial Government by notification in 
the Gazette. In every such suit the plaintiff shall also, if the Court so  directs, file a duplicate copy of the 
plaint and of t he  said statement”.  
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 11] 
 Haryana  
Amendment of section 8 of central Act 7 of 1870 .—To section 8 of the Court Fees Act, 1870, 
(hereinafter called the principal Act), the following pro viso, shall be added, namely: -- 
“Provided t hat the fixed court fee of one hundred rupees shall be payable on the memorandum of a 
appeal or cross objections before the High Court arising under the Land Acquisition Act, 1984 or any 
other law for the time being in force for acquisition of land for pub lic purposes.”.  
[Vide Haryana Act 3 of 1990, s. 2]  
9. Power to ascertain nett profits or market -value. —If the Court sees reason to think that the 
annual nett profits or the market -value of any such land, house or garden as is mentioned in section 7, 
paragr aphs ( v) and ( vi), have or has been wrongly estimated, the Court may, for the purpose of computing 
the fee payable in an y suit therein mentioned, issue a commission to any  proper person directing him to 
make such local or other investiga
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 12]
ioned, issue a commission to any  proper person directing him to 
make such local or other investigation as may be nece ssary, and to report thereon to the Court.  
10. Procedure where net profits or market -value wrongly estimated .—(i) If in the result of 
any such investigation the Court fin ds that the net profits or market -value have or has been 
wrongly estimated, the Court , if the estimation has been excessive, may in its discretion ref und 
the excess paid as such fee : but, if the estimation has been insufficient, the Court shall require 
the plaintiff to pay so much additional fee as would have been payable had the said mark et-value 
or nett profits been rightly estimated.  
(ii) In such case the suit shall be stayed until the additional fee is paid. If the additional fee is not paid 
within such time as the Court shall fix, the suit shall be dismissed.  
1*              *              *              *              * 
11. Procedure in suits for mesne  profits or account when amount decreed exceeds amount 
claimed. —In suits for mesne  profits or for immovable property and mesne  profits, or for an account, if 
the profits or amount decreed  are or is in excess of the profits claimed or the amount at which the plaintiff 
valued the relief sought, the decree shall not be executed until the difference  between the fee actually paid 
and the fee which would have been payable had the suit comprised the whole of the profits or amount so 
decreed shall have been paid to the proper officer.  
Where the amount of mesne  profits is left to be ascertained in the course of the execution of the 
decree, if the profits so ascertained exceed the profits claimed, th e further  execution of the decree shall be 
stayed until the difference between the fee actually paid and the fee which would have been payable had 
                                                      
1. Clause  (iii) rep. by Act 12 of 1891, s. 3 and the First Schedule.   
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 12]
Clause  (iii) rep. by Act 12 of 1891, s. 3 and the First Schedule.   
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 13]
 
 
  
13 
 the suit comprised the whole of the profits so ascertained is paid. If the additional fee is not paid within 
such time as the Court shall fix, the suit shall be dismissed.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Orissa  
Amendment of section 11 of Act (7 of 1870 ).—For the second paragraph of section 11 of the 
principal Act the following paragraphs shall be substituted: — 
“Where a decree di rects an enquiry as to mesne -profits which have accrued  on the property 
during a period prior to the institution of the suit, if the profits ascertained on such inquiry exceed the 
profits claimed, no final decree shall be passed till the difference  betwe en the fee actually paid and 
the fee which would have been  payable had the suit comprised the whole of the profits so ascertained 
is paid. If the additional fee is not paid within such time as the Court shall fix, the claim for the excess 
shall be dismiss ed, unless the Court, for sufficient cause, extends the time for payment.  
Where a decree directs an inquiry as to mesno -profits from the institution of the suit and a final 
decree is passed in accordance with the result of such inquiry, the decree shall no t be executed until 
such fee is paid would have been payable on the amount claimed  in execution if a separate suit had  
been instituted therefor.”  
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 12] 
12. Decision of questions as to valuation. —(i) Every question relating to  valuation for the purpose 
of determining the amount of any fee chargeable under this Chapter on a plaint or memo randum of 
appeal, shall be decided by the Court in which such plaint or memorandum, as the case may be, is filed, 
and such decision shall be f inal as between the parties to the suit.  
(ii) But whenever any such suit comes before a Court of appeal, reference or revision, if such Court 
considers that the said question has been wrongly decided to the detriment of the reve nue, it shall require 
the p arty by whom such fee has been paid to pay so 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 13]
he detriment of the reve nue, it shall require 
the p arty by whom such fee has been paid to pay so much additional fee as would have been payable had 
the question been rightly decided, and the provisions of section 10, paragraph ( ii), shall apply.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Orissa  
Amendment of section 12 of Act (7 of 1 870). --(1) In section 12 of the principal Act, for paragraph 
ii, the following paragraph shall be substituted: — 
“ii. But whenever any such suit comes before a Court of appeal, reference or revision, if such 
Court considers that the said question has been w rongly decided, it shall — 
(a) in any case in which the decision is to the detriment of revenue, require the party  by 
whom such fee has been paid, to pay so much additional fee as would have been payable had the 
question been rightly decided and thereafter — 
(i) if the party required to pay is the appellant or petitioner, the appeal or petition shall be 
stayed until the additional fee is paid. If the additional fee is not paid within such time as the 
Court shall fix, the appeal or petition shall be dismissed ; 
(ii) if the party required to pay it’s the r espondent or the opposite party , the Court shall 
fix a date before which such party shall pay the amount of court  fee due from him and, if 
such party fails to pay the fee required before the date fixed by the Court, the Court shall 
recover the amount of such fee from  him as if it were an arrear of land revenue. Where the 
Court considers that the amount of such fee should be paid to the respondent or the opposite 
party by the appellant or the petitioner, as the  case may be , the Court may provide for such 
payment in the order as to costs in the said appeal or petition; and  
(b) in any case in which the decision is that any excess  fee  has been levied, direct the refund of 
so much  excess fee to the party  who p aid it as would not have been payable  had the question been 
rightly decided.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 13]
ot have been payable  had the question been 
rightly decided.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 14]
 
 
  
14 
 Explanation .—For the purposes of this section a question relating to the classification of any suit 
in regard to section 7 shall not be deemed to be a question relating to valuat ion.”  
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 13] 
13. Refund of fee paid on memorandum of appeal .—If an appeal or plaint, which has been rejected 
by the lower Court on any of the grounds mentioned in the 1Code of Civil Procedure, is ordered to be 
received, or if a suit is remanded in appeal, on any of the grounds mentioned in 2section 351 of the same 
Code, for a second decision by the lower Court, the Appellate Court shall grant to the appellant a 
certificate, authorizing him to receive back from the Collector the f ull amount of fee paid on the 
memorandum of appeal:  
Provided that if, in the case of a remand in appeal, the order of remand shall not cover the whole of 
the subject -matter of the suit, the certificate so granted shall not authorize the appellant to receiv e back 
more than so much fee as would have been originally payable on the part or parts of such subject -matter 
in respect whereof the suit has been remanded.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Orissa  
Amendment of section 13 .—In the Court -fees Act, 1870 (7 of 1870), — 
(a) For the marginal heading to section 13, the following marginal heading shall be substituted, 
namely: — 
“Refund of fee paid on memorandum of appeal and in cases where compromise or settlement has 
been arrived at by a Lok Adalat.”;  
(b) Section 13 shall be renumbe red as sub -section (1) thereof and — 
(i) In sub -section (1) as  so renumbered,  for the words and figures “ the Code of Civil Procedure”  
and “section 351 of the same Code”, the words and figures “ the Code Civil Procedure, 1908” and 
“rule 23 of Order XLI of the First Schedule to the said Code” shall respectively be substituted; and  
(ii) After sub -section (1) as so renumbered, the following new sub -section shall be inserted, 
namely: — 
“(2) Where a compromise or settlement has 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 14]
following new sub -section shall be inserted, 
namely: — 
“(2) Where a compromise or settlement has been arrived at, by a Lok Adalat  in a case 
referred to it under sub -section (1) of section 20 of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987  (39 
of 1987) , the Court by which the case was so referred to the Lok Adalat shall  grant a certificate 
to the party or every party to the case who pai d any court -fee in that case, authorizing him to 
receive back from the Collector the full amount of the fee so paid.”.  
[Vide Orissa Act 7 of 2002, s. 2]  
Tripura  
Amendment of Section 13 .—In section 13 of the principal Act, the expression “the Appellate Cour t 
shall grant to the appellant a certificate, authorizing him to receive back from the Collector the full 
amount of fee paid on the memorandum of appeal”, shall be substituted with the expression “the 
Appellate Court shall grant to the appellant a certific ate, authorizing him to receive back from the 
Collector or by way of electronic transfer in such manner as may be prescribed, the full amount of fee 
paid on the memorandum of appeal” . 
[Vide Tripura Act 17 of 2020, s. 2]  
                                                      
1. See now the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908).  
2. This reference should now be read as applying to the corresponding provision of Act 5 of  1908 , i.e., Orde r XLI, rule 23 of the 
First Schedule.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 15]
 
 
  
15 
 14. Refund of fee on application for  review of judgment. —Where an 1application for a review of 
judgment is presented on or after the ninetieth day from the date of the decree, the Court, unless the delay 
was caused by the applicant ’s laches, may, in its discretion, grant him a certificate au thorizing him to 
receive back from the Collector so much of the fee paid on the application as exceeds the fee which 
would have been payable had it been presented before 2such day.  
Tripura  
Amendment of Section 14. —In Section 14 of the principal Act, the ex pression “grant him a certificate 
authorizing him to receive back from the Collector so much of the fee paid on the application as exceeds the 
fee which would have been payable had it been presented before such day”, shall be substituted with the 
expressio n “grant him a certificate authorizing him to receive back  from the Collector or by way of 
electronic transfer in such manner as may be  prescribed, so much of the fee paid on the application as 
exceeds the fee which would  have been payable had it been pres ented before such day .” 
[Vide Tripura Act 17 of 2020, s. 3]  
15. Refund where Court reverses or modifies its former decision on ground of 
mistake. —Where an  application for a review of judgment is admitted, and where, on the 
rehearing, the Court reverses or modifies its former decision on the ground of mistake in law or 
fact, the applicant shall be entitled to a certificate from the Court authori sing him to receive back 
from the Collector so much of the fee paid on the 3[application] as exceeds the fee payabl e on 
any other application to such Court under the second schedule to this Act, No. 1, clause ( b) or 
clause ( d). 
But nothing in the former part of this section shall entitle the applicant to such certificate 
where the reversal or modification is due, wholl y or in part, to fresh evidence which might have 
been produced at the original hearing.  
Tripura  
Amendment of Sec
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 15]
fresh evidence which might have 
been produced at the original hearing.  
Tripura  
Amendment of Section 15. —In section 15 of the principal Act, the expression “the applicant shall be 
entitled to a  certificate from the court authorizing him to receive back from the Collector so much of the 
fee paid on the application as exceeds the fee payable on any other application to such Court under the 
second schedule to this Act”, shall be substituted with the expression “the applicant shall be entitled t o a 
certificate from the court authorizing him to receive back from the Collector or by way of electronic 
transfer in such manner as may be prescribed, so much of the fee paid on the application as exceeds the 
fee payable on any other application to such c ourt under the second schedule to this Act.”  
[Vide Tripura Act 17 of 2020, s. 4]  
4[16. Refund of fee .—Where the court refers the parties to the suit to any one of the mode of 
settlement of dispute referred to in section 89 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1 908 (5 of 1908) , the 
plaintiff shall be entitled to a certificate from the court authorizing him to receive back from the collector, 
the full amount of the fee paid in respect of such plaint.]  
Tripura  
Amendment of Section 16 .—In Section 16 of the principal Act, the expression “the plaintiff shall be entitled to 
a certificate from the Court authorizing him to receive back from the Collector, the full  amount of the fee paid in 
respect of such plaint”, shall be substituted with the expression  “the plaintiff sha ll be entitled to a certificate from the 
Court authorizing him to receive  back from the Collector or by way electronic transfer in such manner as may be  
prescribed, the full amount of the fee paid in respect of such plaint.”  
[Vide Tripura Act 17 of 2020, s . 5] 
                                                      
1. As to application for review of judgment, see the Code of Civil Proc edure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908), s. 114 and Order  
X
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 15]
for review of judgment, see the Code of Civil Proc edure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908), s. 114 and Order  
XLVII of the First Schedule.  
2. See I Schedule, Nos. 4 and 5, infra. 
3. Subs. by Ac t 20 of 1870, s. 1, for “plaint or memorandum of appeal”.  
4. Ins. by Act 46 of 1999, s. 34 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2002).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 16]
 
 
  
16 
 17. Multifarious suits. —Where  a suit embraces two or more distinct subjects, the plaint or 
memo randum of appeal shall be chargeable with the aggregate amount of the fees to which the 
plaints or memoranda of appeal in suits embracing separately each o f such subjects would be 
liable under this Act.  
Nothing in the former part of this section shall be deemed to aff ect the power conferred by the 1Code 
of Civil Procedure, section 9.  
18.Written examinations of complainants. —When the first or only examination  of a person 
who complains of the offence of wrongful confinement, or of wrongful restraint, or of any offence other 
than an offence for which police -officers may arrest without a warrant, and who has not already presented 
a petition on which a fee has bee n levied under this Act, is reduced to writing under the provisions of the 
2Code of Criminal Procedure, the complainant shall pay a fee of eight annas, unless the Court thinks fit to 
remit such payment.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Orissa  
Amendment of section 18 of Act  (7 of 1870 ).—In section 18 of the principal Act, for the words 
“eight annas” the words “one rupee” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 14] 
Insertion of a new section  18-A Act (7 of 1 l870). —After section 18 of the Court Fees Act, 1870, as  
in force in the State of Orissa the following new section shall be inserted, namely: — 
“18-A. Exemption to women. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act no plaint in 
respect of a suit filed by a women, whose annual income does not exceed three thousand rupees, for 
maintenance or for enhancement of maintenance or for recovery of share in the estate of her deceased 
husband or parent in the family property and no petitions filed by any such women for divorce on 
ground of cruelty or other misconduct  on the part of her husband shall be chargeable with court fees.  
(2) The Court in which such plaint or petition is filed shall have power to make such inq
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 16]
rt fees.  
(2) The Court in which such plaint or petition is filed shall have power to make such inquiry as it 
deems fit for assessing the income of the plaintiff or the petitioner, as the case may be.” . 
[Vide Orissa Act 55 of 1975, s. 2]  
19. Exemption of certain documents. —Nothing contained in this Act shall render the follow ing 
documents chargeable with any fee: —  
(i) Power -of-attorney to institute or defend a suit when executed 3[by a member of any o f the 
Armed Forces of the Union] not in civil employment.  
4*             *              *              *              * 
(iii) Written statements called for by the Court after the first hearing of a suit.   
5*          *           *           *           * 
(v) Plaints in suits tried by 6village Munsifs in the Presidency of Fort St. George.  
(vi) Plaints and processes in suits before District Panchayats in the same  residency.  
(vii) Plaints in suits before Collectors under Madras Regulation 12 of 1816.  
(viii) Probate of a will, letters of administration, 7[and, save as regards debts and securities a 
certificate under Bombay Regulation 8 of 1827], where the amount or value of the property in respect 
of which the probate or letters or certificate shall be granted d oes not exceed one thousand rupees.  
(ix) Application or petition to a Collector or other officer making a settlement of land -revenue, or 
to a Board of Revenue, or a Commissioner of Revenue, relating to matters connected with the 
                                                      
1. See now the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908).  
2. This reference should now be read a s referring to the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act 5 of 1898) —see s. 3 of that Act.  
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “by an officer, warrant -officer, non -commissioned officer or private of Her Majesty’s army”.  
4 Clause ( ii) rep. by Act 12 of 1891, s. 3  and the First Schedule.  
5. Clause ( iv) rep. by Act 13  of 1889, s. 2 and the Schedule
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 16]
1891, s. 3  and the First Schedule.  
5. Clause ( iv) rep. by Act 13  of 1889, s. 2 and the Schedule.  
6. See the Madras Village Courts Act, 1889 (Mad. 1 of 1889).  
7. Subs. by Act 7 of 1889, s. 13, for “and certificate mentioned in the first schedule to this Act annexed,  No. 12”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 17]
 
 
  
17 
 assessment of land or the ascertainment of rights thereto or interests therein, if pre sented previous to 
the final confirmation of such settlement.  
(x) Application relating to a supply for irrigation of water belonging to Government.  
(xi) Application for leave to extend cultivatio n, or to relinquish land, when presented to an officer 
of land -revenue by a person holding, under direct engagement with Government, land of which the 
revenue is settled, but not permanently.  
(xii) Application for service of notice of relinquishment of lan d or of enhancement of rent.  
(xiii) Written authority to an agent to distrain.  
(xiv) First application (other than a petition containing a criminal charge or information) 
for the summons of a witness or other person to attend either to give evidence or to produce a 
document or in respect of the production or filing of an exhibit not being an affidavit made  for 
the immediate purpose of being produced in Court.  
(xv) Bail-bonds in criminal cases, recognizances to pro secute or give evidence, and recognizan ces 
for personal appearance or otherwise.  
(xvi) Petition, application, charge or information respecting any offence when presented, 
made or laid to or before a police -officer, or to or before the 1Heads of Villages or the 2Village 
Police in the territories resp ectively subject to the Governors in Council of Madras and 
Bombay.  
(xvii) Petition by a prisoner, or other person in duress or under restraint of any Court or its 
officers.  
(xviii) Complaint of a public servant [as defined in the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1 860)], a 
municipal officer, or an officer or servant of a Railway Company.  
(xix) Application for permission to cut timber in Government forests, or otherwise relating to 
such forests.  
(xx) Application for the payment of money due by Government to the appli cant.  
(xxi) Petition of appeal against the chaukidari assessment under 3Act No. 20 of 1856, or against 
any municipal tax. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 17]
 appeal against the chaukidari assessment under 3Act No. 20 of 1856, or against 
any municipal tax.  
(xxii) Applications for compensation under any law for the time being in force relating to the 
4acquisition of property for public pur poses.  
(xxiii) Petitions presented to the Special Commissioner appointed under 5Bengal Act No. 2 of 
1869 (to ascertain, regulate and record certain tenures in Chota Nagpur .). 
[6(xxiv) (Petitions under the Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872 (15 of 1872), s ections 45 and 
48.] 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Orissa  
In section 19 of the Court -Fees Act, 1870  (7 of 1870)  (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) in 
clause ( viii) for the words” one thousand rupees” the words “two thousand rupees” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Orissa Act 11 of 1967, s. 3]  
                                                      
1. See Madras Regulations 11 of 1816 and 4 of 1821, s. 6.  
2. See Bombay Village Police Act, 1867 (Bo m. 8 of 1867), ss.  14, 15 and 16.  
3. The Bengal Chaukidari Act, 1856.  
4. See now the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (1 of 1894).  
5. The Chota Nagpur T enures Act, 1869.  
6. Subs. by Act 15 of 1872, s. 2, for cl ause (xxiv) which read as follows: ---  
 “Petitions under the 14th and 15th of Victoria, Ch. 40 (an Act for marriages in India ), s. 5, or under Act No. 5 of 1852, s. 9”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 18]
 
 
  
18 
 1[CHAPTER IIIA 
PROBATES , LETTERS OF ADMINISTRATION AND CERTIFICATES OF ADMINISTRATION  
19A. Relief where too high a court -fee has been paid. —Where any person on applying for 
the probate of a will or letters of administration h as estimated the property of the deceased to be of 
greater value than the same has afterwards proved to be, and has consequently paid too high a 
court -fee thereon, if, within six months after the true value of the property has been ascertained, 
such person  produces the probate or letters to the Chief Controlling Revenue -authority 2[for the 
local area] in which the probate or letters has or have been granted,  
and delivers to such Authority a particular inventory and valuation of the property of the deceased,  
verified by affidavit or affirmation,  
and if such Authority is satisfied that a greater fee was paid on the probate or letters than the law 
required,  
the said Authority may —  
(a) cancel the stamp on the probate or letters if such stamp has not been alread y cancelled;  
(b) substitute another stamp for denoting the court -fee which should have been  paid thereon; and  
(c) make an allowance for the difference between them as in the case of spoiled stamps, or repay 
the same in money, at his discretion.  
19B. Relief  where debts due from a deceased person have been paid out of his estate .—
Whenever  it is proved to the satisfaction of such Authority that an executor or administrator has 
paid debts due from the deceased to such an amount as, being deducted out of the amo unt or value 
of the estate, reduces the same to a sum which, if it had been the whole gross amount or value of the 
estate, would have occasioned a less court -fee to be paid on the probate or letters of administration 
granted in respect of such estate than has been actually paid thereon under this Act,  
such Authority may return the difference, provided the same be claimed within three years after the 
date of such probate or letters
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 18]
fference, provided the same be claimed within three years after the 
date of such probate or letters.  
But when by reason of any legal proceeding, the debts due from the deceased have not been 
ascer tained and paid, or his effects have not been recovered and made available, and in consequence 
thereof the executor or administrator is prevented from claiming the return of such difference within 
the said term of three years, the said A uthority may allow such further time for making the claim as 
may appear to be reasonable under the circumstances.  
19C. Relief in case of several grants. —Whenever  3*** a grant of probate or letters of 
administration has been or is made in respect of the who le of the property belonging to an estate, 
and the full fee chargeable under this Act has been or is paid thereon, no fee shall be chargeable 
under the same Act when a like grant is made in respect of the whole or any part of the same 
property belonging to  the same estate.  
Whenever such a grant has been or is made in respect of any property forming part of an 
estate, the amount of fees then actually paid under this Act shall be deducted when a like grant is 
made in respect of property belonging to the same estate, identical with or including the property 
to which the former grant relates.  
19D. Probates declared valid as to trust -property though not covered by court -fee.—The 
probate of the will or the letters of administration of the effects of any person de ceased heretofore or 
hereafter granted shall be deemed valid and available by his executors or administrators for 
recovering, transferring or assigning,  any movable or immovable property whereof or whereto the 
deceased w as possessed or entitled, either wh olly or partially as a trustee, notwithstanding the amount 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 13 of 1875, s.  6. 
2. Subs. by Act 10 of 1901, s. 3 (1), for “of the Provin ce”. 
3. The word “such” rep. by Act 12 of 189
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 18]
Subs. by Act 10 of 1901, s. 3 (1), for “of the Provin ce”. 
3. The word “such” rep. by Act 12 of 1891.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 19]
 
 
  
19 
 or value of such property is not included in the amount or value of the estate in respect of which a 
court -fee was paid on such probate or letters of administration.  
19E. Provision for case where t oo low a court -fee has been paid on probates, etc. —Where  
any person on applying for probate or letters of administration has estimated the estate of the 
deceased to be of less value than the same has afterwards proved to be, and has in consequence 
paid too  low a court -fee thereon, the Chief Controlling Revenue -authority 1[for the local area] in 
which the probate or letters has or have been granted may, on the value of the estate of th e 
deceased being verified by affidavit or affirmation, cause the probate o r letters of administration to 
be duly stamped on payment of the full court -fee which ought to have been originally paid thereon 
in respect of such value and of the further penalty, if the probate or letters is or are produced 
within one year from the date  of grant, of five times, or, if it or they is or are produced after one 
year from such date, of twenty times, such proper court -fee, without any deduction of the court -fee 
originally paid on such probate or letters:  
Provided that, if the application be ma de within six months after the ascertainment of the true 
value of the estate and the discovery that too low a court -fee was at first paid on the probate or 
letters, and if the said Authority is satisfied that such fee was paid in consequence of a mistake  or 
of its not being known at the time that some particular part of the estate belonged to the deceased, and 
without any intention of fraud or to delay the payment of the proper court -fee, the said Authority may 
remit the said penalty, and cause the probate or letters to be duly stamped on payment only of the sum 
wanting to make up the fee which should have been at first paid thereon.  
19F. Administrator to give proper security before letters stamped under section 19E.
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 19]
paid thereon.  
19F. Administrator to give proper security before letters stamped under section 19E. —In case 
of letters of administration on w hich too low a court -fee has been paid at first, the said Authority shall not 
cause the same to be duly stamped in manner aforesaid until the administrator has given such security to 
the Court by which the letters of administration have been granted as oug ht by law to have been given on 
the granting thereof in case the full value of the estate of the deceased had been then ascertained.  
2[19G. Executors, etc., not paying full court -fee on probates, etc., within six months 
after discovery of under -payment. —Where too low a court -fee has been paid on any probate or 
letters of administration in consequence of any mistake, or of its not being known at the time that some 
particular p art of the estate belonged to the deceased, if any executor or administrator acting  under such 
probate or letters does not, within six months 3*** after the discovery of the mistake or of any effects not 
known at the time to have belonged to the deceased, apply to the said Authority and pay what is wanting 
to make up the court -fee which ought to have been paid at first on such probate or letters, he shall forfeit 
the sum of one thousand rupees and also a further sum at the rate of ten percent. on the amount of the sum 
wanting to make up the proper court -fee.] 
4[19H. Notice of applications  for probate or letters of administration to be given to                      
Revenue -authorities, and procedure thereon. —(1) Where an application for probate or letters of 
administra tion is made to any Court other than a High Court, the Court shall cause  notice of the 
application to be given to the Collector. 
(2) Where such an application as aforesaid is made to a High Court, the High Court shall cause 
notice of the application to be given to the Chief Controlling Revenue -authority 5[for the local area in  
which the High Court is si
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 19]
ven to the Chief Controlling Revenue -authority 5[for the local area in  
which the High Court is situated].  
(3) The Collector within the local limits of whose revenue -jurisdiction the property of the deceased 
or any part thereof is, may at any time inspect or cause to be inspected, and take or cause to be taken 
copies of, the record of any case in which application for probate or letters of adminis tration has been 
made; and if, on such inspection or otherwise, he is of opinion that the petitioner has under -estimated the 
value of the property of the deceased, the Collector may,  if he thinks fit, require the attendance of the 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 1901, s. 3 (1), for “of the Province”.  
2. As to recovery of penalties or forfeitures under s. 19G, see s. 19J, infra. 
3. The wor ds and figures “after the first day of April, 1875, or “rep. by Act 12 of 1891 ”. 
4. Ins. by Act 11 of 1 899, s. 2.  
5. Subs. by Act 10 of 19 01, s. 3 (2), for “of the Province”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 20]
 
 
  
20 
 petitioner (either in person or by agent) and take evidence and inquire into the matter in such manner as 
he may think fit, and, if he is still of opinion that the value of the property has been under -estima ted, may 
require the petitioner to amend the valuation.  
(4) If the petitioner does not amend the valuation to the satisfaction of the Collector, the Collector 
may move the Court before which the application for probate or letters of administration was made , to 
hold an inquiry into the true value of the property:  
Provided that no such motion shall be made after the expiration of six months from the date of the 
exhibition of the inventory required by section 277 of the 1Indian Succession Act, 1865 (10 of 1865 ), or 
as the case may be, by section 98 of the 1Probate and Administration Act, 1881 (5 of 1881).  
(5) The Court, when so moved as aforesaid, shall hold, or cause to be held, an inquiry accordingly, 
and shall record a finding as to the true value, as near a s may be, at which the property of the deceased 
should have been estimated. The Collector shall be deemed to be a party to the inquiry.  
(6) For the purposes of any such inquiry, the Court or person authori sed by the Court to 
hold the inquiry may examine th e petitioner for probate or letters of administration on oath 
(whether in person or by commission), and may take such further evidence as may be produced 
to prove the true value of the property. The person authori sed as aforesaid to hold the inquiry shall return 
to the Court the evidence taken by him and report the result of the inquiry, and such report and the 
evidence so taken shall be evidence in the proceeding, and the Court may record a finding in accordance 
with the report, unless it is satisfied that  it is erroneous.  
(7) The finding of the Court recorded under sub -section ( 5) shall be final, but shall not bar the 
entertainment and disposal by the Chief Controlling Revenue -authority of any application und
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 20]
r the 
entertainment and disposal by the Chief Controlling Revenue -authority of any application under               
section 19E.  
(8) The State Gove rnment may make rules for the guidance of Collectors in the exercise of the 
powers conferred by sub -section (3).] 
2[19I. Payment of court -fees in respect of probates and letters of administration. —(1) No order 
entitling the petitioner to the grant of proba te or letters of administration shall be made upon an 
application for such grant until the petitioner has filed in the Court a valuation of the property in the form 
set forth in the third schedule, and the Court is satisfied that the fee mentioned in No.  11 of the first 
schedule has been paid on such valuation. 
(2) The grant of probate or letters of administration shall not be delayed by reason of any motion 
made by the Collector under section 19H, sub -section (4).] 
2[19J. Recovery of penalties, etc. — (1) Any excess fee found to be payable on any inquiry held 
under section 19H, sub -section ( 6), and any penalty or forfeiture under section 19G, may, on the 
certificate of the Chief Controlling Revenue -authority, be recovered from the executor or administrator a s 
if it were an arrear of land -revenue by any Collector 3***. 
(2) The Chief Controlling Revenue -authority may remit the whole or any part of any such penalty or 
forfeiture as aforesaid, or any pa rt of any penalty under sec tion 19E or of any court -fee un der section 19E 
in excess of the full court -fee which ought to have been paid .] 
2[19K. Sections 6 and 28 not to apply to probates or letters of administration .—Nothing in 
section 6 or section 28 shall apply to probates or letters of administration.]] 
CHAPTER IV 
PROCESS -FEES  
20. Rules as to cost of processes. —The High Court shall, as soon as may be, make rules as to the 
following matters: —  
(i) The fees chargeable for serving a nd executing processes issued b y such court in its appellate 
jurisdiction, and by the  other
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 20]
ing a nd executing processes issued b y such court in its appellate 
jurisdiction, and by the  other Civil and Revenue Courts established within the local limits of such 
jurisdiction;  
                                                      
1. See now the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925).  
2. Ins. by Act 11 of 1899 , s 2.  
3. The words “in any part of British India” rep by the A.O. 1 948. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 21]
 
 
  
21 
 (ii) the fees chargeable for serving and executing processes issued by the Criminal Courts established 
within such limits in the case of offences other than offences for which police -officers may arrest without 
a warrant; and  
(iii) the remunerat ion of the peons and all other p ersons employed by leave of a Court in the service 
or execution of processes.  
The High Court may from time to time alter and add to the rules so made.  
Confirmation and publication of rules. —All such rules, alterations and additions shall, 
after being confirmed by the State Government 1***, be published in the Official Gazette, and 
shall thereupon have the force  of law.  
Until such rules shall be so made and published, the fees now leviable for serving and executing 
processes s hall continue to be levied, and  shall be deemed to be fees leviable under this Act.  
21. T ables of process fees. —A table in the English and Vernacular languages, showing 
the fees  chargeable for such service and execution, shall be exposed to view in a conspicuous 
part of each Court.  
22. Number of peons in district and subordinate Courts. —Subject to rules to be made by the  High 
Court and approved by the State Government 2***, 
every  District Judge and every Magistrate of a district shall fix, and may from time to time alter, the 
number of peons necessary to be employed for the service and execution of processes issued out of his 
Court and each of the Courts subordinate thereto,  
Numbe r of peo ns in Mufassal Small Cause Courts. —and for the purposes of this section , 
every Court of Sm all Causes established under Act No. 11 of 1865 (to consolidate and amend 
the law relating to Courts of Small Causes beyond the local limits of the ordinary o riginal civil 
jurisdiction of  the High Courts of Judicature )3 shall be deemed to be subordinate to the Court of 
the District Judge.  
23. Number of peons in Revenue Courts. —Subject to rules to be framed by the Chief 
Contro lling Reve
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 21]
3. Number of peons in Revenue Courts. —Subject to rules to be framed by the Chief 
Contro lling Revenue -authority and approve d by the State Government 2***, every officer 
performing the functions of a Collector of a district shall fix, and may from time to time alter, 
the number of peons necessary to be employed for the service  and execution of pro cesses issued 
out of his Court or the courts subordinate to him.  
24. [Process served under this Chapter to be held to be process within meaning of Code 
of Civil Procedure .] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act , 1891 (12 of 1891) ,  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Substitution of section 24-A.—For section 24 -A for the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely: — 
“24-A. Control of Court fee and Stamp Commissioner .—(1) The levy of fees under this Act shall be under 
the general control and superintendence of the Chief C ontrolling Revenue Authority, who may be assisted in the 
supervision thereof by the Commissioner of Stamps and by as many Additional many Additional Commissioners of 
the Stamps, Deputy Commissioners of Stamps and Assistant Commissioners of Stamps as the St ate Government 
may appoint in the behalf or by any other subordinate agency appointed for the purpose.  
(2) The Officers and the agency referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall have access to all records, and shall be 
furnished with all such information as may be required by them for the performance of their duties under this Act.”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 6 of 1980, s. 5]  
 
 
                                                      
1. The words “and sanctioned by the Governor General of India in Council” rep. by Act 38 of 1920, s. 2 and  the First 
Schedule.   
2. The words “and the Governor General of India in Coun cil” Rep.  by Act 38 of 1920, s. 2 and the First Schedule.  
3. The reference to Act 11 of 1865 should now be read as referring to the Provincial Small Cause Courts Ac t, 1887  (9 of 1887); 
see s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 21]
should now be read as referring to the Provincial Small Cause Courts Ac t, 1887  (9 of 1887); 
see s. 2(3) of that Act.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 22]
 
 
  
22 
 CHAPTER V  
OF THE  MODE OF LEVYING  FEES 
25. Collection of fees by stamps. —All fees referred to in section 3 or chargeable under this Act shall 
be collected by stamps.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Meghalaya  
Amendment section 25 of Central Act 7 of 1870. —In the Court Fees act, 1870 after section 25 the 
following new section  shall be inserted as section 25A, namely: -- 
“25A. Notwithstanding anything contained in s ection 25 where , 
(a)     (i) the State Government, in relation to any area in the State, or  
  (ii) The Deputy Commissioner, in relation to any area in the district under his charge, is 
satisfied that on account of temporary shortage of stamps in any area, fees cannot be paid, and 
payment of fees cannot be indicated on documents by means of stamps, the State Government, or 
as the case may be, the Deputy Commissioner, may, by notification in the official Gazette, direct 
that, in such area and for such period as may be specified in such notification, the fees may be 
paid in cash in any Treasury or Sub -Treasury and shall, on production of a challan evidencing 
payment of fees in the Government treasury, certify by endorsement on the document in respect 
of which t he fees is paid, that the fees have been paid, and state in the said endorsement the 
amount of the fees so paid.  
(b) An endorsement made on any document under clause (a) shall have the same effect as if 
the fees of an amount equal to the amount stated in t he endorsement had been paid in respect of, 
and such payment has been indicated on, such documents by means of stamps under section 25.  
[Vide Meghalaya Act 2 of 1972, s. 2]  
Tripura  
Amendment of Section 25. — In Section 25 of the principal Act, the expressio n “stamps”, shall be substituted 
with the expression “stamps or electronic transfer of payment to State Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed .” 
[Vide Tripura Act 17 of 2020, s. 6]  
26. Stamps to be impressed or adhesive. —The stamps used to denote a 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 22]
ripura Act 17 of 2020, s. 6]  
26. Stamps to be impressed or adhesive. —The stamps used to denote a ny fees chargeable under 
this Act shall be impressed or adhesive, or pertly impressed and partly adhesive, as the 1[appropriate 
Government] may, by notification in the Official Gazette, from time to time direct2. 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Jammu and Kashmir (UT).— 
Section 26 shall be numbered as sub -section (1) thereof, and after sub -section (1) so renumbered, 
insert the following sub -section, namely: — 
(2) For the purposes of sub -section (1), and section 25, “stamp” means any mark, seal or endorsement 
by any agency or  person duly authorised  by the Appropriate Government, and includes an adhesive or 
impressed stamp, for the purposes of court fee chargeable under this Act.  
Explanation :—“impressed stamp” includes impression by a franking machine or another machine, or a 
unique number generated by e -stamping or similar software, as the Appropriate Government may, by 
notification in the official Gazette, specify”.  
[Vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganization (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification  No. 
S.O. 1123( E) dated (18 -3-2020).]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O.  1937, for “L. G.”.  
2. Fo r rules as to levy of court -fees by adhesive and impressed stamps, see Gazette of India, 1883, Pt. I, p. 189.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 23]
 
 
  
23 
  
Union Territory of Ladakh  
Section 26 .—Numbered as sub -section (1) thereof, and after sub -section (1) as so numbered, 
insert - 
'(2) For the purposes of sub -section (1), and section  25, "stamp" means any mark, seal or 
endorsement by an y agency or person duly authorised by the Appropriate Government, and includes 
an adhesive or impressed stamp, for the purposes of court fee chargeable under this Act.  
Explanation  7.—The expression "impressed stamp" includes impression by a franking machin e 
or another machine, or a unique number generated by e -stamping or similar software, as the 
Appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify.’.  
Explanation  2.—The expression "e -stamping" means stamping using unique number or co de 
through an electronic machine or a software application’.  
[Vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, Notification 
No. S. O. 3774(E), dated (23 -10-2020).]  
Haryana  
Amendment of section 26 of Central Act 7 of 18 70.—In section 26 of the Court Fees act, 1870, the 
following explanation shall be added, namely: -- 
“Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, - 
(i) “stamp” means any mark, seal or endorsement by any agency or person duly authorized by 
the State Governm ent and includes and adhesive or impressed stamp chargeable for the purposes 
of court fee under this Act; and  
(ii) “impressed stamp” means an impression by a franking or any other machine, or                           
e-stamping.”.  
[Vide Haryana Act 29 of 2016, s. 2]  
27. Rules for supply, number, renewal and keeping accounts of stamps. —The 1[appropriate 
Govern ment] may, from time to time, make rules for regulating —  
(a) the supply of stamps to be used under this Act;  
(b) the number of stamps to be used for denoting any fee chargeabl e under this Act;  
(c) the renewal of damaged or spoiled stamps; and  
(d) the keeping accounts of all stamps used under this Act: 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 23]
wal of damaged or spoiled stamps; and  
(d) the keeping accounts of all stamps used under this Act:  
Provided that, in the case of stamps used under section 3 in a High Court, such rules shall be made 
with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of such Court.  
All such rules shall be published in the Official Gazette, and shall thereupon have the force 
of law.  
Tripura  
Amendment of Section 27 .— Clause (a) of Section 27 of the principal Act, shall be substituted with the 
following - 
“(a) the manner of supply of stamps or electronic transfer of payment of court -fee and refund 
thereof ;” 
[Vide  Tripura Act 17 of 2020, s. 7]  
28. Stamping  documents inadvertently received. —No document which ought to bear a stamp 
under this Act shall be of any v alidity, unless and until it is properly stamped.  
But, if any such document is through mistake or inadvertence received, filed or used in any Court or 
office without being properly stamped, the presiding Judge or the he ad of the office, as the case may be,  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1937 for “L.G.” . 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 24]
 
 
  
24 
 or, in the case of a High Court, any Judge of such Court, may, if he thinks fit, order that such document be 
stamped as he may direct; and, on such document being stamped accordingly, the same and every 
proceeding relative thereto sh all be as valid as if it had been properly stamped in the first instance.  
 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Orissa  
Insertion a new section 28 -A, Act (7 of 1870 ).—After section 28 of the Court Fees Act, 1870 the 
following new section shall be inserted, namely: — 
“28-A. Recovery Deficient or unpai d court fees. ---(1) If, on examination of the records of a Civil, 
Criminal or Revenue case which has been disposed of, a public officer finds that the fee payable 
under the Act or the rules made thereunder on any document filed, exhibited or recorded  ther ein has 
not  been paid or has been insufficiently  paid, he  shall report the fact to the presiding officer of the 
Court or to the revenue officer concerned.  
(2) Such presiding  officer or revenue officer, after satisfying  himself  of the correctness of s uch 
report,  shall record a provisional  finding that the  proper fee  has not been paid and determine the 
amount of fee payable and the person from  whom the fee or the difference thereof, if any, shall be 
recoverable.  
(3) After recording a finding under sub-section  (2), the presiding officer or revenue officer shall 
issue a notice to the person referred to in that sub -section to show cause why he should not be ordered 
to pay the fee determined thereunder, and , if sufficient cause is not shown, the presid ing officer or 
revenue officer shall confirm the finding and make an order requiring  such person to pay the proper 
fee before a date to be specified in that notice.  
(4) If  such person fails to pay the fee in accordance with the  notice issued under sub -section ( 3), 
it shall on the certificate of such presiding officer or revenue officer, be recoverable as an arrear of 
land revenue.”  
[Vide Orissa Act 13 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 24]
ng officer or revenue officer, be recoverable as an arrear of 
land revenue.”  
[Vide Orissa Act 13 of 19 57, s. 2]  
29. Amended document. —Where  any such document is amended in order merely to correct a 
mistake and to make it conform to the original intention of the parties, it shall not be necessary to impose 
a fresh stamp.  
30. Cancellation of stamp. —No document requiring a stamp under this Act shall be filed or acted 
upon in any proceeding in any Court or office until the stamp has been cancelled.  
Such officer as the Court or the head of the office may from time to time appoint shall, on 
receiving any such document, forthwith effect such cancellation by punching out the figure -head 
so as to leave the amount  designated on the stamp untouched, and the part removed by punching 
shall be burnt or otherwise destroyed.  
Tripura  
Amendment of Section 30 .—In Section 30 of the principal Act, after the existing text, the following 
proviso shall  be added - 
“Provided that, where court -fee is paid by electronic transfer of payment, the officer competent to 
cancel stamp shall verify the genuineness of the payment and after satisfying himself that the court -
fee is paid, shall lock the entry in the computer and make an endorseme nt under his signature on the 
document that the court -fee is paid and the entry is locked”.  
[Vide  Tripura Act 17 of 2020, s. 8]  
Bihar  
Insertion of new Chapter V -A in Act VII of 1870. ---After Chapter V of the Court -fees Act, 1870 (Act VII of 
1870) (hereinaf ter referred to the said Act) the following Chapter and Section shall be inserted, namely: - 
"Chapter V -A.-Levy of Additional Surcharge.  
30-A. The fees leviable under the Act, shall be increased in each case by an additional surcharge 
at the rate of ten per  centum of the amount of the Court Fees."  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 25]
 
 
  
25 
 [Vide Bihar Act 20 of 1977, s. 2]  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
31. [Repayment of fees paid on applications to Criminal Courts .] Rep. by the Code of Criminal  
Procedure (Amendment) Act,  1923 (18 of 1923), s. 163. 
32. [Amendment of Act  8 of 1859  and Act 9 of 1869.] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act , 1891 
(12 of 1891).  
33. Admission in crimi nal cases of documents for which proper fee has not been paid. —
Whenever the filing or exhibition in a Criminal Court of a document  in respect of which the proper fee  
has not been paid is, in the op inion of the presiding Judge, necessary to prevent a failure of justice, 
nothing contained in section 4 or section 6 shall be deemed to prohibit such filing or exhibition.  
1[34. Sale of sta mps. —(1) The 2[appropriate Government] may from time to time make rules for 
regulating the sale of stamps to be used under this Act, the persons by whom alone such sale is to be 
conducted, and the duties and remuneration of such persons. 
(2) All such rules  shall be published in the Official Gazette, and shall thereupon have the 
force of law.  
(3) Any person appointed to sell stamps who disobeys any rule made under this section, and 
any person not so appointed who sells or offers for sale any stamp, shall be punished with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may ext end to five 
hundred rupees, or with both.]  
35. Power to reduce or remit fees. —The 2[appropriate Government] may, from time to time 
by notification in the Offici al Gazette, reduce or remit, in the whole or in any part of 3[the 
territories  under its administration], all or any of the fees mentioned in the first and second 
schedules to this Act annexed, and may in like manner cancel or vary such order.  
STATE AMENDME NT 
Orissa  
Amendment of section 35 of Act (7 of 1870). —For section 35 of the principal Act, the following 
section shall be substituted: — 
“35. Power to suspend, reduce or remit fees.
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 25]
al Act, the following 
section shall be substituted: — 
“35. Power to suspend, reduce or remit fees. —(1) The Provincial Government may from time 
to time subject to such conditi ons or restrictions as it may think fit to impose, by notification in the 
Gazette suspend the payment of or reduce or remit, in the whole of Orissa or in any part thereof, all or 
any of the fees mentioned in Schedules I and II to this Act annexed and may i n like manner cancel or 
vary such order.  
(3) The Provincial Government may from time to time by rules prescribe the  manner in which 
any fee the payment of which is suspended under sub -section (1) may be realized a nd for this purpose 
direct that such fee m ay be recovered as if it were an arrear of land revenue.”  
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 15]  
Haryana  
Substitution of section 35 of Central Act 7 of 1870 .— For section 35 of the Court Fees Act, 
1870 (hereinafter referred  to as the principal Act), the follow ing section shall be substituted, namely: — 
"35. Power to remit or reduce fees .—The State Government may,  subject to such c onditions or 
restrictions as it may think fit to  impose, by notification in the Official Gazette, reduce or remit in  
relation to all o r any class of persons, in the whole or any part of  the territories under its 
administration, all or any of the  fees mentioned in the first and second schedules annexed to  this Act 
and may in like manner cancel or vary such order .” 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 12 of 1891, for s ection  34. 
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “L. G.”.  
3. Subs.  by Act 38 of 1 920, s. 2 and  the First Schedule , for “British India”.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 26]
 
 
  
26 
 [Vide  Haryana Act 27 of 1976, s. 2]  
Bihar  
Substitution of new Section for Section 35 of Act VII of 1870.  - For Section 35 of the said Act, the 
following Section shall be substituted, namely: - 
"35. Power to remit or reduce Court -fees.---The State Government may, subject to such co ndition 
or restriction as it may think fit to impose, by order published in the Official Gazette, reduce or 
remit in relation to all or any class of persons, in the whole or any part of the State, all or any of 
the fees mentioned in the First and Second Sc hedules to this Act and may in like manner cancel or 
vary such order."  
[Vide Bihar Act 20 of 1977, s.  3]  
36. Saving of fees to certain officers of High Courts. —Nothing in Chapters II and V of this Act 
applies to the commission payable to the Accountant Ge neral of the High Court at Fort William, or to the 
fees which any officer of a High Court is allowed to receive in addition to a fixed salary . 
 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Haryana  
Insertion of section 37 in Act 7 of 1870 .— After section 36 of the principal Act, the fo llowing 
section shall be inserted, namely : — 
 “37. Fees in High Court .—Nothing contained in Schedules I and II to this act shall apply 
to the High Court of Punjab and Haryana and the provisions in that behalf applicable 
immediately before the 1st day of No vember, 1966, shall continue to apply to the said High 
Court.”.  
[Vide  Haryana Act 22 of 1974, s. 3]  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 27]
 
 
  
27 
 SCHEDULE I  
AD VALOREM  FEES 
                        Number  _____ _ Proper Fee  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. 1Plaint 2[written statement 
pleading a set -off or counter -
claim] or memoran dum of appeal 
(not otherwise provided for in 
this Act) 2[or of cross -objection] 
presented to any Civil or 
Revenue Court except those 
mentioned in section 3.  
  When the amount or value of the subject -matter in 
dispute does not exceed five  rupees.  Six annas.  
When such amount or value exceeds five rupees, for 
every five rupees, or part thereof, in excess of five 
rupees, up to one hundred rupees.  Six annas.  
When such amount or value exceeds one hundred 
rupees, for every ten rupees, or p art thereof, in excess of 
one hundred rupees, up to one thou sand rupees.  Twelve annas.  
When such amount or value exceeds one thou sand 
rupees, for every one hundred rupees, or part thereof, in 
excess of one thousand rupees, up to five thousand 
rupees.  Five rupees.  
When such amount or value exceeds five thousand 
rupees, for every two hundred and fifty rupees, or part 
thereof, in excess of five thousand rupees, up to ten 
thousand rupees.  Ten rupees.  
When such amount or value exceeds ten thousand 
rupees, for every five hundred rupees, or part thereof, in 
excess of ten thousand rupees, up to twenty thousand 
rupees.  Fifteen rupees.  
When such amount or value exceeds twenty thousand 
rupees, for every one thousand rupees, or part thereof, in 
excess of t wenty thousand rupees, up to thirty thousand 
rupees.  Twenty rupees.  
When such amount or value exceeds thirty thousand 
rupees, for every two thousand rupees, or part thereof, in 
excess of thirty thousand rupees, up to fifty thousand 
rupees.  Twenty rupees . 
When such amount or value exceeds fifty thousand 
rupees, for every five thousand rupees, or part thereof, in 
excess of fifty thousand rupees : Twenty -five 
rupees.  
Provided that the maximum fee leviable on a plaint or 
memorandum of
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 27]
upees : Twenty -five 
rupees.  
Provided that the maximum fee leviable on a plaint or 
memorandum of appeal shall be th ree thousand rupees.   
2. Plaint 3*** in a suit for 
possession under 4[the Specific 
Relief Act, 1877, section 9].  
3. [ Repealed by the Indian 
Registration Act, 1871 (8 of 
1871) ].   
.. A fee of one -half 
the amount 
prescribed in the 
foregoing scale.   
.. 
4. Application for  review of 
judgment ,5if presented on or after 
the ninetieth day from the date of  
the decree.   
.. The fee leviable 
on the plaint or 
memorandum of 
appeal.  
5. Application for review of 
judgments , 5if presented before the 
ninetieth day fr om the date of the 
decree.   
.. One-half of the 
fee leviable on 
the plaint or 
memorandum of  
appeal.  
                                                      
1. To ascertain the proper fee leviable on the institution of a suit, see the table annexed to this Schedule.   
2. Ins. by Act 5 of 1908, s. 155 and the Fourth Schedule . 
3. The words “or memorandum of appeal” rep. by Act 20 of 1870.  
4. Subs. by Act 12 of 1891 , s. 3 and the First Schedule  for “Act No. 14 of 1859 (to provide for the limitation of 
suits )”. 
5. As to application for review of judgment, see the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 28]
 
 
  
28 
  
               Number    Proper Fee  
 
 
6. Copy or translation of a 
judgment or order not being, or 
having the force of, a decree.   When such judgment or ord er is passed by any Civil Court 
other than a High Court, or by the presiding officer of any 
Revenue Court or office, or by any other Judicial or Executive 
Authority —  
(a) If the amount or value of the subject -matter is fifty or less 
than fifty rupees.  Four annas.  
(b) If such amount or value exceeds fifty rupees.  Eight annas.  
When such judgment or order is passed by  a High Court.  One rupee.  
 
7. Copy of a decree or order having 
the force of a decree.   When such decree or order is made by any Civil  Court other 
than a High Court, or by any Revenue Court —  
(a) If the amount or value of the subject -matter of the suit 
wherein such decree or order is made is fifty or less than fifty 
rupees.  Eight annas.  
(b) If such amount or value exceeds fifty rup ees. One rupee . 
When such decree or order is made by a High Court.  Four rupees.  
8. Copy of any document liable to 
stamp -duty under the Indian Stamp 
Act, 18791, (1 of 1879), when left 
by any party to a suit o r proceeding 
in place of the original withdra wn.  (a) When the stamp -duty chargeable on the original does not 
exceed eight annas.  The amount of the 
duty chargeable on 
the original.  
(b) In any other case.  Eight annas.  
9. Copy of any revenue or judicial 
proceeding or order not otherwise 
provided f or by this Act, or copy of any 
account, statement, report or the like, 
taken out of any Civil or Criminal or 
Revenue Court or office, or from the 
office of any chief officer charged with 
the executive administration of a 
Division.  For every three hundred a nd sixty words or fraction of three 
hundred and sixty words.  Eight annas.  
10. [ Rep. by the Guardians and Wards  
Act, 1890 (8 of 1890).]                                                   ..              .. 
 
 
 
 
2[11. Probate of a will or let
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 28]
                                          ..              .. 
 
 
 
 
2[11. Probate of a will or letters of 
administr ation with or without will 
annexed.   3[When the amount or value of the property in respect of which 
the grant of probate or letters is made exceeds one thousand 
rupees, but does not exceed ten thousand rupees.  Two per centum on 
such amount or 
value.  
When such amount or value exceeds ten thousand rupees, but 
does not exceed fifty thousand rupees.  Two and one -half 
per centum on such 
amount or value.  
When such amount or value exceeds fifty thousand rupees:  Three per centum 
on such amount or 
value.]  
Provided that when, after the grant of a certificate under the 
Succession Certificate Act, 1889 (7 of 1889), or under the 
Regulation of the Bombay Code, No. 8 of 1827, in respect of 
any property included in an estate, a grant of probate or 
letters of admini stration is made in respect of the same 
estate, the fee payable in respect of the letter grant shall be 
reduced by the amount of the fee paid in respect of the 
former grant.  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
1. See now the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 (2 of 1899).  
2. Subs. by Act 7 of 1 889, s. 13 (1), for article 11.  
3. These items were subs. by Act 7 of 1910 , s. 2(i). 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 29]
 
 
  
29 
                  Number  ______  Proper Fee  
1[12. Certificate under th e                     
Succession Certificate Act, 1889 (7 
of 1889). In any case.   Two per centum on the 
amount or value of any 
debt or secu rity specified 
in the certificate under 
section 8 of the Act, and 
three per centum on the 
amount or value of any 
debt or security to which 
the certificate is extended 
under section 10 of the 
Act. 
NOTE. —(1) The amount 
of a debt is its amount, 
inclu -ding interest, on the 
day on which the inclusion 
of the debt in the 
certificate is applied for, 
so far as such amount can 
be asc -ertained.  
(2) Whether or not any 
power with respect to a 
security specified in a           
certificate has been 
conferred under the Act, 
and, where such a power 
has been so conferred, 
whether the power is for 
the receiving of  interest  or 
dividend s on, or for the 
negotiation or transfer, of 
the security, or for both 
purposes, the value of the 
security is its market -value 
on the day on which the 
inclusion of the security in 
the certificate is applied 
for, so far as such value 
can be ascertained.]  
2[12A. Certificate under the 
Regulation of the Bombay Code 
No. 8 of 1827.  3[(1) As regards debts and securities.  The same fee as would 
be payable in respect of 
a certificate under the 
Succession Certificate 
Act, 1889 (7 of 1889), 
or in respect of an ext -
ension of such a cert -
ificate, as the case may 
be. 
 (2) As regards other property in respect of which 
the certificate is granted —  
 When the amount or value of such property exceeds 
one thousand rupees, but does not exceed ten 
thousand rupees.  Two per centu m on 
such amount or              
value.  
 When such amount or value exceeds ten thousand 
rupees, but does not exceed fifty thousand rupees.  Two and one -half per 
centum on such           
amount or value.  
 When such amount or value exceeds fifty thousand 
rupees. Three per centum on 
such amount or        
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 29]
hen such amount or value exceeds fifty thousand 
rupees. Three per centum on 
such amount or                 
value.]]  
 
 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 18 89, s. 13 (1), for the article 12.   
2. Subs. by s. 13 (1), ibid., for article  12A.  
3 These items were subs . by Act 7 of 1910, s. 2 (ii). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 30]
 
 
  
30 
  
 
                 Number  ______  Proper Fee  
113. Application to the 2[High 
Court of Punjab] for the exercise 
of its jurisdiction under             
section 44 of the Punjab Courts 
Act, 191 8 (Punjab 6 of 1918) or 
to the Court of the Financial 
Commissioner of Punjab for the 
exercise of its revisional 
jurisdiction under section 84 of 
the Punjab Ten ancy Act, 1887 
(16 of 1887).  When the amount or value of the subject -matter in 
dispute does not exceed twenty -five rupees.  
 Two rupees.  
When such amount or value exceeds twenty -five 
rupees.  The fee leviable on 
a memorandum of 
appeal.  
14. [ Rep. by the A.O. 1937. ]   
15. [ Rep. by the Repealing and 
Amending Act, 1923 (11 of 
1923 ), s. 3 and Sch. II .]   
 
 
  
                                                      
1. Ins. by the Punjab Courts Act, 1884 (8 of 1884), s. 71, as amended by the Punjab Courts Act 1899 (25 of 1899), s. 6. Article 1 3 
was rep. in the Punjab by s. 5 of the Punjab Courts (Amendment) Ac t, 1912 (Punjab 1 of 1912); but it has since been revived 
in this form by the Court -fees (Punjab Amendment) Act, 1922 (Punjab 7 of 1922).  
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1948, for “High Court of Judicature at Lahore”.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 31]
 
 
  
31 
  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Assam.  
Amendment of Schedule 1 of Act 7 of 1870. —In Schedule I to the principal Act, — (1) for Article 1, 
the following shall be substituted, namely: — 
 
  
Number   Proper fee  
(1) (2) (3) 
“1. Plaint, written statement 
pleading a set -off or counter -
claim or memorandum of appeal 
(not otherwise provided for in 
this Act ) or, of cross -objection 
presented to any Civil or 
Revenue Court except those 
mentioned in Section 3 . When the amount or value of the subject -
matter in dispute does not exce ed one 
hundred rupees, for every five rupees, or, 
part thereof of such amount or value ; fifty-five paise.  
 and  
 When such amount or value exceeds one 
hundred rupees, for every ten rupees or part 
thereof, in excess of one hundred rupees up 
to one hundred  and fifty rupees ; One rupee and ninety -
five paise.  
 and  
 When such amount or values exceeds one 
hundred and fifty rupees, for every ten 
rupees, or part the reof, up to one thousand 
rupees;  One rupee and forty  
paise.  
 and  
 When such amount or value ex ceeds one 
thousand rupees, for every one hundred 
rupees, or part thereof in excess of one 
thousand rupees, up  to seven  thousand  five 
hundred  rupees ; Eight rupees and 
twenty -five paise . 
 and  
 When such amount or value exceeds seven  
thousand five hundred rupees, for every two 
hundred and fifty rupees, or part thereof, in 
excess of seven  thousand five hundred 
rupees, up to thousand rupees ; Sixteen rupees and 
fifty paise.  
 and  
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 32]
 
 
  
32 
  When such amount or value exceeds ten , 
thousand rupees, for every  five hund red 
rupees , or part thereof, in excess of ten 
thousand rupees, up to twenty  thousand 
rupees ; Twenty -four rupees 
and seventy -five 
paise . 
 and  
 When such amount or value exceeds twenty  
thousand rupees, for every one thousand 
rupees, or part thereof in ex cess of twenty  
thousand rupees  upto fifty thousand rupees;  Thirty -three rupees.  
 and  
 When such amount or value exceeds fifty 
thousand rupees, for every five thousand 
rupees, or part thereof in exceess of fifty 
thousand rupees :   Forty -one rupees and 
twenty -five paise.  
 Provided that the maximum fee leviable on 
a plaint or memorandum of appeal shall not 
exceed eleven thousand rupees. ”  
(2) for Articles 6, 7, 8 and 9 the following shall be substituted, namely:  — 
“6. Copy or translation of a 
judgment or  order not being or 
having the force of a decree . When such judgment or order is passed by 
any Civil Court other than High Court, or by 
the Presiding Officer of any Revenue Court 
or officer  
or by any other Judicial or Executive 
Authority:   
 (a) if the amo unt or value of the subject -
matter is fifty or less than fifty rupees . One rupee and ten 
paise . 
  (b) if such amount or value exceeds fifty 
rupees . Two rupees and 
twenty paise . 
 (c) when such judgment or order is passed 
by a High Court . Four rupees and f orty 
paise . 
7. Copy of a decree or order 
having the force of a decree  When such decree or order is made by any 
Civil Court other than a High, Court, or by 
any Revenue Court —  
 (a) If the amount or value of the subject  
matter of the suit wherein such decr ee or 
order is made is fifty or less than fifty 
rupees . Two rupees and 
twenty paise . 
 (b) If such amount or value exceeds fifty 
rupees . Three rupees and 
thirty paise . 
 (c) when such decree or order is made by 
High Court . Eight rupees and 
twenty -five pais e. 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 32]
er is made by 
High Court . Eight rupees and 
twenty -five pais e. 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 33]
 
 
  
33 
    
8. Copy of any document liable 
to stamp -duty under the Indian 
Stamp Act, 1899 (Act 2 of 1899), 
when left by any party to a suit or 
proceeding in place of the 
original withdrawn . (a) when the stamp -duty chargeable on 
the original does not exceed o ne rupee . The amount of the 
duty chargeable on the 
original.  
 (b) In any other case . One rupee and twenty 
paise. ” 
9. Copy of any revenue or 
judicial proceeding or order not 
otherwise provided for by this 
Act, or copy of any account, 
statement, report or the like, 
taken out of any Civil or 
Criminal or Revenue Court or 
office or from the office of any 
Chief Officer charged with the 
executive administration of 
Division.  For every three hundred and sixty words 
or fraction of three hundred and sixty 
words . One rupee and twenty 
paise.  
[Vide Assam Act 28 of 1972, s. 2 ,] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 34]
 
 
  
34 
 

<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 35]
 
 
  
35 
 

<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 36]
 
 
  
36 
  
  

<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 37]
 
 
  
37 
  
  

<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 38]
 
 
  
38 
  
  

<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 39]
 
 
  
39 
  
 

<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 40]
 
 
  
40 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
 
Assam  
Table of Rates of Ad valorem  Fees Leviable on the Institution of  Suits  
 
When the amount or  value of the 
subject  matter exceeds  But does not  exceed  Proper fee  
(1) (2) (3) 
Rs. Rs. Rs. P.  
"  " 5 .55 
5 10 1.10 
10 15 1.65 
15 20 2.20 
20 25 2.75 
25 30 3.30 
30 35 3.85 
35 40 4.40 
40 45 4.95 
45 50 5.50 
50 55 6.05 
55 60 6.60 
60 65 7.15 
65 70 7.70 
70 75 8.25 
75 80 8.80 
80 85 9.35 
85 90 9.90 
90 95 10.45  
95 100 11.00  
100 110 12.95  
110 120 14.85  
120 130 16.80  
130 140 18.70  
140 150 20.55 
150 160 21.95  
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 41]
 
 
  
41 
 When the amount or  value of the 
subject  matter exceeds  But does not exceed  Proper fee  
(1) (2) (3) 
Rs. Rs. Rs. P.  
160 170 23.30 
170 180 24.60  
180 190 25.90  
190 200 27.25  
200 210 28.55  
210 220 29.90  
220 230 31.20  
230 240 32.50  
240 250 33.85  
250 260 35.15  
260 270 36.50  
270 280 37.80  
280 290 39.15  
290 300 40.45  
300 310 41.75  
310 320 43.10  
320 330 44.40  
330 340 45.75  
340 350 47.05  
350 360 48.35  
360 370 49.0 
370 380 51.00  
380 390 52.35  
390 400 53.65  
400 410 54.95  
410 420 56.30  
420 430 57.60  
430 440 58.95  
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 42]
 
 
  
42 
 When the amount or  value of the 
subject  matter exceeds  But does not exceed  Proper fee  
(1) (2) (3) 
Rs. Rs. Rs. P.  
440 450 60 25  
450 460 61.55  
460 470 62.90  
470 480 64.20  
480 490 65.55  
490 500 66.85  
500 510 68.15  
510 520 69.50  
520 530 70.80  
530 540 72.15  
540 550 73.45  
550 560 74.75  
560 570 76.10  
570 580 77.40  
580 590 78.75  
590 600 80.05  
600 610 81.35  
610 620 82.70  
620 630 84.00  
630 640 85.35  
640 650 86.65  
650 660 87.95  
660 670 89.30  
670 680 90.60  
680 690 91.95  
690 700 93.25  
700 710 94. 55  
710 720 95.90  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 43]
 
 
  
43 
 When the amount or  value of the 
subject  matter exceeds  But does not exceed  Proper fee  
(1) (2) (3) 
Rs. Rs. Rs. P.  
720 730 97.20  
730 740 98.55  
740 750 99.85  
750 760 101.15  
760 770 102.50  
770 780 103.80  
780 790 105.15  
790 800 106.45  
800 810 107.75  
810 820 109.10  
820 830 110.40  
830 840 111.75  
840 850 113.05  
850 860 114.35 
860 870 115.70  
870 880 117.00  
880 890 118.35  
890 900 119.65  
900 910 120.95  
910 920 122.30  
920 930 123.60  
930 940 124.95  
940 950 126.25  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 44]
 
 
  
44 
 Number   Proper fee  
(1) (2) (3) 
 
5. Plaint or memorandum of appeal to a suit 
to establish or di sprove a right of occupancy.  
6. Bail -bond or other instrument obligation 
given in a pursuance of an order made by a Court 
or Magistrate under any section of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898), or the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  and not otherwise 
provided for by this Act.  
7. Undertaking under section 49 of the Indian 
Divorce Act, 1869.  
   
 
 
One rupee 
and ten paise.  
8. ...   
9. ...   
10. Mukhtarn ama or Vakalatnama.  
 When presented for the conduct of any one 
case—  
 (a) to any Civil or Criminal Court other 
than a High Court, or to any Revenue 
Court, or to any Collector or Magistrate, 
or other Executive Officer except such as 
are mentioned in clauses ( b) and ( c) of 
this Number;  
 One rupee 
and ten paise.  
 (b) to a Commissioner of Revenue,  
Circuit or Customs or to any officer 
charged with the Executive 
Administration of a Division, not being 
the Chief Revenue or Executive 
Authority;  Two rupees 
and seventy -
five paise.  
 (c) to a High Court, Chief 
Commissioner, Board of Revenue, or 
other Chie f Controlling Revenue or 
Executive Authority, or an appellate 
Authority prescribed under the Motor 
Vehicles Act, 1939 (Act IV of 1939) or 
to an Appellate Authority prescribed 
under the Assam Sales Tax Act, 
1947(Assam Act XVII of 1947).  
 Five rupees 
and fif ty 
paise.  
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 45]
 
 
  
45 
 Number   Proper fee  
(1) (2) (3) 
 
11. Memorandum of appeal when the appeal 
is not from a decree or an order having the 
force of a decree, and is presented.  (a) to any Civil Court other than a High 
Court, or to any Revenue Court or 
Executive O fficer other than the High 
Court or Chief Controlling Revenue or 
Executive Authority except an authority 
specified in clause ( b); Three rupees 
and thirty 
paise.  
 (b) to an Excise Appellate Authority 
under Rule 340 of the Assam Excise 
Rules;  Sixteen 
rupees  and 
fifty paise.  
 (c) to a High Court or Chief 
Commissioner or other Chief Controlling 
Executive or Revenue Authority except an 
Authority prescribed in clause ( b); Eleven 
rupees.  
 (d) To an Excise Appellate Authority 
under Rule 341 of the Assam Excise R ule 
: Fifty five 
rupees.  
 (e) to a High Court in miscellaneous 
revenue matters except ( f) below or to an 
Appellate Authority prescribed under the 
Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 (Act IV of 
1939); and  Sixteen 
rupees and 
fifty paise.  
 (f) to a High Court in appea l and revision 
matters arising out of settlement of 
fishery —  
 (i) When the bid money is below ten 
thousand rupees:  Sixteen 
rupees and 
fifty paise.  
 (ii) When the bid money is above then 
thousand rupees but below twenty 
thousand rupees:  Twenty -
seven rupe es 
and fifty 
paise.  
 (iii) When the bid money is above 
twenty thousand rupees.  Thirty -tree 
rupees.  
12. Caveat...   Eleven 
rupees.  
13. Application under Act No. 10 of 1859, 
section 26 or Bengal Act No. 6 of 196 2, section 
9 or Bengal Act No. 8  of 1869 sect ion 37.   Five rupees 
and fifty 
paise.  
Number   Proper fee  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 46]
 
 
  
46 
 (1) (2) (3) 
14. Petition in a suit under the Native Converts’ 
Marriage Dissolution Act, 1866.   Five rupees 
and fifty 
paise.  
17. Plaint or memorandum of appeal in each of 
the following suits: --   
 (i) to alter or set aside a summary decision 
or order of any of the Civil Courts not 
established by Letters Patent or of any 
Revenue Court;   
 
Sixteen 
rupees and 
fifty paise.   (ii) to alter or cancel any entry in a register 
of the names of proprietors of revenue -
paying estates;  
 (iii) to obtain a declaration decree where no 
consequential relief is prayed;  Twenty -two 
rupees.  
 (iv) to set aside an award;  Sixteen 
rupees and 
fifty paise.  
 (v) to set aside an adoption;  Twenty --two 
rupees.  
 (vi) every ot her suit where it is not possible 
to estimate at a money -value the subject -
matter in dispute, and which is not other -
wise provided for by this Act.  Sixteen 
rupees and 
fifty paise.  
18. Application under section 14 or section 20, of 
the Indian Arbitration A ct, 1940 (Act X of 1940), 
for a direction for filing an award or for an order 
for filing an agreement.  When presented to a Munsif’s Court.  Sixteen 
rupees and 
fifty paise.  
 When presented to any other Court.  Fifty -five 
rupees.  
19. Agreement in writing sta ting a question for 
the opinion of the Court under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (Act V of 1908).   Sixteen 
rupees and 
fifty paise.  
20. Every petition under the Indian Divorce Act, 
1869 (Act IV of 1869), except petitions under 
section 44 of the same Ac t, and every 
memorandum of appeal under section 55 of the 
same Act.   Twenty -two 
rupees.  
21. Plaint or memorandum of appeal under the 
Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 1865 (Act XV 
of 1865).   Twenty -two 
rupees.]  
 
[Vide Assam Act 27 of 1972   s. 3] 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 47]
 
 
  
47 
 STATE AM ENDMENT  
 
Orissa  
Amendment of Schedule I Act (7 of 1870). -In Schedule I to the principal Act for articles 11 and 12, 
the following articles shall be substituted, namely :-- 
 
Number       Proper fee  
(1) (2) (3) 
“11. Probate of a will or letters of 
administra tion with or without 
will annexed.  When the amount or value of the 
property in respect of which the 
grant of probate or letters is made 
exceeds two thousand rupees, on 
such amount or value up to ten 
thousand rupees.  
                             and 
When su ch amount or value 
exceeds ten thousand  rupees, on 
the portion of such amount or 
value which is in excess of ten 
thousand rupees up to fifty 
thousand rupees.  
                        and   
  When such amount or value 
exceeds fifty  thousand rupees, 
on the portion of such amount or 
value which is in excess of fifty 
thousand rupees up to one lakh of 
rupees,  
                      and                              
When such amount or value 
exceeds a lakh of rupees, on the 
portion of such amount or value 
which is  in excess of one lakh of 
rupees:  
Provided that when, after the 
grant of a certificate under the 
Indian Succession Act, 1925  (39 
of 1925 ) or under the Regulation 
of the Bom bay Code No.8 of 1827, 
in respect of any property included 
in an estate, a grant of probate or 
letters of administration is made in 
respect of the same estate, the fee 
payable in respect of the latter grant 
shall be reduced by the amount of 
the fee paid in respect  of the former 
grant.  Two per centum  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Three per centum  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Four per centum  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Five per centum  
 
                          
 
 
 
  
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 48]
 
 
  
48 
 12. Certificate under the Indian 
Succession Act, 1925.  When the amount or value of any 
debt or security specified in the 
certificate under section 374 of 
the Act, exceeds one thousand 
rupees, on such amount or value 
up to ten thousand rupees,  
 
                          and     
When such amount or value 
exceeds ten thousand  rupees, on 
the portion of such amount or 
value which is in excess of ten 
thousand  rupees up to fifty 
thousand rupe es, 
     
                            and                                        
When such amount or value 
exceeds fifty thousand rupees, on 
the portion of such amount or 
value which is in excess of  fifty 
thousand  rupees up to one lakh 
of rupees,                           and  
When such amount or value 
exceeds a lakh of rupees, on the 
portion of such amount or value 
which is in excess of one lakh of 
rupees.  Two per centum, and on the 
amount or value of any debt or 
security to which the certificate is 
exten ded under section 376 of the 
Act, three per centum.  
 
 
 
Three per centum, and on the 
amount or value of any debt or 
security to which the certificate is 
extended under section 376 of the 
Act, four -and-a-half per centum.  
Four per centum, and on the 
mount or value of any debt or 
security to which the certificate is 
extended under section 376 of the  
Act, six per centum.  
Five per centum, and on the 
amount or value of any debt or 
security to which the certificate is 
extended under section 376 of the 
Act, seven -and-a-half per 
centum.”  
 
SCHEDULE  
(See section 2)  
 
Number and year   Short title   
(1) (2) 
Bihar and Orissa Act 1 of 1952  Bihar and Orissa Court -Fees (Amendment  Act, 
1922).  
Madras Act V of 1922 Central Province Act XVI 
of 1935  Madras Court -Fees (Amendmen t) Act, 1922 Court -
Fees (Central Provinces Amendment) Act, 1935.  
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 49]
 
 
  
49 
 When the amount or value of the 
subject -matter exceeds  But does not exceed  Proper fee.  
1        2 3 
Rs. 
 
1,400  
 
1,500  
 
1,600  
 
1,700  
 
1,800  
 
1,900  
 
2,000  
 
2,100  
 
2,200  
 
2,300  
 
2,400  
 
2,500 
 
2,600  
 
2,700  
 
2,800  
 
2,900  
 
3,000  
 
3,100  
 
3,200  Rs. 
 
1,500  
 
1,600  
 
1,700  
 
1,800  
 
1,900  
 
2,000  
 
2,100  
 
2,200  
 
2,300  
 
2,400  
 
2,500  
 
2,600  
 
2,700  
 
2,800  
 
2,900  
 
3,100  
 
3,200  
 
3,300  
 
3,300  Rs.   a.   p.  
 
141  4  0  
 
148   12  0  
 
156  4    0  
 
163  12  0  
 
171  4   0 
 
178   12  0  
 
186   4  0  
 
193   12   0  
 
201   4   0  
 
208   12  0  
 
216   4   0  
 
223   12   0  
 
231   4   0  
 
238    12   0  
 
246   4     0  
 
263   12   0  
 
261  4    0  
 
268   12   0  
 
276   4   0  
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 50]
 
 
  
50 
 When the amount or value of the 
subject -matter exceeds  But does not exceed  Proper fee.  
1        2 3 
Rs. 
850 
 
860 
 
870 
 
880 
 
890 
 
900 
 
910 
 
920 
 
930 
 
940 
 
950 
 
960 
 
970 
 
980 
 
990 
 
1,000  
 
1,100  
 
1,200  
 
1,300  Rs. 
860 
 
870 
 
880 
 
890 
 
900 
 
910 
 
920 
 
930 
 
940 
 
950 
 
960 
 
970 
 
980 
 
990 
 
1,000  
 
1,100  
 
1,200  
 
1,300  
 
1,400 Rs. a.  p.  
88  0  0  
 
89   2  0  
 
90   4  0  
 
91   6  0  
 
92    8  0  
 
93   10 0  
 
94   12  0  
 
95    14 0  
 
97   0  0  
 
98   2  0  
 
99   4  0  
 
100   6  0  
 
101   8  0  
 
102   10  0  
 
103   12  0  
 
111    4  0  
 
118   12   0  
 
126     4  0  
 
133    12   0  
 
 
When the amount or value of the 
subject -matter exceeds  But does not exceed  Proper fee.  
1        2 3 
Rs. 
 
24.000  
 Rs 
 
25,000  
 Rs.  a.  p.  
 
1,341  4  0  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 51]
 
 
  
51 
 25,000  
 
26,000  
 
27,000  
 
28,000  
 
29,000  
 
30,000  
 
32,000  
 
34,000  
 
36,000  
 
38,000  
 
40,000  
 
42,000  
 
44,000  
 
46,000  
 
48,000  26,000  
 
27,000  
 
28,000 
 
29,000  
 
30,000  
 
32,000  
 
34,000  
 
36,000  
 
38,000  
 
40,000  
 
42,000  
 
44,000  
 
46,000  
 
48,000  
 
50,000  1,371  4  0  
 
1,401  4  0  
 
1,431  4  0  
 
1,461  4  0  
 
1,491  4  0  
 
1,521  4  0  
 
1,551  4  0  
 
1,581  4  0  
 
1,661  4  0  
 
1,641  4  0  
 
1,671  4  0  
 
1,701  4  0  
 
1,731  4  0  
 
1,761  4  0  
 
1, 791  4  0  
 
When the amount or value of the 
subject -matter exceeds  But does not exceed  Proper fee.  
1        2 3 
Rs. 
85 
 
90 
 
95 
 Rs. 
90 
 
95 
 
100 
 Rs. 
6  12  0  
 
7  2  0  
 
 7  8  0  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 52]
 
 
  
52 
 100 
 
110 
 
120 
 
130 
 
140 
 
150 
 
160 
 
170 
 
180 
 
190 
 
200 
 
210 
 
220 
 
230 
 
240 
 
250 
 
260 110 
 
120 
 
130 
 
140 
 
150 
 
160 
 
170 
 
180 
 
190 
 
200 
 
210 
 
220 
 
230 
 
240 
 
250 
 
260 
 
                          270 8  8  0  
 
9  8  0  
 
10  8  0  
 
11  8  0  
 
12  8  0  
 
13  8  0  
 
14  8  0  
 
15   8 0  
 
16   8 0 
 
17  8  0  
 
18   8 0  
 
19   8 0  
 
20   8 0  
 
21   8 0  
 
22   8 0  
 
23   8 0  
 
24  8 0  
 
When the amount or value of the 
subject -matter exceeds  But does not exceed  Proper fee.  
1        2 3 
Rs. 
7,100  
 
7,200  
 
7,300  
 
7,500  
 Rs. 
7,200  
 
7,300  
 
7,500  
 
7,600  
 Rs.  a.  p.  
 
 
508  12  0  
 
576  4  0  
 
533  12  0  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 53]
 
 
  
53 
 7,600  
 
7,700  
 
7,800  
 
7,900  
 
8,000  
 
8,250 
 
8,500  
 
8,750  
 
9,000  
 
9,250  
 
9,500  
 
9,750  
 
10,000  
 
10,500  
 
11,000  
 
11,500  
 
12,000  7,700  
 
7,800  
 
7,900  
 
8,000  
 
8,250  
 
8,500  
 
8,750  
 
9,000  
 
9,250  
 
9,500  
 
9,750  
 
10,000  
 
10,500  
 
11,000  
 
11,500  
 
12,000  
 
12,500  591  4  0  
 
606  4  0  
 
621  4  0  
 
636   4  0  
 
                    651  4  0  
 
666  4  0  
 
681  4  0  
 
696  4  0  
 
711  4  0  
 
726  4  0  
 
741  4  0  
 
763  12  0  
 
786  4  0  
 
808  12  0  
 
831  4  0  
 
853  12  0  
 
 
When the amount o r value of the 
subject -matter exceeds  But does not exceed  Proper fee.  
1        2 3 
Rs. 
 
660 
 
670 
 
680 
 
690 
 
700 
 
710 Rs. 
 
670 
 
680 
 
690 
 
700 
 
710 
 
720 Rs.    a.    p.  
 
66  10  0  
 
67  12  0  
 
68  14  0  
 
70  0   0  
 
71   2  0  
 
72   4  0  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 54]
 
 
  
54 
  
720 
 
730 
 
740 
 
750 
 
760 
 
770 
 
780 
 
790 
 
800 
 
810 
 
820 
 
830 
 
840 
  
730 
 
740 
 
750 
 
760 
 
770 
 
780 
 
790 
 
800 
 
810 
 
820 
 
830 
 
840 
 
850  
73   6   0  
 
74    8  0  
 
75   10  0  
 
76   12  0  
 
77   14 0  
 
79   0  0  
 
80   2  0  
 
81   4  0  
 
82   0  0  
 
83    8  0  
 
   84   10 0  
 
85   12  0  
 
86   14  0  
When the amount or value of the 
subject -matter exceeds  But does not exceed  Proper fee.  
1        2 3 
Rs. 
90 
 
95 
 
100 
 
110 
 
120 
 
130 
 
140 
 
150 
 Rs. 
95 
 
100 
 
110 
 
120 
 
130 
 
140 
 
150 
 
160 
 Rs.    a.    p.  
7  2  0  
 
7  8  0  
 
8   4  0  
 
9   0  0  
 
9  12  0  
 
10  8  0  
 
11  4   0  
 
12   0  0  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 55]
 
 
  
55 
 160 
 
170 
 
180 
 
190 
 
200 
 
210 
 
220 
 
230 
 
240 
 
250 
 
260 
 
270 
 
280 170 
 
180 
 
190 
 
200 
 
210 
 
220 
 
230 
 
240 
 
250 
 
260 
 
270 
 
280 
 
290 12   12  0  
 
13  8  0  
 
14  4  0  
 
15   0  0  
 
15   12 0  
 
16  8 0  
 
17   4  0  
 
18  0 0  
 
18   12 0  
 
19  8 0  
 
20  4 0  
 
21  0 0  
 
21  12  0  
 
When the amount or value of the 
subject -matter exceeds  But does not exceed  Proper fee.  
1        2 3 
Rs. 
290 
 
300 
 
310 
 
320 
 
330 
 
340 
 
350 
 
360 
 
370 
 
380 
 
390 Rs. 
300 
 
310 
 
320 
 
330 
 
340 
 
350 
 
360 
 
370 
 
380 
 
390 
 
400 Rs.  a.   p.  
22  8  0  
 
23  4  0  
 
24  0  0  
 
24  12  0  
 
25  8  0  
 
26  4  0  
 
27  0  0  
 
27  12  0  
 
28  8    0  
 
29  4  0  
 
30   0  0  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 56]
 
 
  
56 
  
400 
 
410 
 
420 
 
430 
 
440 
 
450 
 
460 
 
470 
 
480 
 
490  
410 
 
420 
 
430 
 
440 
 
450 
 
460 
 
470 
 
480 
 
490 
 
500  
30  12  0  
 
31  8  0  
 
32  4  0 
 
33  0  0  
 
33  12  0  
 
34  8  0  
 
35  4  0  
 
36  0  0  
 
36  12  0  
 
37  8  0  
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 57]
 
 
  
57 
 SCHEDULE B.  
(See Section 21).  
(a) Table of rales and  valorem  fees leviable on plaints , etc ., mentioned in Article 1 of Schedule I.  
 
When the amount of 
value of the subje ct-
matter exceeds.  But does not exceed.  Proper fee.  
1 2 3 
Rs. 
… 
 
 
5 
 
10 
 
15 
 
20 
 
25 
 
30 
 
35 
 
40 
 
45 
 
50 
 
55 
 
60 
 
65 
 
70 
 
75 
 
80 Rs. 
 
5 
 
10 
 
15 
 
20 
 
25 
 
30 
 
35 
 
40 
 
45 
 
50 
 
55 
 
60 
 
65 
 
70 
 
75 
 
80 
 
85 Rs.   a.    p.  
 
0 6  0 
 
                0 12 0  
              
                1  2  0  
 
                1   8  0  
 
                1  14 0  
 
                2   4  0  
 
               2   10 0  
 
                3   0   0  
 
                3   6   0  
 
               3   12 0  
 
               4   2   0  
 
               4   8   0 
 
               4   14 0  
 
               5   4  0  
 
                5 10 0  
 
               6   0   0  
 
                6    6 0  
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 58]
 
 
  
58 
 SCHEDULE A.  
(See Section 2.)  
 
Province year and number.  Title.  Extent of Repeal.  
1 2 3 
Bihar and Orissa Act I of 
1922.  
 
Madras Act V of 1922.  
 
 
 
Central Provinces Act XVI of 
1935.  Bihar and Orissa Court Fees 
(Amendment) Act, 1992.  
 
Madras Court Fees 
(Amendment) Act, 1922.  
 
 
Court Fees (Central Provinces 
Amendment) Act, 1935.  The whole Act, except 
sections 6,9, 10 and 13.  
 
The whole Act, except section 
11 in respect of Articles 11 
and 12 of Schedule I.  
 
The whole Act, except section 
4 (e).  
When the amount or value of 
the subject -matter exceeds  But does not exceed  Proper fee.  
1        2 3 
Rs. 
 
3,300  
 
3,400  
 
3,500  
 
3,600  
 
3,700  
 
3,800  
 
3,900  
 
4,000  
 
4,100  
 
4,200  
 
4,300  
 
4,400  
 
4,500  
 
4,600  
 
4,700  
 
4,800  
 Rs. 
 
3,400  
 
3,500  
 
3,600  
 
3,700  
 
3,800  
 
3,900  
 
4,000  
 
4,100  
 
4,200  
 
4,300  
 
4,400  
 
4,500  
 
4,600  
 
4,700  
 
4,800  
 
4,900  
 Rs. a.  p.  
 
283  12  0  
 
291  4  0  
 
298  12  0  
 
306  4   0  
 
313  12  0  
 
321  4  0  
 
328  12  0  
 
336  4  0  
 
343  12  0  
 
351  4  0  
 
358  12   0  
 
366  4  0  
 
373  12  0  
 
381  4  0  
 
388  12  0  
 
396   4  0  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 59]
 
 
  
59 
 4,900  
 
5,000  
 
5,100  5,000  
 
5,100  
 
5,200  403  12  0  
 
411  4  0  
 
418  12  0  
 
[Vide Orissa Act 11 of 1967, s. 4]  
 
Amendment of Article  1 of Schedule 1  (7 of 1870) .--For Article 1 of Schedule I of the Principal Act 
the followin g Article shall be substituted: -- 
“Number.   — Proper fee.  
1.Plaint, written statement pleading  a set -
off or counter -claim or memorandum of 
appeal (not otherwise provided for in this 
Act) presented to any Civil or Revenue 
Court except those mentioned in section 3.  When the amount or value of the subject 
matter in dispute does not exceed  five 
rupees.  
 
When such amount or value exceeds five 
rupees, for every five rupees, or part 
thereof , in excess of five rupees, up to 
one hundred rupees.  
 
When such amount or value exceeds one 
hundred rupees, for every ten rupees, or 
part thereof, in excess of one hundred 
rupees, up to five hundred rupees.  
 
When  such amount or value exceeds five 
hundred rupees, for every ten rupees, or 
part thereof, in excess of five hundred 
rupees, up to one thousand rupees.  
 
When such amount or value exceeds one 
thousand rupees, for every one hundred 
rupees, or part thereof, in  excess of one 
thousand rupees, up to seven  thousand 
five hundred rupees.  
 
When such amount or value exceeds 
seven thousand five hundred rupees, for 
every two hundred and fifty rupees, or 
part thereof,  in excess of seven thousand 
five hundred rupees, up to ten thousand 
rupees.  
 
When such amount or value exceeds ten 
thousand  rupees, for every five hundred 
rupees, or part thereof, in excess of ten 
thousand  rupees,  up to twenty thousand 
rupees.  
 
When such amount or value exceeds 
twenty thousand rupees, fo r  every one 
thousand rupees, or part thereof, in 
excess of twenty thousand rupees, up to 
thirty thousand rupees  
When such amount value  exceeds thirty 
thousand  rupees, for every two thousand 
rupees, or part thereof  in  excess of  Six annas.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 59]
irty 
thousand  rupees, for every two thousand 
rupees, or part thereof  in  excess of  Six annas.  
 
 
 
Six annas.  
 
 
 
 
One rupee.  
 
 
 
 
One rupee  
two annas.  
 
 
 
Seven rupees  
eight annas.  
 
 
 
 
 
Fifteen rupees.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Twenty two rupees  
 eight annas.  
 
 
 
 
Thirty rupees.  
 
 
 
Thirty rupees.  
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 60]
 
 
  
60 
 thirty thousand rupees,   up to fifty 
thousand rupees.  
When such amount or value exceeds fifty 
thousand rupees for every five thousand  
rupees, or part thereof , in excess of fifty 
thousand rupees.   
 
 
Thirty -seven rupees  
eight annas.”  
 
 
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 16]  
Insertion of new Articles 3 and 3A in Schedule 1 of Act VII of 1870 .-- In Schedule I of the principal 
Act after Article 2, the following Articles shall be inserted: — 
 
“3. Plaint, or written statement pleading 
a  set -off or counterclaim in any suit of 
the nature cognizable by a court of small 
causes when the amount or value  of the 
subject matter does not exceed Rs.500.  
 When the amount or value of the subject 
matter in dispute does not exceed five rupees . 
When such amount or value exceeds five 
rupees, for every five rupees, or part 
thereof, in excess of five rupees, up to 
one hundred rupees.  
When such amount or value exceeds one 
hundred rupees, for every ten rupees, or 
part thereof, in excess of one hundred 
rupees up to five hundred rupees.  
When such value exceeds three thousand 
rupees but does not exceed four 
thousand rupee s. 
 Six annas.  
 
 
Six annas.  
 
 
 
Twelve annas.  
 
 
 
 
Fifty rupees  
 
. 
 
3A. plaint  or memorandum of appeal in 
each of the following suits: — 
(i)to obtain a  declaratory decree where 
no consequential relief is prayed.  
(ii) to set aside an award.  
(iii) to obtain a declaration that an 
alleged  adoption is invalid or never in 
fact took place or to obtain a declaration 
that an adoption is valid.  
 When such value exceeds four thousand 
rupees for every two thousand rupees, or 
part thereof, in excess of four thousand 
rupees, upto ten thousand rupees.  
When such value exceeds ten thousand 
rupees, for every ten thousand rupees, or 
part thereof in excess of ten thousand 
rupees, up to fifty thousand rupees.  
When such value exceeds fifty thousand 
rupees, for every fifty thousa nd rupees, 
or part 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 60]
upees.  
When such value exceeds fifty thousand 
rupees, for every fifty thousa nd rupees, 
or part thereof, in excess of fifty 
thousand rupees.  Fifty rupees.  
 
 
 
 
Fifty rupees.  
 
 
 
 
One hundred rupees.”  
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 1 7] 
Amendment of Article  6 of Schedule I of Act VII of 1870 .—In the third column of Article 6 of 
Schedu le I of the principal Act — 
(a) for the words “four annas” the words “six annas” shall be substituted;  
(b) for the words “eight annas” the words “twelve annas” shall be substituted;  
(c) for  the words “one rupee” the words “one rupee eight annas” shall be su bstituted.  
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 1 8] 
Amendment of Article 7 of Schedule I of Act VII of 1870 . —For  Article 7 of Schedule I of the principal 
Act the  following Article shall be substituted: — 
 
“copy of decree or order 
having the fore of a decree.  When such decree or order is made by a 
Munsif’s Court or a Court of Small 
Causes, or a Revenue Court — 
(a) If the amount or value of the              
subject -matter of the suit wherein 
such decree or order is made does 
not exceed one hundred  rupees;   
 
 
Eight annas.  
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 61]
 
 
  
61 
 (b) If such amo unt or value exceeds 
one hundred rupees but  does not 
exceed one thousand ;  
(c) If such amount or value exceeds 
one thousand rupees.  
When such decree or order is made by the 
Court of a District Judge or of a 
Subordinate Judge.  
 
When such decree or order is mad e by a 
High Court.  One rupee.  
 
 
One rupee  
eight annas.  
 
 
 
 
Three rupees, if the amount 
or value of the subject 
matter of the suit  wherein 
such decree or order is 
made does not exceed one 
thousand  rupees; six  
rupees, if such amount or 
value exceeds one thousand  
rupees.”  
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 1 9] 
 Amendment of Article 9 of Schedule I of Act VII of 1870 .—In the third column of Article 9 of 
Schedule I of the principal Act, for the words, “eight annas” the words “twelve annas” sh all be 
substituted.  
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 20] 
Amendment of table of rates and insertion of new tables in Schedule I of Act VII of 1870 .--For 
the table of rates of advalorem fees annexed to Schedule I of the principal Act, the table set forth in 
Schedule B to this Act shall be substituted.  
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 21] 
Amendment of Schedule I . —In Schedule I to the Court Fees Act, 1870  (7 of 1870)  as amended in 
its application to  the State of Orissa (hereinafter referred  as the principal Act) ,— 
(a)  in article 1, for the words “Thirty -seven rupees fifty  naye paise” occurring as the last entry 
under the heading “ proper fee” the words “ One hundred rupees” shall be substituted;  
(b) in the foot note to the Table of rates of advalorem  fees appe aring under heading “(a) Table of 
rates of advalorem fees leviable on plaints, etc., mentioned in Article   1 of Schedule 1”, for the words 
“thirty -seven rupees fifty naye paise”, the words “ one  hundred rupees” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Orissa  Act 34 o f 1992, s. 2]  
Haryana  
Amendment of  Schedule I to  the Central Act  7 of 1870  .— In schedule I to the Court Fees Act, 187
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 61]
Amendment of  Schedule I to  the Central Act  7 of 1870  .— In schedule I to the Court Fees Act, 1870, 
for "Table of rates of ad-valorem  fees leviable on the institution of suits," the following Table shall be 
substituted, namely : -- 
“Table of rates of ad-valorem  fees leviable on the institution of suits  
When the  amount or 
value  
of the subject matter  
exceeds  But does not 
exceed  Proper fee  
1 2 3 
Rupees  Rupees  Rupees  
1 15,000  2.5% 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 62]
 
 
  
62 
 And when the amount or value of t he subject matter exceeds seventy -five lakh rupees, the proper fee 
leviable shall be two la kh six thousand three hundred  rupees plus twenty five rupees for each five hundred 
rupees or part thereof  in excess of seventy -five lakh rupees.".  
[Vide Haryana Act 16 of 2009, s. 2]  
Bihar  
Amendment in Schedule -I and II of the Court -Fees Act, 1870.  - Any fee payable under Schedule -I and 
Schedule -II of the Court -Fees Act, 1870 calculated in paise shall be rounded off in rupee.  
[Vide Bihar Act 13 of 2010, s. 2]  
Substitu tion of Schedule I and II appended to Act VII, 1870.  - In the Court Fees Act, 1870 (Act VII of 
1870) for Schedule I and II the following shall be substituted, namely - 
[Schedule -1] 
Ad valorem Fees  
No. Subject   
Description   
Rates  
1 Plaint, written 
statement , pleading of 
an adjustment or 
counter claim or 
memorandum of 
appeal or a cross 
objection, or plaint or  
When the amount 
or value of the 
subject matter in 
dispute -   
 
(i) up to Rs. 
30,000/ - (Rupees 
thirty thousand)   
15% of the amount or value  15,000  27,000  375+3.5% of the amount exceeding Rs. 15, 000 
27,000  39, 000  795+4.5% of the amount exceeding Rs. 27,000  
39,000  51, 000  1335+5.5% of the amount exceeding Rs. 39,000  
51, 000  63, 000  1995+6.5% of the amount exceeding Rs. 51,000  
63, 000 75,000  2775+7.5 % of the amount exceeding Rs. 63,000  
75, 000  5,00,000  3675+6.5% of the amount exceeding Rs. 75,000  
5,00,000  10,00,000  31300+5.5% of the amount exceeding R s. 
5,00,000  
10,00,000  20,00,000  58800+4.5% of the amount exceeding Rs. 
10,00,000  
20,00,000  30,00,000  103800+3.5% of the amount exceeding Rs. 
20,00,000  
30,00,000  45,00,000  138000+2.5% of the amount exceeding Rs. 
30,00,000  
45,00,000  60,00,000 176300+1.5% of the amount exceeding Rs. 
45,00,000  
60,00,000  75,00 ,000 198800+0.5% of the amount exceeding Rs. 
60,00,000  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 62]
.5% of the amount exceeding Rs. 
60,00,000  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 63]
 
 
  
63 
 memorandum of 
appeal to set aside an 
award not otherwise 
provided in this Act, 
presented to any Civil 
or Revenue Court 
except those 
mentioned in Section -
3.  
(ii) exceed Rs. 
30,000/ - (Rupees 
thirty thousand) 
but does not 
exceed Rs. 
5,00,000/ - 
(Rupees five lac).   
Rs. 4,500/ - (Rupees four 
thousand five hundred) + 
10% of amount or value 
exceeding Rs. 30,000/ - 
(Rupees thirty thousand).  
 
(iii) exceeds Rs. 
5,00,000/ - (five 
lac) but does not 
exceed Rs. 
20,00,000/ -
(twenty lac).   
Rs. 51,500 (fifty one 
thousand five hundr ed) + 
5% of amount or value 
exceeding Rs. 5,00,000/ - 
(five lac).  
 
(iv) exceeds Rs. 
20,00,000/ - 
(Rupees twenty 
lac), Rs. 1 (one) 
crore.   
Rs. 1,26,500 (Rupees one 
lac twenty six thousand five 
hundred) + 1% of the 
amount or value exceeding 
Rs. 20,00,000/ - (Rupees 
twenty lac).  
 
(v) exceeds Rs. 1 
(one) crore   
Rs. 2,06,500/ - (Rupees two 
lac six thousand five 
hundred) + ½% of the 
amount or value exceeding 
Rs. 1 (one) crore. 
Maximum Rs. 3,00,000/ - 
(rupees three lac.)  
2 Plaint in a suit for 
possession under 
Section 6 of Specific 
Relief Act, 1963.     
According to rates as 
prescribed in item no.1.  
3 Probate of a will or 
letters of 
administration with or 
without will annexed.     
10% of the amount or value 
[minimum Rs. 500/ - 
(Rupees five hundred) & 
maximum Rs. 3, 00,000/ - 
(Rupees three lac)].  
4 Certificate under the 
Succession Certificate 
Act, 1889.     
As prescribed in item no. 3 
on amount or value 
indicated on certificate.  
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 64]
 
 
  
64 
 [Schedule -II] 
Fixed Fees  
No. Subject   
Description   
Fee 
1 (1) Application or petition   
When presented to 
an administrative or 
revenue officer of 
State Government or 
Central Government 
or local body or in a 
civil or criminal or 
small cause court 
other than High 
Court and which is 
not otherwise 
provided -  Rs. 20/ - (Rupees twenty)  
 
(2) When pr esented to the 
High Court -  
(i) Under Article 
226, 227 or under 
Article 226 and 227 
of the Constitution -   
   
(a) To file a general 
application.   
Rs. 500/ - (Rupees five 
hundred).  
   
(b) To file a Public 
Interest Litigation.   
Rs. 1000/ - (Rupees one 
thousa nd). 
   
(ii) On other 
applications   
Rs. 250/ - (Rupees two 
hundred fifty).  
 
(3) Application for Civil 
Revision under Section 115 of 
Civil Procedure Code or 
Criminal Revision under 
Section 397 read with Section 
399/401 of Criminal Procedure 
Code.     
Rs. 25 0/- (Rupees two 
hundred fifty).  
2 Application to call for records 
from any other Court.     
Rs. 50/ - (Rupees fifty).  
3 Application for leave to sue as 
a pauper or for leave to appeal 
as pauper.     
Rs. 20/ - (Rupees twenty).  
4 Plaint or memorandum of 
appea l to establish or prove a 
right of occupancy.     
Rs. 100/ - (Rupees one 
hundred).  
5 Bail Bond or other instruments 
of obligation given in    
Rs. 20/ - (Rupees twenty).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 65]
 
 
  
65 
 pursuance of any order made 
by a Court or Magistrate under 
any section of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 or 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908 and not otherwise 
provided by this Act.  
6 Undertaking under Section 49 
of the Indian Divorce Act, 
1869 (4 of 1869).     
Rs. 100/ - (Rupees one 
hundred).  
7 Affidavit   
(i) In all other courts 
except the High 
Court.   
Rs. 20/ - (Rupees twenty 
Rupees).  
   
(ii) In the High 
Court.   
Rs. 30/ - (Rupees thirty).  
8 Vakalatnama   
(i) In all other courts 
except the High 
Court.   
Rs. 30/ - (Rupees thirty) 
[Court fee Rs. 20/ - + 
Advocate Welfare stamps 
Rs. 10/ -]. 
   
(ii) In the High 
Court.   
Rs. 50/ - (Rupees fifty) 
[Court fee Rs. 30/ -+ 
Advocate Welfare stamp 
Rs. 20/ -]. 
9 All kinds of copies of any 
judgement, decree, order, 
proceeding, the documents 
filed in a proceeding etc.     
Rs. 10/ - (Rupees ten) per 
page.  
10 Cavea t    
Rs. 100/ - (Rupees one 
hundred)  
11 Application for review of 
judgement.     
Rs. 500/ - (Rupees five 
hundred) only.  
12 Memorandum of Appeal when 
the appeal is not from a decree 
or an order having the force of 
a decree and is presented.   
(a) To any Civil  
Court other than a 
High Court, or to 
any Revenue Court, 
or Executive Officer, 
other than the High 
Court or Chief 
Controlling Revenue 
or Executive 
Authority.   
Rs. 50/ - (Rupees fifty).  
   
(b) To High Court or 
Chief Controlling  
Rs. 100/ - (Rupees one 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 66]
 
 
  
66 
 Executive or 
Revenue Authorit y. hundred).  
13 Plaint or Memorandum of 
Appeal in each of the 
following suits: -  
(i) To alter or set 
aside a summary 
decision or order of 
any of the Civil 
Courts (not 
established by 
Letters Patent or not 
a Revenue Court)   
Rs. 500/ - (Rupees five 
hundred).  
   
(ii) To alter or cancel 
any entry in a 
register of the names 
of proprietors of 
revenue paying 
estates.   
Rs. 500/ - (Rupees five 
hundred).  
   
(iii) To obtain a 
declaratory decree 
where no 
consequential relief 
is prayed.   
Rs. 1000/ - (Rupees one 
thousand).  
   
(iv) To set aside an 
award.   
Rs. 1000/ - (Rupees one 
thousand).  
   
(v) To set aside an 
adoption.   
Rs. 1000/ - (Rupees one 
thousand).  
   
(vi) For every other 
suit where it is not 
possible to estimate 
at a money value the 
subject  matter in 
dispute and which is 
not otherwise 
provided for by this 
Act.  
Rs. 1000/ - (Rupees one 
thousand).  
14 Agreement in writing stating a 
question for the opinion of the 
Court under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908.     
Rs. 200/ - (Rupees two 
hundred).  
15 (1) Every petition under the 
Indian Divorce Act, 1869 except 
under Section 44 of the same Act 
and every Memorandum of 
Appeal under Section 55 of the 
same Act.     
Rs. 500/ - (Rupees five 
hundred).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 67]
 
 
  
67 
  
(2) Plaint or Memorandum of 
Appeal under the Parsi Marr iage 
and Divorce Act, 1865.      
[Vide Bihar Act 7 of 1996, s. 2]  
Bihar  
Substitution of Schedules I and II appended to Act VII, 1870. —In the Court Fees Act, 1870 [Act VII 
of 1870] as amended by Court Fees [(Bihar Amendment) Act, 1995] Schedules I and II sh all 
be substituted , by the following: - 
Schedule -I 
Ad Valorem Fees  
No. Subject   
Description   
Rates  
1 Plaint, written statement, 
pleading of an adjustment or 
counter claim or 
memorandum of appeal or a 
cross objection, or plaint or 
memorandum of appeal to se t 
aside an award not otherwise 
provided in this Act, 
presented to any Civil or 
Revenue Court except those 
mentioned in Section -3.  
When the amount or 
value of the subject 
matter in dispute -   
 
(i) up to Rs. 30,000/ - 
(Rupees thirty thousand)   
15% of the amount or 
value  
 
(ii) exceed Rs. 30,000/ - 
(Rupees thirty thousand) 
but does not exceed Rs. 
5,00,000/ - (Rupees five 
lac).  
Rs. 4,500/ - (Rupees 
four thousand five 
hundred) + 10% of 
amount or value 
exceeding Rs. 
30,000/ - (Rupees 
thirty thousand).  
 
(iii) exceeds Rs. 
5,00,000/ - (five lac) but 
does not exceed Rs. 
20,00,000/ -(twenty lac).   
Rs. 51,500 (fifty one 
thousand five 
hundred) + 5% of 
amount or value 
exceeding Rs. 
5,00,000/ - (five lac).  
 
(iv) exceeds Rs. 
20,00,000/ - (Rupees 
twenty lac), Rs. 1 (one)  
crore.   
Rs. 1,26,500 (Rupees 
one lac twenty six 
thousand five 
hundred) + 1% of the 
amount or value 
exceeding Rs. 
20,00,000/ - (Rupees 
twenty lac).  
 
(v) exceeds Rs. 1 (one) 
crore   
Rs. 2,06,500/ - 
(Rupees two lac six 
thousand five 
hundred) + ½% of 
the amou nt or value 
exceeding Rs. 1 (one) 
crore. Maximum Rs. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 68]
 
 
  
68 
 3,00,000/ - (rupees 
three lac.)  
2 Plaint in a suit for possession 
under Section 6 of Specific 
Relief Act, 1963.     
According to rates as 
prescribed in item 
no.1.  
3 Probate of a will or letters of 
admini stration with or without 
will annexed.     
10% of the amount or 
value [minimum Rs. 
500/- (Rupees five 
hundred) & 
maximum Rs. 
3,00,000/ - (Rupees 
three lac)].  
4 Certificate under the 
Succession Certificate Act, 
1889.     
As prescribed in item 
no. 3 on amount or 
value indicated on 
certificate.  
 
Schedule -II 
Fixed Fees  
No. Subject   
Description   
Fee 
1 (1) Application or petition   
When presented to an 
administrative or 
revenue officer of State 
Government or Central 
Government or local 
body or in a civil or 
crimin al or small cause 
court other than High 
Court and which is not 
otherwise provided -  
Rs. 20/ - (Rupees 
twenty)  
 
(2) When presented to the 
High Court -  
(i) Under Article 226, 
227 or under Article 
226 and 227 of the 
Constitution -   
   
(a) To file a general 
application.   
Rs. 500/ - (Rupees 
five hundred).  
   
(b) To file a Public 
Interest Litigation.   
Rs. 1000/ - (Rupees 
one thousand).  
   
(ii) On other 
applications   
Rs. 250/ - (Rupees 
two hundred fifty).  
 
(3) Application for Civil 
Revision under Section    
Rs. 250/ - (Rupees 
two hundred fifty).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 69]
 
 
  
69 
 115 of C ivil Procedure 
Code or Criminal 
Revision under Section 
397 read with Section 
399/401 of Criminal 
Procedure Code.  
2 Application to call for 
records from any other 
Court.     
Rs. 50/ - (Rupees 
fifty).  
3 Application fo r leave to 
sue as a pauper or for 
leave to appeal as pauper.     
Rs. 20/ - (Rupees 
twenty).  
4 Plaint or memorandum of 
appeal to establish or 
prove a right of 
occupancy.     
Rs. 100/ - (Rupees 
one hundred).  
5 Bail Bond or other 
instruments of obligation 
given  in pursuance of any 
order made by a Court or 
Magistrate under any 
section of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 
or the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 and not 
otherwise provided by this 
Act.    
Rs. 20/ - (Rupees 
twenty).  
6 Undertaking under 
Section 49 of the Indian 
Divorce Act, 1869 (4 of 
1869).     
Rs. 100/ - (Rupees 
one hundred).  
7 Affidavit   
(i) In all other courts 
except the High Court.   
Rs. 20/ - (Rupees 
twenty Rupees).  
   
(ii) In the High Court.   
Rs. 30/ - (Rupees 
thirty).  
8 Vakalatnama   
(i) In all ot her courts 
except the High Court.   
Rs. 30/ - (Rupees 
thirty) [Court fee Rs. 
20/- + Advocate 
Welfare stamps Rs. 
10/-]. 
   
(ii) In the High Court.   
Rs. 50/ - (Rupees 
fifty) [Court fee Rs. 
30/-+ Advocate 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 70]
 
 
  
70 
 Welfare stamp Rs. 
20/-]. 
9 All kinds of copies of any 
judgement, decree, order, 
proceeding, the 
documents filed in a 
proceeding etc.     
Rs. 10/ - (Rupees 
ten) per page.  
10 Caveat     
Rs. 100/ - (Rupees 
one hundred)  
11 Application for review of 
judgement.     
Rs. 500/ - (Rupees 
five hundred) only.  
12 Memorandum o f Appeal 
when the appeal is not 
from a decree or an order 
having the force of a 
decree and is presented.   
(a) To any Civil Court 
other than a High 
Court, or to any 
Revenue Court, or 
Executive Officer, 
other than the High 
Court or Chief 
Controlling Revenue or 
Executive Authority.   
Rs. 50/ - (Rupees 
fifty).  
   
(b) To High Court or 
Chief Controlling 
Executive or Revenue 
Authority.   
Rs. 100/ - (Rupees 
one hundred).  
13 Plaint or Memorandum of 
Appeal in each of the 
following suits: -  
(i) To alter or set aside 
a summary decision or 
order of any of the 
Civil Courts (not 
established by Letters 
Patent or not a 
Revenue Court)   
Rs. 500/ - (Rupees 
five hundred).  
   
(ii) To alter or cancel 
any entry in a register 
of the names of 
proprietors of revenue 
paying estates.   
Rs. 500/- (Rupees 
five hundred).  
   
(iii) To obtain a 
declaratory decree 
where no consequential 
relief is prayed.   
Rs. 1000/ - (Rupees 
one thousand).  
   
(iv) To set aside an 
award.   
Rs. 1000/ - (Rupees 
one thousand).  
   
(v) To set aside an  
Rs. 100 0/- (Rupees 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 71]
 
 
  
71 
 adoption.  one thousand).  
   
(vi) For every other 
suit where it is not 
possible to estimate at 
a money value the 
subject matter in 
dispute and which is 
not otherwise provided 
for by this Act.   
Rs. 1000/ - (Rupees 
one thousand).  
14 Agreement in writing 
stating a question for the 
opinion of the Court 
under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908.     
Rs. 200/ - (Rupees 
two hundred).  
15 (1) Every petition under 
the Indian Divorce Act, 
1869 except under Section 
44 of the same Act and 
every Memorandum of 
Appeal under  Section 55 
of the same Act.     
Rs. 500/ - (Rupees 
five hundred).  
 
(2) Plaint or 
Memorandum of Appeal 
under the Parsi Marriage 
and Divorce Act, 1865.      
 
[Vide Bihar Act 4 of 2008, s. 2]  
Bihar  
Amendment of Articles 1 and 6 of Schedule I to Act VII of 18 70. - For the 'proper fee' set forth in 
Schedule I to the Court -fees Act, 1870 (VII of 1870), as amended from time to time in its application to 
the State of Bihar (hereinafter referred to as the said Act), for Articles 1 and 6 and shown in the second 
column of the Schedule A to this Act, the 'proper fees' shown against them in the third column of the said 
Schedule A shall be substituted.  
[Vide Bihar Act 7 of 1958, s. 2]  
Amendment of the Table of Rates in Schedule I to Act VII of 1870.  - For the 'proper fee s' set forth in 
the table of rates annexed to Schedule to the said Act and shown in the first column of Schedule B to this 
Act, the 'proper fees' shown in the second column of the Schedule B shall be substituted.  
[Vide Bihar Act 7 of 1958, s. 3]  
 
Amendment  in Schedule -I and II of the Court -Fees Act, 1870.  - Any fee payable under Schedule -I and 
Schedule -II of the Court -Fees Act, 1870 calculated in paise shall be rounded off in rupee.  
[Vide Bihar Act 13 of 2010, s. 2]  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 72]
 
 
  
72 
 Haryana  
Amendment of Schedule I to 7 of  1870 .—In Schedule I to the principal Act, -- 
 
(i) after serial number 5 and entries thereagainst, the following serial number and entries 
thereagainst shall be inserted, namely: -- 
 
1 2 3 4 
“5-A Copy of order of the 
Rent  Controller  -- Five rupees.";  
 (ii) against serial number 8, under columns 3 and 4, for the existing  
entries, the following entries shall be substituted, namely : — 
3  4  
“for every Page   Two rupees." .  
Bihar  
 Amendment of item 2, 3 and 4 of Schedule I appended to Act VII, 1870 (as amend ed by Bihar 
Amendment Act, 1996 ).—In the Court fees act, 1870 (as amended by Bihar Amendment Act, 1995) for 
the items 2, 3 and 4 of Schedule I the following shall be substituted, namely: - 
 
(1) Plaint in a suit for possession under 
Specific Relief Act, 1963 , Section 6.  A fee of half of the prescribed fee in the foregoing 
Scale in item I.  
(2) Application for review of judgement if 
presented on or after the ninetieth day from the 
date of the decree.  The fee leviable on the plaint or memorandum of 
appeal as it em 1.  
(3) Application for review of judgement, if 
presented before the ninetieth day from the 
date of the decree.  One half of the fee leviable on the plaint or 
memorandum of appeal as item 1.  
 
[Vide Bihar Act 9 of 2001, s. 2]  
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 73]
 
 
  
73 
  
 
  

<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 74]
 
 
  
74 
  
 
  

<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 75]
 
 
  
75 
  
 
  

<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 76]
 
 
  
76 
  
  

<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 77]
 
 
  
77 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
Orissa  
Amendment of Article 1 of Schedule II of Act VII of 1870. —. In Article I of Schedule II of the 
principal Act, — 
(a)  in the third column opposite clause (a), for the words “one annas” the words “two annas” 
shall be substituted;  
(b)  in the third column opposite clause (b), for the words, “eight annas” the words “in the 
case of a criminal complaint and appeal one rupee and in other  cases twelve annas” shall 
be substituted;  
(c)  in the third column opposite clause (c) for the words “one rupee”  the words “one rupee 
eight annas” shall be substituted;  
(d)  in the second and third columns, for clause (d) and the words opposite the said clause the 
following shall be substituted: — 
 “(d) (i) When presented to a High Court under section 115 of the Code  of Civil Procedure, 
1908 (5 of 1908),  for  revision of an order, — 
 
(a) When the value of the suit 
or proceedings to which 
the order relates does not 
exceed one thousand 
rupees.  
(b) When the value of the suit 
or proceeding exceeds one 
thousand rupees.  
(ii) when p resented to a   High Court 
otherwise than under that section.  Five rupees.  
 
 
Ten rupees.  
 
Two rupees .” 
 
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 2 2] 
 
Amendment of Article 1A of Schedule II of Act VII of 1870. --In the third column of Article 1A of 
Schedule II of the  principal Act, for the words “twelve annas” the words “one rupee” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 2 3] 
Amendment of Article 10 of Schedule II of Act VII of 1870 .—In Article 10 of Schedule II of the 
principal Act, — 
In the third column — 
  (i) for the words “eight annas” the words “one rupee” shall be substituted;  
  (ii) for the words “one rupee” the words “two rupees “ shall be substituted;  
(iii) for the words “two rupees” the words “three rupees” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 2 4] 
Amendment of Article 11 of Schedule II of Act VII of 1870. — In Article 11 of Schedule II of
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 77]
. 2 4] 
Amendment of Article 11 of Schedule II of Act VII of 1870. — In Article 11 of Schedule II of the 
principal Act — 
(a) for the entry in the first column, the following entry shall be substituted: — 
“Memorandum of appeal when the appeal is from a n order inclusive of an order determining 
any question under section 47 or section 144 of the Code of Civil Procedure (5 of 1908) and is 
presented”.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 78]
 
 
  
78 
 (c) in the third column — 
(i) for the words “eight annas” the words “one rupee” shall be substituted;  
(ii) for the words “two rupees” the words “four rupees” shall  be substituted.  
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 25]  
Amendment of Article 11 of Schedule II of Act VII of 1870. --In the third column in Article 2 of 
Schedule II of the principal Act, for the words “f ive rupees” the words “ten rupees” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 2 6] 
Amendm ent of Article 14 of Schedule I  of Act VII of 1870. -- In the third column in Article 14 of 
Schedule II of the principal Act, for the words “five rupees” the w ords “ten rupees” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 27]  
Amendment of Article 17 and insertion of new Article 17A in Schedule II of Act VII of 1870. --
For Article 17 of Schedule  II of the principal Act the following two Articles shall be substituted: — 
“17. Plaint or memorandum of 
appeal in a suit, — 
(i) to alter or set aside a summary 
decision or order of any of the 
Civil Courts not established by 
Letters Patent or of any Revenue 
Court;  
 
(ii) to alter or cancel any entry in a 
register of th e  names of the 
proprietors of revenue –paying  
estates;  
(iii) for relief under section 14 
Endowment Act, 1868  (XX of 
1868) , or under section 91 of the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.  
 
 
17A.Plaint or memorandum of 
appeal in every suit where it is not 
possib le to estimate at a money -
value the subject -matter in dispute 
and which is not otherwise 
provided for by this Act.        
 
 
                                                    Fifteen rupees.  
 
 
 
                                                       Fifteen  rupees.  
 
 
                                                       Fifteen rupees.  
                                                          
 
 
 
    
When the plaint is 
prescribed to, or the 
memorandum of 
appeal is against the 
decree of — 
(a) a Revenue 
court in 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 78]
 
prescribed to, or the 
memorandum of 
appeal is against the 
decree of — 
(a) a Revenue 
court in th e 
district of 
Ganjam or 
Koraput;  
(b) any other 
Revenue 
court, or any 
court of a 
District 
Judge , sub -
ordinate 
Judge or 
Munsif.  Ten rupees.  
 
 
 
 
Fifteen rupees if the 
value for purposes of 
jurisdiction does not 
exceed four thousand 
rupees, one hundred 
rupees if such value 
exceeds four 
thousand rupees.”  
 
 
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 28] 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 79]
 
 
  
79 
 Amendment of Article 18 of Schedule II of Act VII of 1870 .--In Article 18 of Schedule II of the 
principal Act — 
(a) for the entry in the first column, the following entry sha ll be substituted: — 
“Application under paragraph 17 or paragraph 20 of the Second Schedule to the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908)”;  
(c) in the third column for the words “ten rupees”  shall be substituted . 
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 29] 
Amend ment of Article 19 of Schedule II of Act VII of 1870 .— In the third column in Article 19 of 
Schedule II of the principal Act, for the words “ten rupees” the words “fifteen rupees” shall be 
substituted.  
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 30]  
Amendment of Articl e 19 of Schedule II of Act VII of 1870. —In the third column in Article 20 
Schedule II of the principal Act, for the words “twenty rupees” the words “thirty rupees” shall be 
substituted.   
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939 , s. 31]  
Amendment of Article 21 of Schedul e II of Act VII of 1870 .--In the third column in Article 21 
Schedule II of the principal Act, for the words “twenty rupees” the words “thirty rupees” shall be 
substituted.  
 
When the amount or value of the 
subject -matter exceeds  But does not exceed  Proper f ee. 
1        2 3 
Rs. 
5,200  
 
5,300  
 
5,400  
 
5,500  
 
5,600  
 
5,700  
 
5,800  
 
5,900  
 
6,000  
 
6,100  
 
6,200  
 
6,300  
 
6,400  
 
6,500  Rs. 
5,300  
 
5,400  
 
5,500  
 
5,600  
 
5,700  
 
5,800  
 
5,900  
 
6,000  
 
6,100  
 
6,200  
 
6,300  
 
6,400  
 
6,500  
 
6,600  Rs.  a.  p.  
426  4  0  
 
433  12  0  
  
441  4  0  
 
418  12  0  
 
456   4  0  
 
463  12  0  
 
471   4  0  
 
478  12   0  
 
486  4  0  
 
493  12  0  
 
501  4  0  
 
508  12  0  
 
516   4  0  
 
523   12   0  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 80]
 
 
  
80 
  
6,600  
 
6,700  
 
6,800  
 
6,900  
 
7,000   
6,700  
 
6,800  
 
6,900  
 
7,000  
 
7,100   
513   4  0  
 
638  12  0  
 
646   4  0  
 
658  12  0  
 
661  4  0  
 
[Vide Orissa Act 5 of 1939, s. 32]  
Amendment of Schedule -II.—In Article  1 of Schedule -II to the Court -fees Act, 1870 (7 of 1870) in 
its application to the State of Odisha, for clause (b) including the entries  under the second and third  
columns thereof, the following shall be substituted under appropriate column, namely: — 
 
“(b) (i) When containing a complaint or charge 
of any offence other than the complaint for the 
offence under section 138 of the Negotiable 
Instrument  Act, 1881        (26 of 1881 ) and an 
offence for which Police Officers may under the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974 ) 
arrest without warrant , and presented to any 
Criminal Court;  
 
Or when presented to a Civil, Criminal or 
Revenue Court or to a Collector, or any  
Revenue Officer having jurisdiction equal  or 
sub-ordinate to a Collector;  
 
Or to any Magistrate in his executive  capacity 
and not otherwise provided for by this Act;  
 
Or  to deposit in Revenue Court or rent; or for 
determination by a Court of the amount of 
compensation to be paid by a landlord to  his 
tenant.  
 
(ii) Complaint for the offence under section 138 
of the Negotiable Instrument  Act, 1881  (26 of 
1881 )— 
       
   When the amount involved In the cheque or  
instrument does not exceed ten thousand ru pees.  
    When the amount involved in the cheque or 
instrument exceeds ten thousand rupees but does 
not exceed one lakh rupees.  
     When the amount involved in the cheque or 
instrument exceeds one lakh rupees.  
 In the case of a criminal complaint and appe al, four 
rupees and in other cases two rupees.  
                                                                               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
One hundred rupees  
         
 Five hundred rupees.  
 
 
  One tho
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 80]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
One hundred rupees  
         
 Five hundred rupees.  
 
 
  One thousand rupees.   
 
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
[Vide Orissa Act 4 of 2013 , s. 2]  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 81]
 
 
  
81 
 Amendment of Schedule II .— In Schedule II to the principal Act, under the heading “proper fee” for 
the entries as mentioned in column (2) of the following Table against the corresponding articles in 
column (1) ther eof, the entries as mentioned against them in column (3) of the said Table shall 
respectively be  substituted: — 
Corresponding Article  
                 
               (1) Entries Occurring under the heading “proper 
fee”  
                   (2) Entries to be substituted  
 
                  (3) 
 
1.(a) 
   (b) 
 
 
 
 
 
   (c)  
   (d) (i) (a)  
              (b) 
         (ii) 
1-A 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. 
3.(a) 
   (b) 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
 
 
10.(a)  
 
     (b) 
    (c) 
11.(a)  
     (b) 
12. 
13. 
14. 
17. 
17.A   (a)  
           (b) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21.  
Forty -five paise  
In case of criminal complaint and appeal, 
two rupees and twenty -five paise and in 
other cases one rupee and twenty -paise.  
 
Two rupees and fifty paise  
Five rupees and fifty paise  
Eleven rupees  
Two rupees and twenty paise    
 
one rupee a nd sixty -five paise in addition to 
any fee levied on the application under 
clause (a), clause (b) or clause (d) of article -
1 of this Schedule.  
 
Fifty -five paise  
One rupee and ten paise  
Two rupees and twenty paise  
 Fifty naye paise  
Fifty naye paise  
Fifty n aye paise  
Fifty naye paise  
 
Two rupees and twenty -five paise  
 
Three rupees and seventy -five paise  
Four rupees  
One rupee  
Four rupees  
Ten rupees  
Five rupees and fifty paise  
Eleven rupees  
Fifteen rupees  
Ten rupees  
Fifteen rupees if the value for purposes of 
jurisdicaiton does not exceed four thousand 
rupees. One hundred rupees if such value 
exceeds four thousand rupees.  
 
Sixteen rupees and fifty paise  
Fifteen rupees  
Thirty -three rupees  
Thirty rupees   
One rupee  
In case of criminal complaint and appeal, 
four rup ees and in other cases two rupees.  
 
 
Five rupees  
Eleven rupees  
Twenty rupees  

<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 81]
l, 
four rup ees and in other cases two rupees.  
 
 
Five rupees  
Eleven rupees  
Twenty rupees  
Four rupees  
 
Three rupees in addition to any fee levied on 
the application under clause (a), clause (b) or 
clause (d) of article -1 of this Schedule.  
 
 
One rupees  
 Two rupees  
Four rupees  
One rupee  
One rupee  
One rupee  
One rupee  
 
Four rupees  
 
Seven rupees  
 
Eight rupees  
Two rupees  
Eight rupees  
Twenty rupees  
Ten rupees  
Twenty -one rupees  
Thirty rupees  
Twenty rupees  
Thirty rupees if the value for purposes of 
jurisdiction does not exceed f our thousand 
rupees. Two hundred rupees if such value 
exceeds four thousand rupees.  
Thirty -two rupees  
Thirty rupees  
Sixty -two rupees  
Sixty rupees  
 
 
 
 
 
[Vide Orissa Act 34 of 1992, s. 3]   
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 82]
 
 
  
82 
 Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of Schedule II of Act (7 of 1870). —In Sche dule II to the Cou rt-Fees Act, as 
amendment in its application to Uttar Pradesh, in Article 1 (Application or Petition), in clause (f),  — 
(a) in sub -clause (i), for the words “Five rupees” the words “One hundred rupees” shall be 
substituted; and  
(b) in sub -clause (i), for the words “Ten rupees” the words “Two hundred rupees” shall be 
substituted.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 14 of 1989, s. 2]  
Haryana  
Substitution of Schedules I and II to Act 7 of 1870. —For Schedules I and II to the principal Act, 
the following S chedules substitution  shall be substituted, namely : — 
SCHEDULE I  
Ad valorem fees  
 
Serial No.  Nature of Document  Amount of value  Proper fee  
1 2 3 4 
 Plaint, written statement, 
pleading or set off or 
counter claim or 
memorandum of appeal 
(not otherwise pro vided 
for in this Act) or of cross 
objections presented to 
any civil or revenue court 
except those mentioned in 
section 3.  When the amount or value 
of the subject matter in 
dispute does not exceed 
one hundred rupees, for 
every ten rupees or part 
thereof,  
When such amount or 
value exceeds one hundred 
rupees, but does not exceed 
five hundred rupees, for 
every twenty rupees, or 
part thereof in excess of 
one hundred rupees, up to 
five hundred rupees.  
when such amount or value 
exceeds three thousand 
rupees, for every one 
hundred  rupees, or part 
thereof, in excess of three 
thousand rupees, up to ten 
thousand  when such 
amount or value exceeds 
three  thousand rupees, for 
every one hundred  rupees, 
or part thereof, in excess of 
three  thousand rupees, up 
to ten thousand  
 
When such amount or 
value exceeds ten  
thousand rupees, for         
every five hundred  
 
 One rupee.  
 
 
 
 
Three r upees.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Twenty rupees .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Seventy -five rupees.  
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 82]
 -five rupees.  
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 83]
 
 
  
83 
 rupees, or part thereof, in 
excess of ten  thousand 
rupees, up to twenty 
thousand  rupees  When 
such amount or value 
exceeds twenty  thousand 
rupees, for every one 
thousan d rupees, or part 
thereof, in excess of twenty  
thousand rupees, up to fifty 
thousand  rupees  When 
such amount or value 
exceeds fifty  thousand 
rupees, for every five 
thousand  rupees, or part 
thereof, in excess of fifty  
thousand rupees  
 One hundred rupees.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Two hundred rupees.  
2.  Plaint in a suit for 
possession under the  
Specific Relief Act, 1963, 
section 6  ---- A fee of one -half the amount 
prescribed in  the f oregoing 
scale.  
3.  Application for review of 
judgement, if presented  
on or after the ninetieth 
day from the  date of the 
decree   The fee leviable on the plaint 
or memorandum  of appeal.  
 
4.  Application for review of 
judgement, if presented  
before the nin etieth day 
from the date  
of the decree   One-half of the fee leviable 
on the plaint or  
memorandum of appeal.  
5.  Copy of translation of 
judgement or order not  
being, or having the force 
of, a decree  When such judgement or 
order is passed by  any civil 
court  other than the High 
Court,  or by the presiding 
officer of any revenue  
court or office, or by any 
other judicial or  executive 
authority  When such 
judgement or order is 
passed by the High Court  Two rupees.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Five rupees.  
6.  Copy of a decree or order  
having the force of  
a decree  When such decree or order 
is made by any  civil court 
other than the High Court 
or by  any revenue court  
When such decree or order 
is made by the  High Court  Five rupees.  
 
 
 
Ten rupees.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 84]
 
 
  
84 
 7.  Copy of any document liable to stamp  
duty under the Indian Stamp Act, 
1899, when  left by any party to a  suit 
or proceeding in  place of the original 
withdrawn, provided  such copy is not 
subject to any duty under  the Indian 
Stamp Act, 1899  (a) When the stamp duty 
chargeable , on the  original 
does not exceed seventy 
five paise  
(b) in any other case  The amount of the duty 
chargeable on the  original,  
 
 
Two rupees.  
 8.  Copy of any revenue or judicial 
proceeding or  order not otherwise 
provided for by this Act,  or copy of 
any account, statement, re port or the 
like, taken out of any civil or criminal  
or revenue court or office, or from the  
office of any chief officer charged  
with the  executive administration of a 
Division  For every three hundred 
and sixty words or One 
rupee  fraction of three 
hundred and sixty words  One rupee.  
9.  probate of a will or letters of 
administration  with or without will 
annexed  When the amount or value 
of the property  in respect 
of which the grant of 
probate or  letters is made 
exceeds one th ousand 
rupees,  but does not 
excee ds ten thousand 
rupees.  
When such amount or 
value exceeds ten  thousand 
rupees, but does not exceed 
fifty thousand rupees  
 
When such amount or 
value exceeds fifty 
thousand rupees  
 three per centum on such 
amount or value.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Five per centum on such 
amoun t or value.  
 
 
 
Six per centum on such  
amount or value.  
10. Certificate u nder part X of the Indian  
Succession Act, 1925.  In any ca se Three per centum on the 
amount or value  of any debt 
or security specified in the  
certificate under section 374 
of that Act, and five per 
centum on t he amount or  
value of any debt or security 
to which the  certificate is 
extended under section 376  
of that Act.  
   Notes .—(1) The amount of a 
debt is i ts amount, including 
interest, on the day on  which 
the inclusion of the debt in  
the certificate is applied for
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 84]
uding 
interest, on the day on  which 
the inclusion of the debt in  
the certificate is applied for, 
so far as such  amount can be 
ascertained.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 85]
 
 
  
85 
    (2) Whether or not any 
power with respect  to a 
security specified in a 
certificate has  been conferred 
under that Act, and where  
such a power has been so 
conferred,  whether the  power 
is for the receiving of  interest 
or dividends on, or for the 
negotiation  or transfer of, the 
security, or for  both 
purposes, the value of the 
security  is its market value  
on the duty on which  the 
inclusion of the security in 
the certified applied fo r, so 
fur as such  value can be 
ascerta ined. 
11. Application to the High Court for the  
exercise of its jurisdiction under 
section 44  of the Punjab Courts Act, 
1918, or to the  court of the Financial 
Commissioner  for the  exercise of its 
revisional jurisdicti on under  section 
84 of the Punjab Tenancy Act, 1887 .  Fifteen rupees.  
 
Table of rates of ad-valorem  fees leviable on the institution of suits  
Value of the subject matter 
exceeds  But does not exceed  Proper fee  
1 2 3 
Rs Rs Rs 
10 10 . 
20 20 2 
30 30 3 
40 40 4 
50 50 5 
60 60 6 
70 70 7 
80 80 8 
90 90 9 
100 100 10 
120 120 13 
140 140 16 
160 160 19 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 86]
 
 
  
86 
 180 180 22 
200 200 25 
220 220 28 
240 240 31 
260 260 34 
280 280 37 
300 300 40 
320 320 43 
340 340 46 
360 360 49 
380 380 52 
400 400 55 
420 420 58 
440 440 61 
460 460 64 
480 480 67 
500 500 78 
550 550 86 
600 600 94 
650 650 102 
700 700 110 
750 750 118 
800 800 126 
850 850 134 
900 900 142 
950 950 150 
1,000  1,000 158 
1050  1,050 166 
1150  1,100 174 
1200  1,200 182 
1250  1,250 190 
1300  1300 198 
1350  1350 206 
1400  1400 214 
1450  1450 222 
1500  1500 238 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 87]
 
 
  
87 
 1550  1550 246 
1600  1600  254 
1650  1650  262 
1700  1700  270 
1750  1750 278 
1800  1800 286 
1850  1850 294 
1900  1900 302 
1950  1950 310 
2000  2000 318 
2050  2050 326 
2100  2100 334 
2150  2150  342 
2200  2200  350 
2250  2250 358 
2300  2300 366 
2350  2350 374 
2400  2400 382 
2450  2450 390 
2500  2500 398 
2550  2550 406 
2600  2600 414 
2650  2650 432 
2700  2700 430 
2750  2750  446 
2800  2800 454 
2850  2850 462 
2900  2900 470 
2950  2950  490 
3000  3000 510 
3100  3100 530 
3200  3200 550 
3300  3300 570 
3400  3400 590 
3500  3500 610 
3600  3600 630 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 88]
 
 
  
88 
 3700  3700  650 
3800  3800  670 
3900  3900 690 
4000  4000 710 
4100  4100 730 
4200  4200 750 
4300  4300 770 
4400  4400 790 
4500  4500 810 
4600  4600 830 
4700  4700 850 
4800  4800 870 
4900  4900 890 
5000  5000 910 
5100  5100 930 
5200  5200  950 
5300  5300 950 
5400  5400 970 
5500  5500 990 
5600  5600 1010  
5700  5700 1030  
5800  5800 1050  
5900  5900 1070  
6000  6000 1090  
6100  6100 1110  
6200  6200 1130  
6300  6300 1150  
6400  6400 1170  
6500  6500 1190  
6600  6600 1210  
6700  6700 1210  
6800  6800 1250  
6900  7000 1290  
7000  7000 1310  
7100  7100 1350  
7200  7200 1370  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 89]
 
 
  
89 
 7300  7300 1390  
7400  7400 1410  
7500  7500 1430  
7600  7600 1450  
7700  7700 1470  
7800  7800 1490  
7900  7900 1510  
8000  8000 1530  
8100  8100 1550  
8200  8200 1570  
8300  8300 1590  
8400  8400 1610  
8500  8500 1630  
8600  8600 1650  
8700  8700 1670  
8800  8800 1690  
8900  8900 1710  
9000  9000 1730  
9100  9100 1750  
9200  9200 1770  
9300  9300 1790  
9400  9400 1810  
9500  9500 1830  
9600  9600 1850  
9700  9700 1870  
9800  9800 1945  
9900  9900 2020  
10000  10000 2095  
10500  10500 2170  
11000  11000 2245  
11500  11500 2320  
12000  12000 2395  
12500  12500 2470  
13000  13000  2545  
13500  13500 2620  
14000  14000 2695  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 90]
 
 
  
90 
 14500  14500 2770  
15000  15000 2845  
15500  15500 2920  
16000  16000 2995  
16500  16500 3070  
17000  17000 3145  
17500  17500 3220  
18000  18000 3295  
18500  18500 3370  
19000  19000 3470  
19500  19500 3570  
20000  20000 3670  
21000  21000 3770  
22000  22000 3870  
23000  23000 3970  
24000  24000 4070  
2500 0 25000  4170  
26000  26000  4270  
27000  27000  4370  
28000  28000  4470  
29000  29000  4570  
30000  30000  4670  
31000  31000  4770  
32000  32000  4870  
33000  33000  4970  
34000  34000  5070  
35000  35000  5170  
36000  36000  5270  
37000  37000  5370  
38000  38000  5470  
39000  39000 5570  
40000  40000  5670  
41000  41000  5770  
42000  42000  5870  
43000  43000  5970  
44000  44000  6070  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 91]
 
 
  
91 
 43000  43000  6170  
44000  44000  6270  
45000  45000  6370  
46000  46000  6570  
47000  47000  6770  
48000  48000  6970  
49000  49000  7170  
50000  50000  7370  
55000  55000  7570  
60000  60000  7770  
65000  65000  7970  
70000  70000  8170  
75000  75000  8370  
80000  80000  8570  
85000  85000  8770  
90000  90000  8970  
95000  95000  9170  
100000  100000  9370  
105000  105000  9370  
110000  110000  9570  
115000  115000  9770  
120000  120000  9970  
125000  125000  10170  
130000  130000  10370  
135000  135000  10570  
140000  140000  10770  
145000  145000  10970  
150000  150000  11370  
155000  155000  11570  
160000  160000  11770  
165000  165000  11970  
170000  170000  12170  
175000  175000  12370  
180000  180000  12570  
185000  185000 12770  
190000  190000  12970  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 92]
 
 
  
92 
 195000  195000  13170  
200000  200000  13370  
205000  205000  13570  
210000  210000  13770  
215000  215000  13970  
220000  220000  14170  
225000  225000  14370  
230000  230000  14570  
235000  235000  14770  
240000  240000  14970  
245000  245000  15170  
250000  250000  15370  
255000  255000  15770  
260000  260000  15970  
265000  265000  16170  
270000  270000  16370  
275000  275000   
280000  280000   
285000  285000   
290000  290000   
295000  295000   
300000  300000   
 
And when  the amoun t or value of the subject -matter exceeds three la cs rupees the proper  fee leviable 
shall he sixteen thousand, three hundred and seventy rupees Plus two hundred  rupees for each five 
thousand rupees or part thereof, in excess of three lacs rupees.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 93]
 
 
  
93 
 SCHEDULE II  
FIXED FEES  
Serial 
No. Nature of the document  Amount of value  Proper fee  
1 2 3 4 
 Application or petition  (a) When presented to any officer of the  Customs 
or Excise Department or to any Magistrate, by any 
person having dealings with the Government and when 
the subject matter of such application relates exclusively 
to those dealings or when presented to any revenue 
officer by any person holding temporarily -settled land 
under direct engagement with Government, and when 
the   subject -matter of the application or petition relates 
exclusively to such engagement; or when presented to 
any municipal commissioner under any Act for the time 
being in force for the conservancy or improvement of 
any place, if the application or petition relates solely to 
such conservancy  or improvement; or whe n presented to 
any civil court other than a principal civil court of 
original  jurisdiction , or to any court of  small causes 
constituted under Act No. 11 of  1865 or under Act No. 
16 of 1868; section 20,  or to a Collector or other 
revenue officer in  relation  to any suit or case in which 
the amount or value of the subject -matter is less  than 
fifty rupees; or when presented to any  civil, criminal or 
revenue court, or to any  Board or executive officer for 
the purpose of  obtaining a copy or translation of any 
judgment, decree or order passed by such court, Board 
or officer, or of any other document on record in such 
court or office  
(b) when containing a complaint or charge of any 
offence  other than an offence for which police officers 
may, under the Code of Crimin al Procedure, 1898, 
arrest without warrant, and presented to any criminal 
court;  
or when presented to a civil criminal or revenue,  
court, or to a Collector or any revenue  officer having 
jurisdiction equal or subordinate  to a Collector, or to 
any Magistrat e in  his executive capacity, and not 
otherwise  provided for by this Act;  
or to deposit in
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 93]
strat e in  his executive capacity, and not 
otherwise  provided for by this Act;  
or to deposit in court, revenue or rent ; or for 
determination by court of the amount of compensation 
to be paid by landlord to his tena nt 
(c) when presented to a Chief Commissioner o r other 
Chief Controller, Revenue or Executive Authority, or to 
a Commissioner of Revenue or Circuit, or to any Chief 
Officer charged with the executive administration of a 
Division and not o therwise provided for by this Act  
(d) when presented to the High Court — 
(i) for winding up a company or under  section  
One Rupees  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Two Rupees  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Three rupees  
Three 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 94]
 
 
  
94 
 397 or 398 of the Companies  Act, 
(ii) under the same Act for taking some  other 
judicial action;  
(iii) under article 226 of the Constitution of  India 
other than petitions for habeas  corpus and petition 
arising out of  criminal proceedings ;  
(iv) petition under  article 227 of the Constitution  
of India ;  
(v) in all other cases  hundred and 
fifty rupees.  
Twenty -five 
rupees.  
One hundred 
rupees  
Fifteen  
rupees  
 
Five rupees  
2. 
 Application to any civil 
court that records  
may be called for from 
another court  When the court grants the application and is  of opinion 
that the transmission of such records  involves the use of 
the post  Two rupees  
3. Application for leave to 
sue as a pauper  .. Two rupees  
4. Application for leave to 
appeal as a pauper  (a) When presented to a District Court  
(b) When Presented to a Commissioner or  the High 
Court  Two rupees  
Five rupees  
5.  Bail-bond or other 
instrument  of obligation  
given in pursuance of an 
order made by a  court or 
Magistrate under any 
section of the  Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 
1898, or the  Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908, 
and not  otherwise 
Provided for by this Act  .. One rupee  
6.  Undertaking under 
section 49 of the Divorce  
Act, 1869   Two rupees  
7. Mukhtarnanca or 
Wakalatnama  When presented for the conduct of any one  case—  
  (a) to any civil or criminal court other than the High 
Court, or to any  revenue court, or to any Collector or 
Magistrate, or oth er Executive Officer, except such as 
are mentioned in clauses (b) and ( c) of this number  
(b) to a Revenue Commissioner or to any  officer 
charged with executive administration  of a Division, not 
being the Chief  Revenue or Executive Authority  
(c) to the High  Court, Chief Commissioner, Boar d of 
reven ue, or other Chief  controlling  Revenue or 
Executive Authority  Two rupees  
 
 
Two rupees  
 
Three rupees  
8. Memorandum of appear 
when the appeal is  not 
from a decree 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 94]
 
 
 
Two rupees  
 
Three rupees  
8. Memorandum of appear 
when the appeal is  not 
from a decree or an order 
having the  (a) to any civil court other than the High  Court, or to 
any revenue court or Executive  Officer other than the 
High Court or Chief  Controlling Revenue or Executive 
Authority  Ten rupees  
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 95]
 
 
  
95 
 force of a decree and is 
presented  (b) to the High Court or Chief Commissioner Fifteen 
rupees  or other Chief Con trolling Revenue or  Executive 
Authority  fifteen  rupees  
9. Caveat  -- Ten rupees  
 
10. Petition in a suit under 
the Converts Marriage  
Dis solution Act, 1866, 
the Divorce Act,  
1869, or the Foreign 
Marriage Act, 1969  -- Twenty -five 
rupees  
11. (i) Every petition or 
application or  
memorandum of appeal 
under the Special  Marriage 
Act, 1954, or the Hindu 
Marriage  Act, 1955, or the 
Dissolution of Muslim  
Marriages Act, 1939  
(ii) Application under 
section 24 of the  Hindu 
Marriage Act, 1955  -- Twenty -five 
rupees  
 
 
 
 
Five rupees  
12.  Plaint or memorandum 
of appeal in each of  
the following suits: — 
 
(i) to alter or set as ide a 
summary decision or  
order of any of the civil 
courts not  established by 
Letters Patent or of any 
revenue  court;  
(ii) to alter or can cel any 
entry in a register  of the 
names of the proprietors 
of revenue  paying 
estates;  
(iii) to obtain a 
declaratory decree where  
no consequential relief is 
prayed;  
(iv) to set aside  an award 
; 
(v) to set aside an 
adoption;  
(vi) every other suit 
where  it is not possible  
to estimate at a money -
value the subject  matter  
in dispute, and which is 
not otherwise  provided 
for by this Act  
 -- 
 
-- 
 
 
 
 
--- 
 
 
-- 
 
-- 
-- 
--  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Twenty -five 
rupees  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 96]
 
 
  
96 
 13. Application under 
section 20 of the 
Arbitration  Act, 1940  -- Twent y-five 
rupees  
14. Agreement in writing 
stating a question for the  
opinion of the court 
under the Code of Civil  
Procedure, 1908  -- Twenty -five 
rupees  
15. Plaint or memorandum 
of appea l in a suit  by 
a reversioner under the 
Punjab Customary  
Law for declarat ion in 
respect of an alienation  
of ancestral land  -- One hundred 
rupees  
16.  Application or 
memorandum of appeal 
for relief under the 
Haryana Urban (Control 
of Rent and Eviction) 
Act, 1973 —  Fifteen 
rupees  
 (i) other than for fixation 
of fair rent  (a) Up  to an annual rent not exceeding  six hundred 
rupees;  Fifteen 
rupees  
 (ii) for fixation of fair 
rent (b) annual rent exceeding six hundred rupees  Fifteen 
rupees  
17. Claims for money 
(whether secured or 
unsecured)  or a claim to 
set off made against such 
claims or counter claims 
under the Banking 
Companies  Act, 1949  (a) Where the amount does not exceed  Rs 2,500 ;  
 
 
(b) where the amount exceeds Rs 2,500  but does not 
exceed Rs 10,000;  
(c) where the amount exceeds Rs 10,000 ;  Twenty -five 
rupees  
Fifty -rupees  
One hundred 
rupees  
18. Memorandum of appeal 
from an order or decision  
passed under the 
Provisions of section  
45-B of the Banking 
Companies Act, 1949  (a) Where the amount exceeds Rs 5,000  put does not 
exceed Rs 10,000;  
(b) where the amount exceeds Rs 10,000  One hundred 
rupees  
Two hundred 
rupees. 
[Vide Haryana Act 11 of 1974, s. 3] 
Haryana  
Amendment of Schedule I to Act 7 of 1870 .— In Schedule I to the principal Act, — 
(a) against serial number 5, under columns 3 and 4, for the existing entries, the following  entry  
shall be substituted, namely :-- 
 "when such judgement or order is passed by                                                   Two rupees.";   
 any civil court or by the presiding officer  of any revenue court or office,  
or by  any other judicial or ex ecutive authori
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 96]
presiding officer  of any revenue court or office,  
or by  any other judicial or ex ecutive authority  
(b) against serial number 6, under columns 3 and 4, for the  existing entries, the following entry 
shall be substituted,  namely : —  
"when such decree or order is made by any Five rupees.";  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 97]
 
 
  
97 
 civil court or by any revenue court  
(c) against se rial number 11, under column 2, the words and figures "to the High Court for the 
exercise of its jurisdiction under section 44 of the Punjab Courts Act, 1918, or" shall be omitted.  
[Vide Haryana Act 22 of 1974, s. 4]  
Bihar  
Amendment of Article 1 of Schedul e II to Act VII of 1870.  - For the 'proper fee' set forth in Schedule II 
to the said Act for Article 1 and shown in the second column of Schedule C to this Act, the 'proper fee, 
shown in the third column of the said Schedule C shall be substituted.  
Schedul e A 
[See Section 2]  
Article  Proper fee set forth in Schedule I to the 
Court -fees Act, 1870  Proper fees to be substituted  
1 2 3 
 
Six annas  40 N.P.  
1 Six annas  40 N.P.  
6 Six annas  40 N.P.  
Schedule B  
[See Section 3]  
Table of rates of  ad valorem  fees levi able on the institution of suits: - 
 
Proper fees set forth in the table  Proper fees to be substituted  
1 2 
Rs. a. p. Rs. N.P. 
0 6 0 0 40 
1 2 0 0 15 
1 14 0 1 90 
2 10 0 2 50 
3 6 0 3 40 
4 2 0 4 15 
4 14 0 4 90 
5 10 0 5 65 
6 0 0 6 40 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 98]
 
 
  
98 
 7 2 0 7 15 
Sched ule C  
[See Section 4]  
Article  Proper fees set forth in Schedule II to the 
Court -fees Act, 1870  Proper fees to be 
substituted  
1 2 3 
1 Two annas  15 N.P  
[Vide Bihar Act 7 of 1958, s. 4]  
Haryana  
Amendment of Schedule I to Central Act 7 of 1870 .—In Schedule I to the principal act, -- 
(i) after serial number 5 and entries thereagainst, the following serial number and entries thereagainst 
shall be inserted, namely: -- 
1 2 3 4 
“5-A Copy of order of the 
Rent Controller  .. Five rupees,”  
 (ii) against serial numbe r 8, under columns 3 and 4, for the existing entries, the 
following entries shall be substituted, namely: -- 
 3 4  
“For every age       Two rupees.”.  
[Vide Haryana Act 3 of 1990, s. 3] 
 
Haryana  
Amendment of Schedule II to Central Act 1 of 1870. — In Schedul e II to the principal Act, — 
(i) against serial number I, under columns 3 and 4, — 
(a) against entry (b), for the words "Two rupees", the words  "Ten rupees" shall be substituted ;  
  (b) against entry (c), fo r the words "Three rupees", the wor ds "Fifteen rupe es" shall b e 
substituted ;  
(ii) against serial  number 3, under column 4, for the words "Two  rupees", the words "Five rupees" 
shall be substituted ;  
(iii) against serial number 4, under column 4, for the words "Two  rupees", the words "Ten 
rupees" shall be s ubstituted ;  
(iv) against serial number 5, under column 4, for the words "One  rupee", the words "Five rupees" 
shall be substituted ;  
(v) against serial number 6, under column 4, for the words "Two  rupees", the words "Ten rupees" 
shall be substituted ;  
(vi) against serial number 8, under columns 3 and 4, — 
(a) against entry (a), for the words "Ten rupees", the words  “Fifteen rupees" shall be 
substituted ;  
(b) against entry (b), for the words “Fifteen rupees", the words  "Twenty rupees" shall be 
substituted.  
[Vide Haryana Act 3 of 1990, s. 4] 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 98]
ide Haryana Act 3 of 1990, s. 4] 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 99]
 
 
  
99 
 Haryana  
Amendment of Schedule II to Act 7 of 1870 .—In Schedule II to the principal Act, — 
(a) against serial number 1, entry (d) shall be omitted ;  
(b) against serial number 4, in entry  (b), the words "or the High Court"  shall be omitted ; 
(c) against serial number 7, — 
(i) in item (a), the words "other than the High Court" shall be  omitted ;  
(ii) in item  (c), for the words "High Court, Chief Commissioner",  the words "Chief 
Commissioner" shall be substituted ;  
(d) against se rial number 8, —  
(i) in entry (a), the words "other than the High Court" occurring  twice, shall be omitted ;  
(ii) in entry  (b), the words "High Court or" shall in omitted ; and  
(E) against serial number 15, for the words "one hundred rupees",  the words "Th irty rupees" shall 
be substituted.  
[Vide Haryana Act 22 of 1974, s. 5]  
 Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of Schedule IX of Act no. VII of 1870. —In Schedule II to the Court Fees Act, 1870, as 
amended in its application to Uttar Pradesh, in Article I (“Application or  petition”) — 
(i) in clause (c), in the second column, for sub -clause (2) and the entry relating to it in the third column, 
the following sub -clause and entry shall be substituted, namely: - 
 
Col. 2  Col. 3  
“(2) Under article 226 or article 227 of 
the Consti tution, or by way of special 
appeal against a judgement or order 
including a judgment or order passed on 
a petition filed before the 
commencement of the Court Fees (Uttar 
Pradesh Amendment( act, 1970 passed 
by a single Judge of the High Court 
thereon.”  One hundred rupees.  
(ii) at the end, the following proviso thereto shall be inserted, namely: -- 
Provided that – 
(i) no court fee shall be payable under clause (c) on an application or petition under section 4591 
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, or un der article 226 of the Constitution for writs in the 
nature of habeas corpus or in relation to any proceeding relating thereto;  
(ii) the court fee payable on an 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 99]
habeas corpus or in relation to any proceeding relating thereto;  
(ii) the court fee payable on an application or petition for adjournment of hearing of any case 
shall be double the court fee pa yable on an ordinary application or petition under clause (b), clause 
(c), clause (d) or sub -clause (5) of clause (c), as the case may be,  
 
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 34 of 1970, s. 2]   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 100]
 
 
  
100 
  
 
 

<|CHUNK|>
[THE COURT-FEES ACT, 1870.pdf - page 101]
 
 
  
101 
  

<|CHUNK|>
[THE DEHRA DUN ACT, 1871.pdf - page 1]
1 
  
THE DEHRA DUN ACT, 1871  
_________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS.  
_________  
 
 
SECTIONS.  
1. Extension of Regulations and Acts in force in Saharanpur to Dehra Dun . 
2. Jurisdiction of High Court and Board of Revenue over Dehra Dun . 
3. District Court of Saharanpur  to be District Court of Dehra Dun . 
4. Exemption of Jaunsar Bawar . 
      
 
 
 
 
. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DEHRA DUN ACT, 1871.pdf - page 2]
2 
 THE DEHRA DUN ACT , 1871  
ACT NO. 21 OF 1871  
 [11th July , 1871. ] 
 
An Act to give va lidity to the operation of the G eneral Regula tions and Acts within the Dehra  Dun.  
 
Preamble. —WHEREAS  it is necessary to give validity to the operation of the General Regulations and 
Acts within the district under the Superintende nt of the Dehra Dun 1***; It is hereby enacted  as follows:  — 
1.  Extension of Regulations and Acts in force in Saharanpur to Dehra Dun . —The Regulations 
and Acts now in force in the district of Saharanpur are hereby declared to e xtend to the said di strict of Dehra 
Dun 2***. 
2. Jurisdiction of High Court and Board of Revenue over Dehra Dun. —The High Cou rt and the 
Board of Revenue of 3[Uttar Pradesh] shall exercise 4*** respectively, in the said district, all the powers 
which the said High Court or Board of Revenue are at present, respectively, authori zed to exercise in any 
part of 3[Agra].  
3. District Court of Saharanpur to be District Court of Dehra Dun .—The District Court of  
Saharanpur shall be 5*** the District  Court of such district until the State Government otherwise                         
directs 6***. 
4. Exemption of Jaunsar Bawar .—Nothing in this Act shall apply to that portion of  the Dehra Dun 
district called 7Jaunsar Bawar   8***. 
                                                           
1. The words “and to indemnify all officers and other persons who have acted in the said district under the said Regulations and  
Acts” rep. by Act 16 of 1874.  
2. The words “and no judgment heretofore given, order passed or proceeding had in the said district , shall be deemed to have been 
or to be invalid merely because any Regulation or Act, under or in reference to which such judgment, order or proceeding was 
given, passed or had, was not in force at the time of such judgment, order or proceeding was given, passed or had, was not in 
force at the time of such judgment, order or proceeding, or on the ground o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DEHRA DUN ACT, 1871.pdf - page 2]
ssed or had, was not in 
force at the time of such judgment, order or proceeding, or on the ground of a  defect of jurisdiction in ay Court or office ” rep. 
by Act 12 of 1891.  
3. Subs, by the A. O. 1950 for “the North -Western Provinces ”. 
4. The words “and shall be deemed to have been heretofore authori sed to exercise” rep., ibid. 
5. The words “deemed to have been heretofore the District Court of the said district of Dehra Dun and” rep., ibid. 
6. The words “and may subject to the provisions of Act 6 of 1871,  hear appeals from decisions given in the said district before                  
the passing of this Act” rep. by Act 12 of 1891.  
7. “Jaunsar Bawar” was one of the Scheduled Districts of the State of Uttar Pradesh,  see the Scheduled Districts Act, 1874 (14 of    
1874), I Schedule, Pt. IV, but has ceased to be so under the Constitution of India.  
8. The words “and referred to in s. 11 of Act 24 of 1864” rep. by Act 12 of 1891.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DEKKHAN AGRICULTURISTS’ RELIEF ACT, 1879.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE DEKKHAN AGRICULTURISTS ’ RELIEF ACT, 1879  
______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIO NS 
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
Commencement.  
Local Extant.  
2. [Repealed .]. 
3. [Repealed .]. 
4. [Repealed .]. 
5. [Repealed .]. 
6. [Repealed .]. 
7. [Repealed .]. 
8. [Repealed .]. 
9. [Repealed .]. 
10. [Repealed .]. 
11. Agriculturists to be sued where they reside . 
12. [Repealed .]. 
13. [Repealed .]. 
14. [Repealed .]. 
15. [Repealed .]. 
16. [Repealed .]. 
17. [Repealed .]. 
18. [Repealed .]. 
19. [Repealed .]. 
20. [Repealed .]. 
21. [Repealed .]. 
22. [Repealed .]. 
23. [Repealed .]. 
24. [Repealed .]. 
25. [Repealed .]. 
26. [Repealed .]. 
27. [Repealed .]. 
28. [Repealed .]. 
29. [Repealed .]. 
30. [Repealed .]. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DEKKHAN AGRICULTURISTS’ RELIEF ACT, 1879.pdf - page 2]
2 
 31. [Repealed .]. 
32. [Repealed .]. 
33. [Repealed .]. 
34. [Repealed .]. 
35. [Repealed .]. 
36. [Repealed .]. 
37. [Repealed .]. 
38. [Repealed .]. 
39. [Repealed .]. 
40. [Repealed .]. 
41. [Repealed .]. 
42. [Repealed .]. 
43. [Repealed .]. 
44. [Repealed .]. 
45. [Repealed .]. 
46. [Repealed .]. 
47. [Repealed .]. 
48. [Repealed .]. 
49. [Repealed .]. 
50. [Repealed .]. 
51. [Repealed .]. 
52. [Repealed .] 
53. [Repealed .]. 
54. [Repealed .]. 
55. [Repealed .]. 
56. Instruments executed by agriculturist not to be deemed valid unless executed before a 
Village -registrar . 
57. [Repealed .]. 
58. [Repealed .]. 
59. [Repealed .]. 
60. Registration under this Act to be deemed equivalent to registration under Indian 
Registration Act, 1877 . 
61. [Repealed .]. 
62. Exemption of instruments to which the Government or any officer of the Government is a 
party . 
———  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DEKKHAN AGRICULTURISTS’ RELIEF ACT, 1879.pdf - page 3]
3 
 THE DEK KHAN AGRICULTURISTS ’ RELIEF ACT, 1879  
ACT NO. 17 OF 1879  
[29th, October , 1879.]  
An Act for the relief of Indebted Agriculturists in certain parts of the Dekkhan . 
Preamble .—WHEREAS it is expedient to relieve the agricultural classes in certain parts of the 
Dekkhan from indebtedness; It is hereby enacted as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be cited as the  1Dekkhan Agriculturists' Relief Act, 1879: and  
Commencement. —it shall com e into force on the first day of November, 1879.  
Local extent .—2[This section and] sections 11, 56, 60 and 62 extend to  3[the whole of India 
except  4[the territories which, immediately before the 1st November, 1956, were comprised in Part 
B States] ]. The r est of this Act 5extends only to the districts of Poona, Satara, Sholapur and 
Ahmednagar  6[but may, from time to time, be extended wholly or in part by the State 
Government  7*** to any other district or districts in the  8[territories which , immediately before the 
1st November, 1956, were comprised in the  State of Bombay,] ] 9[or to any part or parts of any 
other such district or districts].  
* * *  
2.  Repealed .—[Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced . 
  
                                                           
1. Acts 17 of 1879, 23 of 1881 and 22 of 1882 may be cited collectively as the Dekkhan Agriculturists' Relief Acts, 1879 to 1882 —
see s. 1(1) of the Dekkhan Agriculturists' Relief Act, 1882 (22 of 1882). The Acts of 1879 to 1882 and Act 23 of 1886 may be 
cited collectively as the Dekkhan Agriculturists' Relief Acts, 1879 to 1886 —see s. 1(1) of the Dekkhan Agriculturists' Relief 
Act, 1886 (23 of 1886). The Acts of 1879 to 1886 and Act 6 of 1895 may be cited collectively as the Dekkhan Agriculturists' 
Relief Acts, 1879 to 1895 —see s.
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DEKKHAN AGRICULTURISTS’ RELIEF ACT, 1879.pdf - page 3]
 of 1895 may be cited collectively as the Dekkhan Agriculturists' 
Relief Acts, 1879 to 1895 —see s. 1(1) of the Dekkhan  Agriculturists' Relief Act, 1895 (6 of 1895). The Acts of 1879 to 1895 
and Bom. Act 1 of 1902 may be cited collectively as the Dekkhan Agriculturists' Relief Acts, 1876 to 1902 —see s. 1(1) of the 
Dekkhan Agriculturists' Relief Act, 1902 (Bom. 1 of 1902).  
2. These words were  inserted  by Act 23 of 1881, Section 3, and are to be deemed to have always been  inserted . 
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “all the Provinces of India”.  
4. Subs by the A.L.O. , 1956 for “Part B States”.  
5. The Act was  repealed  in the State  of Bombay, with effect from 27 -5-1950 by the Bombay Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act, 1947  
Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 as amended. Hence the part applicable to that State only has not been reproduced . 
6. Ins.  by Act 23 of 1886, s. 3. 
7. The words “with the previous sanction of the G.G. in C.”  rep.  by Act 38 of 1920, s. 2 and Schedule I.  
8.  Subs . by 2 A.L.O., 1956 , for “State of Bombay” (w.e.f. 1 -11-1956).  
9. Ins.  by Act 23 of 1886, s. 3.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DEKKHAN AGRICULTURISTS’ RELIEF ACT, 1879.pdf - page 4]
4 
 3. Repealed .—[Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .] 
 4. Repealed .—[Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .]  
5. Repealed .—[Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .] 
6. Repealed .—[Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .] 
7. Repealed .—[Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .] 
8. Repealed .—[Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .] 
9. Repealed .—[Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .] 
10. Repealed .—[Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .]  

<|CHUNK|>
[THE DEKKHAN AGRICULTURISTS’ RELIEF ACT, 1879.pdf - page 4]
947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .]  
11. Agriculturists to be sued where they reside .—Every suit of the description mentioned in 
Section 3, clause ( w)1, may, if the defendant, or, when there are several defendants, on e only of 
such defendants, is an agriculturist, be instituted and tried in a Court within the local limits of 
whose jurisdiction such defendant resides, and not elsewhere.  
                                                           
1. Reproduced below: — 
“(w) suits for the recovery of money alleged to be due to the plaintiff — 
on account of money lent or advanced to, or paid for, the defendant, or as the price of goods sold, or  
on an account stated between the plaintiff and defendant, or  
on a written or unwritten engagement for the payment of money no t hereinbefore provided for;” . 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DEKKHAN AGRICULTURISTS’ RELIEF ACT, 1879.pdf - page 5]
5 
 Every such suit in which there are several defendants who are agriculturists may be instituted and tried 
in a Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction any one of such defendants resides, and not 
elsewhere.  
Nothing herein contained shall affect sections 22 to 25 (both inclusive) of the  1Code of Civil Procedure.  
[* * *]  
12. Repealed .—[Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .] 
13. Repealed .—[Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief  Act, 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .] 
 14. Repealed .—[Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .] 
15. Repealed .—[Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the  part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .] 
16. Repealed .—[Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .] 
17. Repealed .—[Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .]  
18. Repealed .—[Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 194
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DEKKHAN AGRICULTURISTS’ RELIEF ACT, 1879.pdf - page 5]
ect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the  part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .] 
19. Repealed .—[Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .]  
20. Repealed .— [Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .]  
                                                           
1. See now Act 5 of 1908.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DEKKHAN AGRICULTURISTS’ RELIEF ACT, 1879.pdf - page 6]
6 
 21. Repealed .— [Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .]  
22. Repealed .— [Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .] 
23. Repealed .— [Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .]   
24. Repealed .— [Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .] 34[* * *]  
25. Repealed .— [Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .]   
26. Repealed .— [Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .]   
27. Repealed .— [Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .]  
28. Repealed .— [Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State on
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DEKKHAN AGRICULTURISTS’ RELIEF ACT, 1879.pdf - page 6]
Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .]  
29. Repealed .— [Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .]  
30. Repealed .— [Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .]  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DEKKHAN AGRICULTURISTS’ RELIEF ACT, 1879.pdf - page 7]
7 
 31. Repealed .— [Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .]  
32. Repealed .— [Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .]  
33. Repealed .— [Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .]  
34. Repealed .— [Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .]  
35. Repealed .— [Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .]  
36. Repealed .— [Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .]  
37. Repealed .— [Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .]  
38. Repealed .— [Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not b
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DEKKHAN AGRICULTURISTS’ RELIEF ACT, 1879.pdf - page 7]
 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .]  
39. Repealed .— [Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .]  
40. Repealed .— [Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .]  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DEKKHAN AGRICULTURISTS’ RELIEF ACT, 1879.pdf - page 8]
8 
 41. Repealed .— [Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .]  
42. Repealed .— [Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .]  
43. Repealed .— [Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State  only has not been reproduced .]   
44. Repealed .— [Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .]   
45. Repealed .— [Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May,  1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .]   
46. Repealed .— [Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .]   
47. Repealed .— [Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .]  
48. Repealed .— [Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DEKKHAN AGRICULTURISTS’ RELIEF ACT, 1879.pdf - page 8]
 Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .]  
49. Repealed .— [Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .]  
50. Repealed. — [Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .]  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DEKKHAN AGRICULTURISTS’ RELIEF ACT, 1879.pdf - page 9]
9 
 51. Repealed. —  [Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .]  
52. Repealed. —  [Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .] 
53. Repealed. —[Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the  part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .]  
54. Repealed. — [Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .]  
55. Repealed. —[Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .]  
56. Instruments executed by agriculturist not to be deemed valid unless executed before 
a Village -registrar .—No instrument which purports to create, modify, transfer, evidence or 
extinguish an obligation for the payment of money or a charge upon any property, or to be a 
conveyance or lease, and which is executed after this Act comes into force by an agriculturist 
residing in any local area for which a Village -registrar has been appo inted, shall be admitted in 
evidence for any purpose by any person having by law or consent of parties authority to receive 
evidence, or shall be acted upon by any such person or by any public officer, unless such 
instrument is written by, or under the sup erintendence of, and is attested
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DEKKHAN AGRICULTURISTS’ RELIEF ACT, 1879.pdf - page 9]
ic officer, unless such 
instrument is written by, or under the sup erintendence of, and is attested by, a Village -registrar:  
Provided that nothing herein contained shall prevent the admission of any instrument in 
evidence in any criminal proceeding,  1[or apply to any instrument which is executed by an 
agriculturist merely  as a surety,]  2[or to any instrument required by Section 17 of the  3Indian 
Registration Act, 1877 (3 of 1877), to be registered under that Act.]  
[* * *]  
                                                           
1. Ins . by Act 23 of 1881, s. 12. 
2. Ins. by Act 23 of 1886, s. 9. 
3. See now the Indian Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DEKKHAN AGRICULTURISTS’ RELIEF ACT, 1879.pdf - page 10]
10 
 57. Repealed. — [Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .]  
58. Repealed. — [Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .]   
59. Repealed. — [Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .]  
60. Registration under this Act to be deemed equivalent to registration under Indian 
Registration Act, 1877 .—Every instrument executed and registered in accordance with the 
foregoing provisions shall be deemed to have been duly registered under the provisions of 
the 1Indian Registration Act, 1 877 (3 of 1877); and no instrument which ought to have been 
executed before a Village -registrar but has been otherwise executed shall be registered by any 
officer acting under the said Act, or in any public office, or shall be authenticated by any public 
officer.  
[* * *]  
61. Repealed. — [Rep. by the State of Bombay, with effect from the  27th May, 1950 by the Bombay 
Agricultural Debtors' Relief Act , 1947 ( Bom. 28 of 1947), s. 56 was amended. Hence the part applicable to 
that State only has not been reproduced .]  
62. Exemption of instruments to which the Government or any officer of the Government 
is a party .—Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to require any instrument, to which the 
Government or any officer of the Government in his official capacity is a party, to be executed 
before a Village -registrar2. 
[* * *]  
———  
                                                           
1. See now the Indian Regi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DEKKHAN AGRICULTURISTS’ RELIEF ACT, 1879.pdf - page 10]
 * *]  
———  
                                                           
1. See now the Indian Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908 . 
2. The words “or any Society registered under the Co -operative Credit Societies Act, 1904”  ins. by Bom. Act 1 of 1910 were  rep. by 
Bom. Act 1 of 1912.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DELHI AND AJMER-MERWARA LAND DEVELOPMENT ACT, 1948.pdf - page 1]
1 THE DELHI AND AJMER -MERWARA LAND DEVELOPMENT ACT, 1948  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
Land Development Boards and Land Development Schemes  
3. Constitution of Land Development Boards.  
4. Matters for which land development schemes may provide.  
5. Inquiry into, and sanctioning o f, schemes.  
6. Publication of schemes.  
7. Power to make regulations.  
8. Power  to make grant o f advance loan.  
9. Penalty.  
10. Works to be carried out by Government at owner’s expense.  
11. Contribution by owners of other land benefiting by work.  
12. Recovery of contributions.  
13. Power to carry out works and recover expenses from owners.  
14. Statement and map showing details of work.  
15. Repairs and renewals of work.  
16. Enhancement of rent on account of improvement effected by work.  
17. Rights of entry, etc.  
18. Appeals.  
19. Power of control.  
CHAPTER III  
Reclamation of Waste -land 
20. Definition s. 
21. Order for taking possessi on of waste -land.  
22. Arrangement for reclamation.  
23. Claim for arrears of rent not to be enforced against Government, etc.  
24. Termination of possession on completion of reclamation.  
25. Compensation for period of possession.  
26. Accounts.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DELHI AND AJMER-MERWARA LAND DEVELOPMENT ACT, 1948.pdf - page 2]
2 SECTIONS  
27. R ecovery of net expenditure incurred by Government.  
28. Appeals.  
29. Continuance of liability for land revenue rates and cesses.  
CHAPTER IV  
Control over Forests and Lands not being the Property of Government  
30. Amendment of Act XVI of 1927 in Delhi.  
31. Application of Chap ter V, Act XVI of 1927 to Ajmer . 
CHAPTER V  
Supplementary  
32. Power to make rules.  
33. Protection of action taken under the Act.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DELHI AND AJMER-MERWARA LAND DEVELOPMENT ACT, 1948.pdf - page 3]
3 THE DELHI AND AJMER -MERWARA LAND DEVELOPMENT ACT, 1948  
ACT NO. 66 OF 1948  
[24th September , 1948.]  
An Act to provide for the preparation and execution of land development schemes, the 
reclamation of waste -land and the control of private forests and grass -land, in the Provinces 
of Delhi and Ajmer -Merwara.  
WHEREAS  it is expedient to provide for the preparation and execution of land development schemes, 
the reclamation of waste -land and the control of private forests and grass -land in the Pr ovinces of Delhi 
and Ajmer -Merwara;  
It is hereby enacted as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Delhi and                    
Ajmer -Merwara  Land Development Act, 1948.  
(2) It extends to the 1[States] of Delhi and 2[Ajmer ]. 
(3) It shall come into force in each of the said 1[States] on such date3 as the Chief Commissioner of 
that 4[State] may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context, — 
(a) “Board ” means the Land Development Board constituted for the 4[State] under section 3;  
(b) “owner”, in relation to any land, means — 
(i) a person having a proprietary right in the land and includes a usufructuary mortgagee of 
such right and, in the 4[State] of 2[Ajmer ], an istimrardar, a jagirdar a muafidar , and a bhumia ; 
and  
(ii) a tenant of the land as hereinafter defined;  
(c) “prescrib ed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(d) “reclamation” includes cultivation, afforestation and any other improvement of land; and  
(e) “tenant” includes a usufructuary mortgagee of the rights of a tenant.  
CHAPTER II  
Land Development Boards an d Land Development Schemes  
3. Constitution of Land Development Boards. —(1) As soon as may be after the commencement of 
this Act, the Chief Commissioner shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint an office
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DELHI AND AJMER-MERWARA LAND DEVELOPMENT ACT, 1948.pdf - page 3]
 
this Act, the Chief Commissioner shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint an officer to be 
called the Land Development Commissioner and constitute for the 4[State] a Land Development Board 
consisting of the following members, namely: — 
(a) the Land Development Commissioner, who shall be the Chairman of th e Board,  
(b) two official members who shall be persons of experience in agriculture  or irrigation 
engineering, and  
(c) two non -official members.  
(2) A non -official member may, at any time by notice in writing to the Chairman, resign his office.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  A.O.  1950 , for “Provinces”  
2. Subs. , ibid., for “Ajmer -Merwara”  
3.1st November , 19 48, vide notification No. F 14 (108)/A146 , dated 29th October , 19 48, see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( i). 
4. Subs. by  A.O.  1950,  for “Province”  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DELHI AND AJMER-MERWARA LAND DEVELOPMENT ACT, 1948.pdf - page 4]
4 (3) The Chi ef Commissioner may, at any time, remove from the Board any member who is guilty of 
any action involving moral turpitude.  
(4) No act done by the Board shall be questioned on the ground merely of the existence of any 
vacancy in, or any defect in the constit ution of, the Board.  
(5) If there is a difference of opinion among the members of the Board regarding any question the 
decision of the majority of the members present and voting shall prevail, and in case of equality of votes 
the Chairman shall have a cast ing vote.  
(6) The Board may appoint one of the official members to be the Secretary of the Board.  
(7) The Chief Commissioner may invest the Land Development Commissioner with all or any of the 
powers of a Deputy Commissioner or a Collector under any law fo r the time being in force in the 1[State] 
of Delhi or 2[Ajmer ], as the case may be.  
4. Matters for which land development schemes may provide. —(1) The Board shall prepare a land 
development scheme for the 1[State] providing for one or more of the following  matters, namely: — 
(i) preservation and improvement of soil;  
(ii) prevention of soil erosion;  
(iii) improvement of water supply by the utilization of water in rivers or rivulets, tube -wells, 
boring or construction of wells, conservation of rain water by co nstructing dams, or by use of power;  
(iv) improvement in the methods of cultivation;  
(v) introduction of dry farming methods;  
(vi) supply of seed, improved implements of agriculture, manure and fertilizers;  
(vii) development of horticulture and planting of  fruit trees;  
(viii) reclamation of land lying waste through water -logging, accumulation of sand, growth of 
jungle, soil erosion or any other cause.  
(ix) cultivation of land lying uncultivated owing to the negligence or incapacity or absence of the 
owner;  
(x) regulation or prohibition of grazing and browsing;  
(xi) control and maintenance of tree -growth.  
(xii) regulation or prohibition of firi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DELHI AND AJMER-MERWARA LAND DEVELOPMENT ACT, 1948.pdf - page 4]
 browsing;  
(xi) control and maintenance of tree -growth.  
(xii) regulation or prohibition of firing of vegetation;  
(xiii) planting or sowing of trees, shrubs and grasses for the purpose of afforesting uncultivable 
land or providin g shelter -beds against wind or sand or for any other purpose;  
(xiv) protection from locusts and other pests; and  
(xv) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
(2) Every scheme prepared under sub -section ( 1) shall contain the following part iculars, namely: — 
(i) the objects of the scheme;  
(ii) details of the area to be covered by the scheme;  
(iii) the work or kind of work to be carried  out under the scheme;  
(iv) the agency or agencies through which the work shall be carried out;  
(v) the appr oximate estimated cost of the scheme and the method of financing it;  
                                                           
1.  Subs. by A.O. 1950, for “Province”  
2. Subs. , ibid., for “Ajmer -Merwara”   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DELHI AND AJMER-MERWARA LAND DEVELOPMENT ACT, 1948.pdf - page 5]
5 (vi) the duties and obligations, financial or other, of the Government as well as of the owners of 
the area concerned; and  
(vii) any other particulars which may be prescribed.  
5. Inquiry into, and sanctioning o f, schemes. —(1) The Chief Commissioner shall, after the Board 
has prepared the scheme under section 4 — 
(a) appoint an Inquiry Officer, and  
(b) cause the scheme to be published in the manner prescribed inviting suggestions from persons 
affected by it within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Chief Commissioner shall, after considering the record of the inquiry and the report of the 
Inquiry Officer and after consulting the Board, submit the scheme with his report to the Central 
Government which may either sanction the scheme with or without modification or reject it.  
6. Publication of schemes. —Every scheme sanctioned under section 5 shall be published by the 
Land Development Commissioner in the prescribed ma nner and shall come into force on such date as 
may be specified by him.  
7. Power to make regulations. —The Board may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
regulations for the purpose of carrying out the objects of the scheme or in respect of any ma tter 
supplementary or incidental thereto, and any regulations so made shall also be published by the Board in 
the manner prescribed.  
 8. Power to make grant or advance loan. —(1) The Land Development Commissioner may, with 
the approval of the Board, make a grant or advance a loan to any person for carrying out any work under 
any scheme on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed.  
(2) The amount of loan, or any instalment thereof or interest thereon which may be due but not repaid 
in accordance with the  terms and conditions of the loa n may, without prejudice to any other remedy 
provided by law, be recovered as arrears of land revenue.  
9. Penalty. —(1) In making any scheme or any regulation under section 7, the Board may provide that 
th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DELHI AND AJMER-MERWARA LAND DEVELOPMENT ACT, 1948.pdf - page 5]
Penalty. —(1) In making any scheme or any regulation under section 7, the Board may provide that 
the contravention of s uch provisions of the scheme or of such regulations as may be specified by it, shall 
be punishable with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which 
may extend to fifty rupees, or with both.  
(2) No person shall be prosecuted for any contravention specified in sub -section ( 1) except on 
complaint in writing by the Land Development Commissioner.  
10. Works to be carried out by Government at owner’s expense. —(1) Where under the scheme 
any work is to be carried out on any  land at the expense of the owner or owners thereof, and such owner, 
or any of such owners, is willing to carry out the work, he may give notice to that effect in writing to the 
Land Development Commissioner within twenty -one days of the coming into force of the scheme.  
(2) On receipt of such notice the Land Development Commissioner  shall furnish the owner with full 
details of the work, and fix the date before which the owner shall carry out the work.  
(3) If the owner fails to carry out the work to the sati sfaction of the Land Development Commissioner 
before the date fixed by him, or if the owner at any time informs the Land Development Commissioner in 
writing of his inability to do so, the Land Development Commissioner may get the work carried out by 
such a gency as he thinks fit and the expenses incurred by him in carrying out the work shall be recovered 
from the owner as arrears of land revenue.  
(4) Where any work is carried out in pursuance of this section by one or more of several owners, the 
other owners  shall be liable to contribute towards the expenses incurred by him or them such amount as 
the Board may determine.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DELHI AND AJMER-MERWARA LAND DEVELOPMENT ACT, 1948.pdf - page 6]
6 11. Contribution by owners of other land benefiting by work. —Where under the scheme any 
work is carried out by the owner or by the Land Deve lopment Commissioner at the expense of the owner, 
and the work is in the opinion of the Board likely to benefit any other land in the area covered by the 
scheme, the owners of such other land shall be liable to contribute towards the expenses of carrying o ut 
the work such amount as the Board may determine:  
Provided that the Chief Commissioner may remit the whole or any part of the contribution so payable 
in respect of any work carried out on land belonging to the Government.  
12. Recovery of contributions. —The amount of contribution determined by the Board under sub -
section ( 4) of section 10 or section 11 shall be paid by the persons concerned within such time as may be 
specified by the Board, and in default of such payment shall be recovered from those persons as arrears of 
land revenue and paid to the persons entitled to the contribution.  
13. Power to carry out works and recover expenses from owners. —Notwithstanding anything 
contained in the scheme, the Board may direct that the work to be carried out or remaining to be carried 
out or any land by the owners thereof shall be carried out by the L and Development Commissioner, and 
that the whole or any specified part of the expenses of carrying out the work shall be recovered as arrears 
of land revenue from the owners of the land in such proportion, at such times, and in such instalments, as 
the Boa rd may fix, having regard to the amount to be recovered and the nature and extent of the rights of 
the owners in the land.  
14. Statement and map showing details of work. —(1) On the completion of any work under the 
scheme, the Land Development Commissioner shall prepare — 
(a) a statement in such form, and containing such particulars, as may be prescribed, and  
(b) a map showing the location and other material details of the work.  
(2) Every statement 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DELHI AND AJMER-MERWARA LAND DEVELOPMENT ACT, 1948.pdf - page 6]
 and  
(b) a map showing the location and other material details of the work.  
(2) Every statement and map so prepared shall, on approval by the Board, form par t of the settlement 
record, or, as the case may be, the record -of-rights of the estates specified in the statement, and the said 
record shall wherever necessary be corrected in accordance with the statement.  
15. Repairs and renewals of work. —If any person shown in a statement prepared under section 14 
as liable to maintain and keep in repair the work fails to effect such repairs or renewals or to do so within 
such time, as the Land Development Commissioner may by order specify, the Land Development 
Commissi oner may get the repairs or renewals done by such agency as he thinks fit, and the expenses 
incurred by him in so doing shall be recovered from the said person as arrears of land revenue.  
16. Enhancement of rent on account of improvement effected by work. —Where any land in 
which a tenant has a right of occupancy has benefited by work carried out under the scheme by or at the 
expense  of the owner of the land, and the tenant has not made any contribution to the expenses thereof, 
the Revenue Officer having jur isdiction shall, on application made by the owner in this behalf, enhance,  
in accordance with such principles as may be prescribed, the rent payable by he tenant in respect of the 
land, anything contained in any law to the contrary notwithstanding.  
17. Rig hts of entry, etc. —(1) Any member, officer, subordinate or workman of the Board or any 
other person authorised by the Land Development Commissioner in this behalf may, after giving such 
notice as may be prescribed to the owner in possession of any land, enter upon and survey the land, or do 
any acts, or carry out any work in or on the land for the purpose of preparing, inquiring into or executing 
any land development scheme the provisions of this Chapter.  
(2) Every such member, officer subordinate, workma n or person sha
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DELHI AND AJMER-MERWARA LAND DEVELOPMENT ACT, 1948.pdf - page 6]
the provisions of this Chapter.  
(2) Every such member, officer subordinate, workma n or person shall be deemed to be a public 
servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
18. Appeals. —Any person aggrieved by— 
(a) a determination of the Board under sub -section ( 4) of section 10 or section 11; or  
(b) the  making of an entry, or the failure to make an entry, in a statement prepared under               
section 14; or  
(c) the order of the Land Development Commissioner under section 15; or  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DELHI AND AJMER-MERWARA LAND DEVELOPMENT ACT, 1948.pdf - page 7]
7 (d) the order of a Revenue Officer under section 16,  
may, within the prescribed time and in the prescribed manner, appeal to the prescribed authority, and, 
notwithstanding anything contained in any law to the contrary, the decision of such authority, and, where 
no appeal is preferred, the determination, order or statement a foresaid shall be final and shall not be called 
in question in any court.  
19. Power of control. —The Central Government may from time to time call for any report or give 
any direction to the Board, and the Board shall submit such repor t and carry out such direction.  
CHAPTER III  
Reclamation of Waste -land 
20. Definition. —In this Chapter — 
(a) “date of taking possession” means the date on which temporary possession of the land is taken 
on behalf of the Government under section 21;  
(b) “waste -land” means any lan d lying waste through water -logging, accumulation of sand, 
growth of jungle, soil erosion or any other cause, or lying uncultivated, for not less than three 
consecutive years.  
21. Order for taking possession of waste -land. —(1) If the board is satisfied tha t for purposes of 
executing any scheme of reclamation of waste -land sanctioned under section 5, it is necessary that 
temporary possession of any waste -land should be taken, it may, by order in writing, direct the Land 
Development Commissioner to take tempo rary possession of such land on behalf of the Government on 
such date as may be specified in that order.  
(2) The order shall be made in such form and brought to the no tice of the owner of the land in such 
manner, as may be prescribed . 
(3) On the date speci fied in the order, the Land Development Commissioner or an officer authorised 
by him shall enter upon and take possession of the land on behalf of the Government.  
22. Arrangement for reclamation. —When the land has been taken possession of the Land 
Developm ent Commissioner may, with the approval of the Board, arrange for its reclamation — 

<|CHUNK|>
[THE DELHI AND AJMER-MERWARA LAND DEVELOPMENT ACT, 1948.pdf - page 7]
Land 
Developm ent Commissioner may, with the approval of the Board, arrange for its reclamation — 
(a) by retaining it under his management for such period as he thinks fit, or  
(b) by settling it for such period and on such terms as may be fixed by the Board with the person 
who on the date of taking possession was in lawful possession of the land, or was entitled to such 
possession, or, if such person is dead, with his successor in interest, or  
(c) if such person refuses to take the land for such period or on such term s, by settling it with any 
other person, or  
(d) by a combination of the methods aforesaid:  
Provided that the total period for which the land is retained or settled under this section shall not 
exceed ten years.  
23. Claim for arrears of rent not to be enfor ced against Government, etc. —No claim of the 
landlord to any arrears of rent accrued or due in respect of the land for the period prior to the date of 
taking possession shall thereafter be enforced by any court, whether in execution of a decree or otherwis e, 
against the Government or against any person holding the land under the Government, or by the issue of 
any process against the land.  
24. Termination of possession on completion of reclamation. —(1) When the reclamation of the 
land is in the opinion of th e Land Development Commissioner complete and, in any case, before the 
expiry of a period of ten years from the making an inquiry in the prescribed manner and by order in 
writing, — 
(a) declare that possession of the land shall be restored on such date as ma y be specified in the 
order to the owner who on the date of taking possession was in lawful possession of the land, or was 
entitled to such possession, or if he is dead, to his successor in interest;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DELHI AND AJMER-MERWARA LAND DEVELOPMENT ACT, 1948.pdf - page 8]
8 (b) determine the person to whom possession is to be so restored;  
(c) where such person is a tenant, determine the rent payable on account of the use or occupation 
of the land; and  
(d) where the land or any part thereof has been afforested, regulate the cutting of trees in such 
land.  
(2) On the date specified i n the said order, possession of the land shall be deemed to have been 
delivered by the Government to the person determined under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1). 
(3) The delivery of possession of the land to the person determined under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) 
shall be final and full discharge of the Government from all liability in respect of such delivery, but shall 
not prejudice any right in respect of the land to which any other person may be entitled, by due process of 
law, to enforce agains t the person to whom the possession of the land has been so delivered . 
25. Compensation for period of possession. —(1) As soon as may be after the date of taking 
possession of the land, the Land Development Commissioner shall make an inquiry in the prescrib ed 
manner and determine — 
(a) in respect of any land which on the said date was in the occupation of a tenant — 
(i) the annual rent payable by him, and  
(ii) the average net annual income, if any, after deducting rent derived by him during the 
three years imm ediately preceding the said date, and  
(b) in respect of any other land, the average net annual income, if any, without deducting any land 
revenue payable, derived by the owner during the three years immediately preceding the said date.  
(2) There shall be payable by the Government as compensation on each anniversary of the date of 
taking possession until the date referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 24 — 
(a) in respect of such land as is referred to in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1), the amount determined 
under sub -clause ( i) thereof to the landlord, and the amount determined under sub -clause ( ii) thereof 
to
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DELHI AND AJMER-MERWARA LAND DEVELOPMENT ACT, 1948.pdf - page 8]
 -clause ( i) thereof to the landlord, and the amount determined under sub -clause ( ii) thereof 
to the tenant, and  
(b) in respect of any other land, the amount determined under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) to the 
owner.  
(3) For the purpos es of this section “landlord” means the person under whom the tenant holds land 
and to whom the tenant is, or but for a special contract would be, liable to pay rent for that land, and any 
reference to an owner, landlord or tenant shall be deemed to includ e a reference to the predecessors and 
successors in interest of the owner, landlord or tenant.  
26. Accounts. —The Board shall maintain, in such form and in accordance with such rules as may be 
prescribed, an account of all receipts and payments by the Gover nment in respect of the land, and any 
owner of, or other person saving an interest in, the land may, on payment of a fee of eight annas, inspect 
the account.  
27. Recovery of net expenditure incurred by Government. —(1) The net expenditure incurred  by 
the Government on the reclamation of the land under the provisions of this Chapter or such part of that 
expenditure as the Chief Commissioner may b y general or special order direct, together with interest 
calculated at the prescribed rate and in the prescribed  manner, shall be recovered  as arrears of                      
land revenue from the person to whom possession of the land delivered by the Government under            
sub-section ( 2) of section 24.  
(2) The amount to be recovered under sub -section ( 1) from any person shall be decided by the Board.  
28. Appeals. —Any person aggrieved by an order under section 21, section 24, section 25 or          
sub-section ( 2) of section 27 of the Board or the Land Development Commissioner, as the case may be, 
may, within th e prescribed time and in the prescribed manner, appeal to the Chief Commissioner, and the 
decision of the Chief Commissioner on such appeal, and where no appeal is preferred the o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DELHI AND AJMER-MERWARA LAND DEVELOPMENT ACT, 1948.pdf - page 8]
, and the 
decision of the Chief Commissioner on such appeal, and where no appeal is preferred the order aforesaid, 
shall be final and shall not be called in question in any cou rt. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DELHI AND AJMER-MERWARA LAND DEVELOPMENT ACT, 1948.pdf - page 9]
9 29. Continuance of liability for land revenue rates and cesses. —The taking and retaining of 
possession of any land on behalf of the Government under pr ovisions of this Chapter shall not affect the 
liability of any person for the payment of land revenue , rate or cess in respect of the land for any period 
whether befo re or after the date of taking possession.  
CHAPTER IV  
Control over Forests and Lands not being the Property of Government  
30. Amendment of Act XVI of 1927 in Delhi. —The following amendments shall be made in the 
Indian Forest Act, 1927, in its application to the 1[State]  at Delhi, namely: — 
(1) in sub -section ( 1) of section 35 of the said Act ,— 
(a) for the words “any forest or waste -land” the words “any forest, waste -land” or grass -land” 
shall be substituted;  
(b) for clauses ( b) and ( c) the following clauses shall be substituted, namely: — 
“(b) the cutting of trees and timber;  
(c) the disposal of any forest produce;  
(d) the firing or clearing of vegetation;  
(e) the cuttin g storage and conservation of grass or leaf fodder; or  
(f) the admission, herding or pasturing of Cattle”; and  
(c) after clause (v) the following shall be added: — 
“(vi) for any other purpose conducive to public welfare.”;  
(2) in sub -section ( 2) of section 37 of the said Act, for the words “not less than three” the words “not 
less than seven” shall be substituted; and  
(3) in sub -section ( 1) of section 38 of the said Act, for the word “two thirds” the word “one -half” 
shall be substituted.  
31. Application of C hapter V, Act XVI of 1927 to 2[Ajmer ].—Without prejudice to the provisions 
of sub -section ( 3) of section 1 of the Indian Forest Act, 1927, the provisions of Chapter V of that Act 
shall apply to the 1[State]  of 2[Ajmer ] as they apply to the 1[State]  of Delhi.  
CHAPTER V  
Supplementary  
32. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purp
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DELHI AND AJMER-MERWARA LAND DEVELOPMENT ACT, 1948.pdf - page 9]
ntral Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the fore going power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the conduct of business by the Board and the procedure to be followed at meetings of the 
Board;  
(b) the procedure to be followed by Inquiry Officers under section 5;  
(c) the manner of publication under sections 5,  6 and 7;  
(d) the principles on which the amounts of contribution are to be determined by the Board under 
sub-section ( 4) of section 10, or section 11;  
(e) the form of the statement under section 14 and the pa rticulars to be stated therein;  
(f) the principles of enhancement of rent under section 16;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by A.O. 1950, for “Province”  
2. Subs. , ibid., for “Ajmer -Merwara”  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DELHI AND AJMER-MERWARA LAND DEVELOPMENT ACT, 1948.pdf - page 10]
10 (g) the manner of giving notice under sub -section ( 1) of section 17;  
(h) the authority to whom appeal may lie and the time and manner of such appeal under                  
section 18;  
(i) the form of notice under section 21 and the manner of its service;  
(j) the manner of inquiry under section 24 and sub -section ( 1) of section 25;  
(k) the form and method of maintaining accounts under section 2 6; 
(l) the rate  of interest and the method of its calculation under sub -section ( 1) of section 27;  
(m) the time and manner of appeal under section 28; and  
(n) any matter which may be prescribed.  
33. Protection of action taken under the Act. —(1) No suit, prosecution or ot her proceeding shall lie 
against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of  this 
Act. 
(2) Save as otherwise expressly provided by or under this Act, no suit or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Government for any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything in good faith done 
or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act.  
<|CHUNK|>
[The Deo Estate Act, 1886.pdf - page 1]
 
The Deo Estate Act, 1886  
ACT NO. IX OF 1886. 
PASSED  BY THE  GOVERNOR  GENERAL OF INDIA IN COUNCIL.  
(Received the assent of the Governor General on the 10th March,1886.)  
An Act to apply the Chutia Nagpur Encumbered Estates Act, 1876, to the Deo  Estate in the 
Gaya District . 
WHEREAS  Raja Bhikam Narayan Singh Bahadur, of Deo in the district of Gaya, is subject to, 
and his immoveable property is charged with, debts and liabilities other than debts due, and 
liabilities in - curred, to the Government;      
And whereas the said Raja h as requested that the provisions of the Chutia Nagpur Encumbered 
Estates Act,1876, be applied to his case;  
And whereas the persons to whom the debts are due and the liabilities have been incurred have 
assented to the applica tion of the Chutia Nagpur Encumbered Estates Act, 1876  (VI of 1876.) , to 
the case on the condition that their title to receive the principal and interest due to them be in no 
way impaired thereby;  
It is hereby enacted as follows: — 
1. Short  title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Deo Estate Act, 1886; and  
  (2)  It shall come into force at once.  
2. Application of Act VI of 1876 to the Deo Estate  .— The provisions of the Chutia Nagpur 
Encumbered Estates Act,1876  (VI of 1876),  as amended b y Act V of 1884 , may be applied to the 
case of the said Raja Bhikam Narayan Singh Bahadur, subject to the following modifications, 
namely :  —  
(1) The expressions “Commissioner”, “De puty Commissioner” and “holder” , where used in the 
said Act, shall be construed as referring to the Commissioner of the Patna division, the Collector of 
the Gaya district and the said Ra ’ja’, respectively.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything in section 2 of the said Act, the Commissioner may, without any 
further application from the said Ra ’ja’ and without any further notification of the consent of the 
Lieutenant -Governor of Bengal , publish an order under that section appointing a manager and 
vest
<|CHUNK|>
[The Deo Estate Act, 1886.pdf - page 1]

Lieutenant -Governor of Bengal , publish an order under that section appointing a manager and 
vesting in him the management of the whole of the im moveable property of or to which the said 
Ra’ja’ is then possessed or entitled in his own right, or which he is entitled to redeem, or which 
may be acquired by or devolve on him or his heir during the continuance of the management.  
(3) Section 4 of the sai d Act shall be read as if after t he words “and their families” the words 
“and persons entitled to receive maintenance from the property” were added.  
(4)  Notwithstanding anything in section 8 – 
the sums mentioned in column 2 and column 4 of the sc hedule to  this Act, as principal  and as 
balance due from the said Raja on the thirty -first day of December, 1885, respectively,  
and the rate of interest mentioned in column 3 of that schedule,  
<|CHUNK|>
[The Deo Estate Act, 1886.pdf - page 2]
shall, save in so far as any error with respect thereto may be proved to the satisfaction of the 
Commissioner, be deemed to be justly due to the several persons mentioned  in column 1 of the 
schedule.  
(5)  The scheme prepared and approve under section 11 of the said Act shall provide that out of 
the residue applicable  under section 4 of that Act, after discharge of costs of management, to the 
settlement of debts and liabilities, interest at the rate of six per cent. per annum in respect of so 
much of the principal sum of six hundred and fifty thousand rupees as is  for the tim e being due to 
the M aharaja of Darbhanga shall be paid to the Maharaja before any sum is paid thereout to any 
other creditor.  
(6)  The second clause of section 12 of the said Act shall  be read as if for the words “ at any 
time before a scheme has been app roved by him under section 11” the words “ at any time before 
the occurrence of either of the events mentioned in the first and third clauses of this section” were 
substituted.  
(7)  The power conferred on the manager by the second clause of section 16 of t he said Act, to 
apply for the removal of a mortgagee or conditional vendee in possession, shall not be exercised.  
(8)  The exercise of the power of sale conferred by section 18 of the said Act shall be subject to 
the following conditions, namely:  —  
(a) that one month’s notice shall be given to the Maharaja of Darbhanga of the manager’s 
intention to sell any property of which the said Maharaja is mortgagee;  
(b) that until the debt due to the said Maharaja has been reduced to the sum of six hundred 
and fifty thousand rupees no portion of the proceeds of the sale of any of that property shall, 
without the previous consent of the Maharaja, be paid  to any other cre ditor; and  
(c) that, except with the previous consent of the said Maharaja, so much of that property 
shall be left unsold as will yield a yearly income sufficient, after compliance with the rest of t
<|CHUNK|>
[The Deo Estate Act, 1886.pdf - page 2]
 
shall be left unsold as will yield a yearly income sufficient, after compliance with the rest of the 
scheme prepared and approved under section 11 of the said Act, to meet the yearly interest for 
the time being  payable to the Maharaja .  
(9) Section 23 of the said Act shall be read as if for the words “ the Courts in Chutia Nagpur” 
the words  “any Court “ were substituted, and as if the following words wer e added to the section 
to the section, namely:  —   
       “and a suit relating to  a claim of maintenance from the property  shall not be entertained by 
any such Court without the previous consent of the Commissioner.”  
3. Saving of Priority of Crown debts. —Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed as 
affecting the priority of any debt due, or liability incurred, to the Government.  
______  
 
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[The Deo Estate Act, 1886.pdf - page 3]
SCHEDULE.  
(Sec section 2,clause (4).)  
Name of creditor.  Principal.  Annual rate 
of interest 
per centum.  Balance due on the 31st 
December,1885.  
1. 2. 3. 4. 
Maharaja 
Lachhmeshar Singh  Rs A. P  Rs. A. p 
Bahadur of 
Darbhanga   .  6.50,000  0 0 6 8,18,141  4 0 
Babu Kameshwar 
Prasa d   . 2,89,751  12 2 6 2,58,340  2 7 
    Ditto    .      .     .  21,0000  0 0 12    21,000  0 0 
     Ditto   .      .      .   9,000  0 0 12      9,000  0 0 
Sayyid Lutf Ali 
Khan Bahadur  12,045  4 0 6    13,460  8 8 
Nurjahan Begum   .     
. 9,405  0 0 6    10,577  10 1 
Gosain Dalmirpuri   
.    . 5,000  0 0 6      6,535  0 0 
Gosain Dalmirpuri 
and Bhakhi  Singh    
.     .     .  5,400  0 0 6      4,850  0 0 
Babu  Ramgopal 
Singh and Babu 
Ram Kirpal S ingh     
. 4,000  0 0 12      4,000  0 0 
Ditto   .      .      .  3,500  0 0 12      3,500  0 0 
Ditto   .      .      .  14,484  8 9 6    15,377  12 2 
Sayyid -un-nissa 
Bibi  .   .  29,660  0 0 18    53,725  1 0 
Babu Baijnath 
Singh  .   .  13,503  13 9 12    17,996  1 10 
Ditto    .    .    .    .      777 8 5 Nil         777 8 5 
Shaikh Imaman 
and Ramdhan Barai   
.   .   .   .  10,000  0 0 9              
10,000          0 0 
Bihari Lal Barik  .    
.     . 3,300  0 0 72  6,006  0 0 
Ditto  .    .    .     .  1,750  0 0 72  3,094  0 0 
Lachhman D ’as 
and Mathura D ’as  .   
.     .    .  4,998  2 6 6  4,215  14 7 
<|CHUNK|>
[The Deo Estate Act, 1886.pdf - page 4]
Ramkishan D ’as  .    
.     . 1,195  10 0 12  1,267   5 0 
Narayan Sahu, 
Sheo Sahu, 
Bhichuk Sahu and 
Sheocharan Sahu   .    
.    . 3,500  0 0 12  3,052  12 0 
Madho Singh   .   .   
. 7,702  0 6 6  7,070   6 11 
Raghubar Singh   .   
.   . 3,000  0 0 12  2,824   2  4 
Raghubar Singh   .   
.   . 3,000  0 0 12  2,824   2  4 
Bishn Saran Lal    .   
.   . 389 0 0 12    389  0 0 
Maharani Baliraj 
Kunwar .  80,000  0 0 4½ 80,000   0 0 
 
 
 
               00   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DESTRUCTIVE INSECTS AND PESTS (AMENDMENT AND VALIDATION).pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE DESTRUCTIVE INSECTS AND PESTS (AMENDMENT AND VALIDATION)             
ACT, 1992  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Amendment of section 3 of Act 2 of 1914 . 
3. Validation . 
4. Repeal and saving . 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DESTRUCTIVE INSECTS AND PESTS (AMENDMENT AND VALIDATION).pdf - page 2]
2 
 THE DESTRUCTIVE INSECTS AND PESTS (AMENDMENT AND VALIDATION)              
ACT, 1992  
ACT NO. 12 OF 1992  
[31st March,  1992 .] 
An Act further to amend the Destructive Insects and Pests Act, 1914.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -third Year of th e Republic of India as follows: –– 
1. Short title and commencement. ––(1) This Act may be called the Destructive Insects and Pests 
(Amendment and Validation) Act, 1992 . 
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 27th day of October, 1989 . 
2. [Amendment of section 3 of Act 2 of 1914. ]––Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act , 2001          
(30 of 2001) , s. 2  and Sch . (w.e.f . 3-9-2001) . 
3. Validation .––(1) Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other 
authority, –– 
(i) the notification No .S.O.867(E), dated the 27th October, 1989 issued under sub -section ( 1) of 
the section 3 of the principal Act, and  
(ii) any fees levied or collected or purported to have been levied or collected for making an 
application for a permit  to import, or for making inspection, fumigation, dis infection, disinfestation or 
supervision of, any article or class of articles or any insect or class of insects under the principa l Act 
or the said notification,  
shall, for all purposes, be deemed to be and to have always been validly issued or, as the case may be, 
levied or collected in accordance with the provisions of section 3 of the principal Act as amended by this 
Act, and accordingly –– 
(a) no suit or other proceeding shall be maintained or continue d in any court for the refund of any 
fees so collected;  
(b) no court or other authority shall enforce any decree or order directing the refund of any fees so 
collected;  
(c) any fees levied or purported to have been levied but not collected, may be recovered under the 
principal Act as amended by this Act; and  
(d) anything done or any action taken or purported to have been done or taken under or for the 
purpos
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DESTRUCTIVE INSECTS AND PESTS (AMENDMENT AND VALIDATION).pdf - page 2]
) anything done or any action taken or purported to have been done or taken under or for the 
purposes of the princip al Act shall be deemed to have been validly done or taken in accordance with 
law as if the provisions of section 3 of the principal Act, as amended by this Act, had been in force at 
all material times . 
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared t hat nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall be construed 
as preventing any person –– 
(a) from questioning in accordance with the provisions of the principal Act, as amended by this 
Act, or the notification issued under section 3 of the principal Act, the levy or collection of such fees; 
or 
(b) from  claiming refund of any fees paid by him in excess of the amount due from him under the 
principal Act, as amended by this Act, or the said notification . 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DESTRUCTIVE INSECTS AND PESTS (AMENDMENT AND VALIDATION).pdf - page 3]
3 
 4. Repeal and saving. ––(1) The Destructive Insects and Pests (Amendment and Validation) 
Ordinance, 1992 (Ord . 4 of 1992) is hereby repealed . 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act, as 
amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act, as 
amended by this A ct. 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DESTRUCTIVE INSECTS AND PESTS ACT, 1914.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE DESTRUCTIVE INSECTS AND PESTS ACT, 1914  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Power of Central Government to regulate or prohibit the import of articles likely to infect.  
4. Operation of notification under section 3.  
4A. Power of Central Government to regulate or prohibit transport fr om State to State of insects or 
articles likely to infect.  
4B. Refusal to carry article of which transport is prohibited.  
4C. [Omitted .]. 
4D. Power of Cent ral Government to make rules.  
5. Power of State Government to make rules.  
5A. Penalties.  
6. Protection to persons acting under Act.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DESTRUCTIVE INSECTS AND PESTS ACT, 1914.pdf - page 2]
2 
 THE DESTRUCTIVE INSECTS AND PESTS ACT, 1914  
ACT NO. 2 OF 19141 
[3rd February , 1914.]  
An Act to prevent the introduction into 2[India] 3[and the transport from one province to another] 
4*** of any insect, fungus or other pest, which is or may be destructive to crops.  
WHEREAS  it is expedient to make provision for preventing the introduction into 5[India]  3[and the 
transport from one province to another] 4*** of any insect, fungus or, other pest, which is or may be 
destructive to crops; It is hereby enacted as fol lows:—  
1. Short title and extent. —6[(1)] This Act may be called the Destructive Insects and Pests Act, 1914.  
7[(2) It extends to the whole of India 8***.] 
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context, —  
(a) “crops” includes all agricultural or horticultural crops 9[and all trees, bushes or plants];  
(b) “import” means t he bringing or taking by sea, 10[land or air] 11[across any customs frontier as defined 
by the Central Government]; 12*** 
(c) “infection” means infection by any insect, fungus or other pest injurious to a crop;  13*** 
14*   *   *   *   * 
3. Power of Central Government to regulate or prohibit the import of articles likely to infect. —(1) 
The Central Government may, by notification in the Officia l Gazette, prohibit or  regulate, subject to such 
restrictions and conditions as it may impose, the import into 15[India], or  any part thereof, or any specified 
place therein, of any article or class of articles likely to cause infection to any crop 16[or of insects generally 
or any class of insects].  
(2) A notification under this section may specify any article or class of articles 16[or any insect or class of 
insects], either generally or in any particular manner, whether with reference to the country of origin or the 
route by which imported or otherwise.  
                                                      
1. The Act has been extended in its application to Dadra 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DESTRUCTIVE INSECTS AND PESTS ACT, 1914.pdf - page 2]
                                          
1. The Act has been extended in its application to Dadra and Nagar Haveli ( w.e.f. 1 -7-1965) by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 3 and the First 
Schedule  and to Pondicherry on 1 -10-1963: vide Reg. 7 of 1963, s. 3 and the First Schedule . 
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule  for “Part A States and Part C States ”. 
3. Ins. by Act 6 of 1938, s. 2.  
4. The words “in British India ” were  omitted  by the A.O. 1948.  
5. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule  for “the territories comprised within Part A States and Part C Sta tes (hereinafter in 
this Act referred to as the said territories) ”. 
6. Section 1 re -numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by s. 3 and the Schedule, ibid. 
7. Ins. by s. 3 and the Schedule,  ibid. 
8. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ” omitted by Act 62 of 1956, s. 2 and the Schedule  (w.e.f  1-11-1956).  
9. Subs. by Act 6 of 1938, s. 3, for “and trees or bushes ”. 
10. Subs. by Act 20 of 1930, s. 2, for “or land”. 
11. Ins. by the A.O. 1937. For definition of customs frontier, see section  3A of the Sea Customs Act, 1878 (8 of 1878) and Gazette of  
India, Pt. II, Sec. 3, dated 6th August, 1955, p. 1521.  
12. The word “and” omitted  by Act 3 of 1939, s. 2.  
13. The word “and” omitted by the A.O. 1948, which was earlier  added by Act 3 of 1939, s. 2. 
14. Clause  (d) omitted by Act 62 of 1956, s. 2 and the Schedule  (w.e.f. 1 -11-1956).  Earlier it  was subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the 
Schedule.  
15. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule  for “the said territories ”. 
16. Ins. by Act 6 of 1938, s. 4.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DESTRUCTIVE INSECTS AND PESTS ACT, 1914.pdf - page 3]
3 
 1[(3) The Central Government m ay, by notification under this section, also levy and collect such fees at 
such rates and in such manner as m ay be specified therein for making an application for a permit to  import, or 
for making inspection, fumigation, disinfection, disinfestation or supervision of, any article or class of articles 
of any insect or class of insects under this section].  
4. Operation of notification under section 3. —A notification under sectio n 3 shall operate as if it had 
been issued under section 19 of the Sea Customs Act, 1878 (8 of 1878), and the officers of Customs at every 
port shall have the same powers in respect of any article with regard to the importation of which such a 
notification  has been issued as they have for the time being in respect of any article the importation of which 
is regulated, restricted or prohibited by the law relating to Sea Customs, and the law for the time being in 
force relating to Sea Customs or any such artic le shall apply accordingly.  
2[4A. Power of Central Government to regulate or prohibit transport from State to State of insects 
or articles likely to infect. —The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, prohibit 
or regulate, subject to such conditions as the Central Government may impose, the export from a State or the 
transport from one State to another State 3*** of any article or class of articles likely to cause infection to any 
crop or of insects generally or any class of insects . 
4B. Refusal to carry article of which transport is prohibited. —When a notification has been issued 
under section 4A, then, notwithstanding any other law for the time being in force, the person responsible for 
the booking of goods or parcels at any railwa y station or inland steam vessel station, —  
(a) where the notification prohibits export or transport, shall refuse to receive for carriage at, or to 
forward or knowingly allow to be carried on, the railway or inland steam v
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DESTRUCTIVE INSECTS AND PESTS ACT, 1914.pdf - page 3]
e for carriage at, or to 
forward or knowingly allow to be carried on, the railway or inland steam vessel from that station 
anything,  of which import or transport is prohibited, consigned to any place in a State other than the State 
in which such station is situate; and  
(b) where the notification imposes cond itions upon export or transport shall so refuse, unles s the 
consignor produces,  or the thing consigned is accompanied by, a document or documents of the 
prescribed nature showing that those conditions are satisfied.  
4C. [Application of section 4B to articles exported to the State of Jammu and Kashmir .] Omitted  by the 
Jammu and Kashmi r (Extension of Laws ) Act, 1956 (62 of 1956), s. 2 and the Schedule  (w.e.f.  1-11-1956).  
4D. Power of Central Government to make rules. —4[(1)] The Central Government may, by  
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules prescribing the nature of the documents which shall 
accompany any article or insect the export or transport whereof is subject to conditions imposed under                
section 4A, or, which shall be held by the consignor or consignee thereof, the authorities which may issue 
such docum ents and the manner in which the documents shall be employed:  
5*   *   *     *   *] 
6[(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in sessio n, for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making a ny 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be withou t prejudice to the validity of anythin
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DESTRUCTIVE INSECTS AND PESTS ACT, 1914.pdf - page 3]
ver, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be withou t prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that 
rule.]  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 12 of 1992, s.  2 (w.e.f. 27 -10-1989).  
2. Ins. by Act 6 of 1938, s. 5.  
3. The words “in British India ” rep. by the A.O. 1948.  
4. Section  4D re -numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule  (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  
5. The p roviso omitted by s. 2 and the Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  
6. Ins. by s. 2 and  the Schedule,  ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DESTRUCTIVE INSECTS AND PESTS ACT, 1914.pdf - page 4]
4 
 5. Power of State Government to make rules. —(1) The State Government may 1[, by notification in the 
Official Gazette,] 2*** make rules for the detention, inspection, disinfection or destruction 3[of any insect or 
class of insects or] of any article or class of articles in respect of which a  notification has been issued u nder 
section 3 3[or under section 4A] or of any article which may have been in contact or proximity thereto, and 
for regulating the powers and duties of the officers whom it may appoint in this behalf.  
(2) In making any rule under this section the State Government may direct that a breach thereof shall be 
punishable with fine, whic h may extend to one thousand rupee s. 
1[(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before the State Legislature.]  
4[5A. Penalties. —Any person who knowingly exports any article or insect from a State or transports any 
article  or insect from one State to another 5*** in contravention of a notification issued under section 4A, or 
attempts so to export or transport any article or insect 6*** and any person responsible for the booking of 
goods or parcels at a railway or inland ste am vessel station who knowingly contravenes the provisions of 
section 4B shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred and fifty rupees and, upon any 
subsequent conviction, with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees.]  
6. Protection t o persons acting under Act. —No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie 
against any person for anything in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule  (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  
2. The words “subject to the control of the G.G. in C. ” were omitted  by the A.O. 1937.  
3. Ins. by Act 6 of 1938, s. 6.  
4. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. 
5. The words “in British India ” were omitted  by the
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DESTRUCTIVE INSECTS AND PESTS ACT, 1914.pdf - page 4]
Act 6 of 1938, s. 6.  
4. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. 
5. The words “in British India ” were omitted  by the A.O. 1948.  
6. The words “or exports or attempts to export from India to the State of Jammu and Kashmir any article or insect in respect of which 
a notification under sec tion 4C has been issued, ” omitted by Act 62 of 1956 s. 2 and the Schedule  (w.e.f. 1 -11-1956).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869  
______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______  
PREAMBLE   
 
I.—PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
Commencement of Act.  
2. Extent of Act.  
Extent of power to grant relief generally, and to make decrees of dissolution, or of nullity.  
3. Interpretation -clause.  
 
II.—JURISDICTION  
4.  Matrimonial jurisdiction of High Courts to be exercised subject to Act.  Exception.   
5. Enforcement of decrees or orders made heretofore by Supreme or High Court.   
6. Pending suits.   
7. [Omitted .].  
8. Extraordinary jurisdiction of High Court.  
Power to transfer suits.  
9. Reference to High Court.  
III.—DISSOLUTION OF MARRIAGE  
10. Grounds for dissolution of marriage  
10A .Dissolution of marriage by mutual consent.  
11. Adulterer to be co -respondent.   
12. Cour t to be satisfied of absence of collusion.   
13. Dismissal of petition.   
14. Power to Court to pronounce decree for dissolving marriage.  
Condonation.  
15. Relief in case of opposition on certain grounds.  
16. Decrees for dissolution to be nisi. 
Collusion.  
17. Power of High Court to remove certain suits.  
17A. [Omitted .]. 
 
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 2]
2 
 IV.—NULLITY OF MARRIAGE  
SECTIONS  
18. Petition for decree of nullity.  
19. Grounds of decree.   
20. [Omitted .]. 
21. Children of annulled marriage.  
V.—JUDICIAL  SEPARATION  
22. Bar to decree for divorce a mensa et toro; but judicial separation obtainable by husband or 
wife.  
23. Application for separation made by petition.  
24. Separated wife deemed spinster with respect to after -acquired property.  
25. Separated wife deemed spinste r for purposes of contract and suing.  
Reversal of Decree of Separation  
26. Decree of separation obtained during absence of husband or wife may bereversed.   
VI.— PROTECTION -ORDERS  
27. Deserted wife may apply to court for protection . 
28. Court may grant protection -order.  
29. Discharge or variation of orders.  
30. Liability of husband seizing wife’s property after notice of order.  
31. Wife’s legal position during continuance of order.  
VII.—RESTITUTION OF CONJUGAL  RIGHTS  
32. Petition for restitution of conjugal rights.  
33. Answer to petition.  
VIII. —DAMAGES AND COSTS  
 
34. [Omitted .]. 
35. [Omitted .]. 
IX.—ALIMONY  
36. Alimony pendente lite . 
37. Power to order permanent alimony.  
Power to order monthly or weekly payments.  
38. Court may direct payment of alimon y to wife or to her trustee.  
X.—SETTLEMENTS  
39. [Omitted .]. 
40. Inquiry into existence of ante -nuptial or post -nuptial settlements.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 3]
3 
 XI.—CUSTODY OF CHILDREN  
SECTIONS  
41. Power to make orders as to custody of children in suit for separation . 
42. Power to make such orders after decree.  
43. Power to make orders as to custody of children  in suits for dissolution or nullity.  
44. Power to make suc h orders after decree or confirmation.  
XII.—PROCEDURE  
45. Code of Civil Procedure to apply.  
46. Forms of petitions and statements.  
47. Petition to state absence of collusion.  
 Statements  to be verified.  
48. Suits on behalf of lunatics.  
49. Suits by minors.  
50. Service of petition.  
51. Mode of taking evidence.  
52. Competence of husband and wife to give evidence as to cruelty or desertion.  
53. Power to close doors.  
54. Power to adjourn.  
55. Enforcement of, and appeals from, orders and decrees.  
No appeal as to  costs.  
56. Appeal to the Supreme Court.  
XIII. —RE-MARRIAGE  
57. Liberty to parties to marry again.  
58. English clergyman not compelled to solemnize marriages of persons divorced for adultery.  
59. English Minister refusing to perform ceremony to permit use o f his Church.  
XIV. —MISCELLANEOUS  
60. Decree for separation or protection -order valid as to persons dealing withwife before reversal.  
Indemnity of persons making payment to wife without notice of reversal ofdecree or protection -
order.  
61. Bar of suit for criminal conversation.   
62. Power to make rules.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 4]
4 
  
SCHEDULE OF FORMS  
NOS. 
1. Petition by husband for a dissolution of marriage with damages againstco -respondent, by reason 
of adultery.  
2. Respondent ’s statement in answer to No. 1.  
3. Co-respondent ’s statement in answer to No. 1.  
4. Petition for decree of Nullity of Marriage.  
5. Petition by wife for judicial separation on the ground of her husband ’s adultery.  
6. Statement in answer to No. 5.   
7. Statement in reply to No. 6.   
8. Petition  for a judicial separation by reason of cruelty.  
9. Statement in answer to No. 8.  
10. Petition for reversal of decree of separation.   
11. Petition for protection -order.   
12. Petition for  Alimony pending the suit.  
13. Statement in answer to No. 12.  
14. Undertaking by minor ’s next friend to be answerable for respondent ’s costs.   
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 5]
5 
 THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869  
ACT NO. 4 OF 18691 
[26th February , 1869.]  
An Act to amend the law relating to Divorce and Matrimonial Causes  2***. 
Preamble. —WHEREAS  it is expedient to amend the law relating to the divorce of persons 
professing the Christian religion, and to confer upon certain Courts jurisdiction in matters 
matrimonial; it is hereby enacted as follows: — 
I.—PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title. Commencement of Act. —This Act may be called the 3*** Divorce Act, and shall 
come into operation on the first day of April, 1869.  
2. Extent of Act .—4[This Act extends to 5[the whole of India 6[except the state of Jammu and 
Kashmir *]].] 
Extent of power to grant relief generally .—7[Nothing hereinafter contained shall 
authorise any Court to grant any relief under this Act except where the petitioner 8[or 
respondent] professes the Christian religion,  
and to make decrees of dissolution .—or to make decrees of dissolution of marriage except where 
the parties to the marriage are domiciled in India at the time when the petition is presented,  
or of nullity. —or to make decrees of nullity of marriage except where the marriage has 
been solemnized in India and the petitioner is resident in In dia at the time of presenting the 
petition,  
or to grant any relief under this Act, other than a decree of dissolution of marriage or of 
nullity of marriage, except where the petitioner resides in India at the time of presenting the 
petition.]  
3.Interpretat ion-clause.—In this Act,  unless there be something repugnant in the subject or  
context,— 
9[(1) “High Court ”.—“High Court ” means with reference to any area: — 
(a)in a State, the High Court for that State;  
10[(b)in Delhi, the High Court of Delhi;  
(bb)in Himachal Pradesh, the High Court of Punjab and Haryana up to and  inclusive of the 
30th April, 1967 and the High Court of Delhi thereafter;]  
(c) in Manipur and Tripura, the High Court of Assam;  
(d) in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, the High Cou
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 5]
Manipur and Tripura, the High Court of Assam;  
(d) in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, the High Court at Calcu tta; 
(e) in11[Lakshadweep], the High Court of Kerala;  
12[(ee) in Chandigarh, the High Court of Punjab and Haryana;]  
                                                      
1. For Statement of Objects and Reasons, see Calcutta Gazette, 1863, p. 173; for Report of Select Committee, see Gazette of India, 1869, p. 
192; for Proceedings in Council, see Calcutta Gazette, 1862, Supplement, p. 463, ibid., 1863, Supplement, p. 43, and Gazette of India, 
1869, Supplement, p. 291.  
2. The words “in India” omitted by Act of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule.  
3. The word “Indian” omitted by Act 51 of 2001, s. 2 (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
4. Subs. by A.O. 1948, for first paragraph  
5. Subs by A.O. 195 0, for certain words.  
6. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule, for “except Part B States”.  
8. Subs. by Act 25 of 1926, s. 2, for paras. 2, 3 and 4.  
9. Ins. by Act 30 of 1927, s. 2.  
10. Subs. by A daption of Laws  (No. 2) 1956, for clause ( 1). 
11. Subs. by the Himachal Pradesh (Adaptation of Laws on State and Concurrent Subjects) Order, 1968, for sub -clause ( b) (w.e.f. 1 -11-
1966).  
12. Subs. by the Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands (Alteration of Name) Adaptation of Laws Order, 1974, for “the Laccadiv e, 
Minicoy and Amindivi Islands” (w.e.f. 1 -11-1973).  
13. Ins. by the Punjab Reorganisation (Chandigarh) (Adaptation of Laws on State and Concurrent Subjects) Order, 1968 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1966).  
*.Vide Notification No. S.O. 3912 (E), dated 30th October, 2019 , this Act is made applicable to the Union ter ritory of Jammu and Kashmir 
and the Union territory of Ladakh . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 6]
6 
 and in the case of any petition under this Act, “High Court” means the High Court for the area where 
the husband and wife reside or last resid ed together ;] 
1[(2) “District Judge ” means a Judge of a principal civil court of original jurisdiction however 
designated ;] 
(3) “District Court ” means, in the case of any petition under this Act, the court of the District 
Judge within the local limits of whose ordinary jurisdiction,  2[or of whose jurisdiction under this Act 
the marriage was solemnized or]   the husband and wife reside or last resid ed together ; 
(4) “Court ” means the High Court or the District Court, as the case may be ; 
(5) “minor children ” means, in the case of sons of Native fathers, boys, who have not completed 
the age of sixteen years, and, in the case of daughters of Native fathe rs, girls who have not completed 
the age of thirteen years ; In other cases it means unmarried children who have not completed the age 
of eighteen years ; 
3[*   *   *   *   *] 
4[*   *   *   *   *] 
(8) “marriage with another woman ” means marriage of any person, being married, to any other 
person, during the life of the former wife, whether the second marriage shall have taken place 
within  5[India] or elsewhere ; 
(9) “desertion ”, implies an abandonment against the wish of the person c harging it; and  
(10) “property ” includes in the case of a wife , any proper ty to which she is entitled for an estate in 
remainder or reversion or as a trustee, executrix or administratr ix; and the date of the death of the 
testator or intestate shall be deemed to be the time at which any such wife becomes entitled as 
executrix or administratr ix. 
II.—JURISDICTION  
4. Matrimonial jurisdiction of High Courts to be exercised subject to Act . Exception .—The 
jurisdiction now exercised by the High Courts in respect of divorce a mensa et toro , and in all other 
causes, suits and matters matrimonial, shall be exercised by such courts and by the District Courts 
sub
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 6]
es, suits and matters matrimonial, shall be exercised by such courts and by the District Courts 
subject to the provisions in this Act c ontained, and not otherwise ; except so far as relates to the 
granting of marriage -licenses, which may be granted as if this Act had not been passed.  
5. Enforcement of decrees or orders made heretofore by Supreme or High Court .—Any 
decree or order of the la te Supreme Court of Judicature at Calcutta, Madras or Bombay sitting on the 
ecclesiastical side, or of any of the said High Courts sitting in the exercise of their matrimonial 
jurisdiction, respectively, in any cause or matter matrimonial, may be enforced and dealt with by the 
said High Courts, respec tively, as hereinafter mentioned, in like manner as if such decree or order had 
been originally made under this Act by the Court so enforcing  or dealing with the same.  
6. Pending suits .—All suits and proceedin gs in causes and matters matrimonial, which when this 
Act comes into operation are pending in any High Court, shall be dealt with and decided by such 
court, so far as may be, as if they had been originally instituted therein under this Act.  
7. [Court to ac t on principles of English Divorce Court ].—[Omitted by the IndianDivorce 
(Amendment) Act, 2001  (51 of 2001 ), s. 4 (w.e.f.  3-10-2001).]  
8. Extraordinary jurisdiction of High Court. —The High Court may, whenever it thinks fit, 
remove and try and determine as a Court of original jurisdiction any suit or proceeding instituted 
under this Act in the Court of any District Judge within the limits of its jurisdiction un der this Act.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by A.O. 1950, for clause ( 2). 
2. Subs. by Act 51 of 2001, s. 3, for “or of whose jurisdiction under this Act” (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
3. Clause ( 6) omitted by Act 51 of 2001, s. 3 (w.e.f. 3-10-2001).  
4. Clause ( 7) omitted by s. 3 ibid,(w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
5. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “the dominions of H
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 6]
 ( 7) omitted by s. 3 ibid,(w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
5. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “the dominions of Her Majesty”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 7]
7 
 Power to transfer suits. —The High Court may also withdraw any such suit or proceeding, and 
transfer it for trial or disposal to the Court of any other such District Judge.  
9. Reference to High Court. —When any question of law or usage having the force of law arises 
at any point in  the proceedings previous to the hearing of any suit under this Act by a District Court or 
at any subsequent stage of such suit, or in the execution of the dec ree therein or order thereon,  
the Court may, either of its own motion or on the application of an y of the parties, draw up a 
statement of the case and refer it, with the Court ’s own opinion thereon, to the decision of the High 
Court.  
If the question has arisen previous to or in the hearing, the District Court may either stay such 
proceedings, or proce ed in the case pending such reference, and pass a decree contingent upon the 
opinion of the High Court upon it.  
If a decree or order has been made, its execution shall be stayed until the receipt of the order of the 
High Court upon such reference.  
III.—DISSOLUTION OF MARRIAGE  
1[10. Grounds for dissolution of marriage .—(1) Any marriage solemnized, whether before or 
after the commencement  of the Indian Divorce (Amendment) Act,  2001  (51 of 2001) , may, on a 
petition presented to the Dis trict Court either by the husband or the wife, be dissolved on the ground 
that since the solemnization of the marriage, the respondent — 
(i) has committed adultery; or  
(ii) has ceased to be Christian by conversion to another religion; or  
(iii) has been incurably of unsound mind for a continuous period of not less than two years 
immediately preceding the presentation of the petition; or  
2*   *   *   *  * 
(v) has, for a period of not less than two years immediately preceding the presentation of the 
petition, been suffering from ven ereal disease in a communi cable form; or  
(vi) has not been heard of as being alive for a period of seven years or more by those pers
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 7]
rm; or  
(vi) has not been heard of as being alive for a period of seven years or more by those persons 
who would naturally have heard of the respondent if the respondent had been alive; or  
(vii) has  wilfully refused to con summate the marriage and the marriage has not therefore been 
consummated; or  
(viii) has failed to comply with a decree for restitution of conjugal rights for a period of two 
years or upwards after the passing of the decree against the respondent; or  
(ix) has deserted the petitioner for at least two years immediately preced ing the presentation of 
the petition; or  
(x) has treated the petitioner with such cruelty as to cause a reasonable apprehension in the 
mind of the petitioner that it would be harmful or injurious for the petitioner to live with the 
respondent.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 51 of 2001, s. 5, for section 10 (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
2. Clause ( iv) omitted  by Act 6 of 2019 , s. 2  (w.e.f. 1 -3-2019) .  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 8]
8 
 (2) A wife may also present a petition for the dissolution of her marriage on the ground that the 
husband has, since the solemnization of the marriage, been guilty of rape, sodomy or bestiality.]  
1[10A .Dissolution of marriage by mutual consent .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act 
and the rules made thereunder, a petition for dissolution of marriage may be presented to the District 
Court by both the parties to a marriage together, whether such marriage was solemnized before or 
after the commencement  of the Indian Divorce (Amendment) Act, 2001  (51 of 2001) , on the ground 
that they have been living separately for a period of two years or more, that they have not been able to 
live together and they have mutually agreed that the marriage should be dissolved.  
(2) On the motion of both the parties made not earlier than six months after the date of presentation 
of the petition referred to in sub -section ( 1) and not later than eighteen months after the sa id date, if 
the petition is not withdrawn by both the parties in the mean time, the Court shall, on being satisfied, 
after hearing the parties and making such inquiry, as it thinks fit, that a marriage has been solemnized 
and that the averments in the peti tion are true, pass a decree declaring the marriage to be dissolved 
with effect from the date of decree. ] . 
2[11. Adulterer or adulteress to be co -respondent .—On a petition for dissolution of marriage 
presented by a husband or wife on the ground of adultery, the petitioner shall make the alleged 
adulterer or adulteress a co -respondent, unless the petitioner is excused by the Court from so doing on 
any of the following grounds, namely: — 
(a) that the wife, being the respondent is leading the life of a prostitute or the husband, being 
respondent is leading an immoral life and that the petitioner knows of no person with whom the 
adultery has been committed;  
 (b) that the name of the alleged adulterer or adulteress is unknown to th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 8]
ery has been committed;  
 (b) that the name of the alleged adulterer or adulteress is unknown to the petitioner although 
the petitioner has made due efforts to discover it;  
 (c) that the alleged adulterer or adulteress is dead.] . 
12. Court to be satisfied of absence of collusion .—Upon any such petition for the dissolution of 
a marriage, the Court shall satisfy itself, so far as  it reasonably can, not only as to the facts alleged, 
but also whether or not the petitioner has been in any manner accessory to, or conniving at, the going 
through of the said form of marriage, or the adultery, or has condoned the same, and shall also enq uire 
into any countercharge which may be made against the petitioner.  
13.  Dismissal of petition .—In case the Court, on the evidence in relation to any such petition, is 
satisfied that the petitioner ’s case has not been proved, or is not satisfied that the  alleged adultery has 
been committed,  
or finds that the petitioner has, during the marriage, been accessory to, or conniving at, the going 
through of the said form of marriage, or the adultery of the other party to the marriage, or has 
condoned the adulter y complained of,  
or that the petition is presented or prosecuted in collusion with either of the respondents,  
then and in any of the said cases the Court shall dismiss the petition.  
3 *   *   *   *   *    
14. Power to court to pronounce decree for dissolvi ng marriage .—In case the Court is satisfied 
on the evidence that the case of the petitioner has been proved,  
and does not find that the petitioner has been in any manner accessory to, or conniving at, the 
going through of the said form of marriage, or the adultery of the other party to the marriage, or has 
condoned the adultery complained of,  
or that the petition is presented or prosecuted in collusion with either of the re spondents,  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 51 of 2001, s . 6. (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
2.
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 8]
                                        
1. Ins. by Act 51 of 2001, s . 6. (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
2. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for section 11 (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
3. Last paragraph  of section 13  omitted by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 9]
9 
 the Court shall pronounce a decree declaring such marriage to be dissolve d 1***: 
Provided that the Court shall not be bound to pronounce such decree if it finds that the petitioner 
has, during the marriage, been guilty of adultery,  
or if the petitioner has, in the opinion of the Court, been guilty of unreasonable delay in prese nting 
or prosecuting such petition,   
or of cruelty towards the other party to the marriage,  
or of having deserted or wilfully separated himself or herself from the other party before the 
adultery complained of, and without reasonable excuse,  
or of such wilful neglect or misconduct of or towards the other party as has conduced to the 
adultery.  
Condonation . No adultery shall be deemed to have been condoned within the meaning of this Act 
unless where conjugal cohabitation has been resumed or continued.  
15. Relief in case of opposition on certain grounds .—In any suit instituted for dissolution of 
marriage, if the respondent opposes the relief sought on the ground, in case of such a suit instituted by 
a husband, of his adultery, cruelty, or desertion  2*** or, in case of such a suit instituted by a wife, on 
the ground of   3[her adultery or cruelty or desertion], the Court may in such suit give to the 
respondent, on his or her application, the same relief to which he or she would have been entitled in 
case he or she had presented a petition seeking such relief, and the respondent shall be competent to 
give evidence of or relating to  4[such adultery, cruelty] or desertion.  
16.  Decrees for dissolution to be nisi.—Every decree for dissolution of marriage made by a H igh 
Court  5*** shall in the first instance, be a decree nisi, not to be made absolute till after the expiration 
of such time, not less than six months from the pronouncing thereof, as the High Court, by general or 
special order from time to time, directs.  
Collusion . During that period any person shall be at liberty, in such manner as the High Cour
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 9]
ts.  
Collusion . During that period any person shall be at liberty, in such manner as the High Court by 
general or special order from time to time direct s, to show cause why the said decree should not be 
made absolute by reason of the same having been obtained b y collusion or by reason of material facts 
not being brought before the Court.  
On cause being so shown, the Court shall deal with the case by making the decree absolute, or by 
reversing the decree nisi, or by requiring further inquiry, or otherwise as just ice may demand.  
The High Court may order the cost of Counsel and witnesses and otherwise arising from such 
cause being shown, to be paid by the parties or such one or more of them as it thinks fit, including a 
wife if she have separate property.  
Whenever a  decree nisi has been made, and the petitioner fails, within a reasonable time, to move 
to have such decree made absolute, the High Court may dismiss the suit.  
6[17. Power of High Court to remove certain suits .—During the progress of the suit in the Court 
of the District Judge, any person suspecting that any parties to the suit are or have been acting in 
collusion for the purpose of obtaining  a divorce, shall be at liberty, in such manner as the High Court 
by general or special order from time to time direc ts, to apply to the High Court to remove the suit 
under section 8, and the Court shall thereupon, if it thinks fit, remove such suit and try and determine 
the same as a Court of original jurisdiction, and the provisions contained in section 16 shall apply to 
every suit so removed; or it may direct the  District Judge to take such steps in respect of the alleged 
collusion as may be neces sary, to enable him to make a decree in accordance with the justice of the 
case.]  
                                                      
1. The words  “in the manner and subject to all the provisions and limitation in section 16 and 17 made declared” in 
paragraph 4 of section 14 omitted by
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 9]
ovisions and limitation in section 16 and 17 made declared” in 
paragraph 4 of section 14 omitted by Act 51 of 2001, s. 9 (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
2. The words “without reasonable excuse,” omitted by s. 10 , ibid., (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
3. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for “her adultery and cruelty” (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
4. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for “such cruelty” (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
5. The words “not being a confirmation of a decree of a District Court ” omitted by s. 11 , ibid., (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
6. Subs . by s. 12, ibid., for section 17 (w.e.f 3 -10-2001).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 10]
10 
 17A. [Appointment of officer to exercise duties of King ’s Proctor ].—[Omitted  by the Indian  
Divorce ( Amendment ) Act, 2001 (5 1 of  2001),  s. 13 (w.e.f . 3-10-2001).]  
IV.—NULLITYOF  MARRIAGE  
18. Petition for decree of nullity .—Any husband or wife may present a petition to the District 
Court  1***, praying that his or her marriage may be declared null and void.  
19. Grounds of decree .—Such decree may be made on any of the following grounds: — 
(1) that the respondent was impotent at the time of the marriage and at the time of the 
institution of the sui t; 
(2) that the parties are within the prohibited degree of consanguinity (whether natural or legal) 
or affinity;  
(3) that either party was a lunatic or idiot at the time of the marriage;  
(4) that the former husband or wife of either party was living at the time of the marriage, and 
the marriage with such former husband or wife was then in force.  
Nothing in this section shall affect the  2[jurisdiction of the District Court] to make decrees of 
nullity of marriage on the ground that the consent of either pa rty was obtained by force or fraud.  
20. [Confirmation of District Judge ’s decree ].—[Omitted by the Indian Divorce (Amendment ) Act, 
2001 (51 of 2001),  s. 16 (w.e.f . 3-10-2001).]  
21. Children of annulled marriage .—Where a marriage is annulled on the ground that a former 
husband or wife was living, and it is adjudged that the subsequent marriage was contracted in good 
faith and with the full belief of the parties that the former husband or wife was dead, or when a 
marriage is annulled on the ground of insanit y, children begotten before the decree is made shall be 
specified in the decree, and shall be entitled to succeed, in the same manner as legitimate children, to 
the estate of the parent who at the time of the marriage was competent to contract.  
V. —JUDICIA L SEPARATION  
22. Bar to decree for divorce a mensa et toro ; but judicial separation obtainable by husband 
or 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 10]
 
22. Bar to decree for divorce a mensa et toro ; but judicial separation obtainable by husband 
or wife .—No decree shall hereafter be made for a divorce a mensa et toro , but the husband or wife 
may obtain a decree of judicial separation, on the g round of adultery, or cruelty, or desertion  3*** for 
two years or upwards, and such decree shall have the effect of a divorce a mensa et toro  under the 
existing law, and such other legal effect as here in after mentioned.  
23. Application for separation mad e by petition .—Application for judicial sepa ration on any 
one of the grounds aforesaid, may be made by either husband or wife by petition to the District Court  
4***, and the Court, on being satisfied of the truth of the statements made in such petition, and that 
there is no legal ground why the application should not be granted, may decree judicial separation 
accordingly.  
24. Separated wife deemed spinster with respect to after -acquired property .—In every case of 
a judicial separation under this Act, the wife shall from the date of the sentence, and whilst the 
separation continues, be considered as unmarried with respect to property of every description which 
she may acquire, or which may come to or devolve upon her.  
Such property may be disposed of by her  in all respects as an unmarried woman, and on her 
decease the same shall, in case she dies intestate, go as the same would have gone if her husband had 
been then dead:  
Provided that, if any such wife again cohabits with her husband, all such property as s he may be 
entitled to when such cohabitation takes place shall be held to her separate use, subject, however, to 
any agreement in writing made between herself and her husband whilst separate.  
                                                      
1. The words “or to the High Court” omitted by Act 51 of 2001, s. 14 (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
2. Subs. by s. 15, ibid.,  for “jurisdiction of the High Court” (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
3. The words
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 10]

2. Subs. by s. 15, ibid.,  for “jurisdiction of the High Court” (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
3. The words “without reasonable excuse” omitted by s. 17, ibid. (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
4. The words “or to the High Court” omitted by Act 51 of 2001, s. 18 (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 11]
11 
 25. Separated wife deemed spinster for purposes of contract and suing .—In every case of a 
judicial separation under this Act, the wife shall, whilst so separated, be considered as an unmarried 
woman for the purposes of contract, and wrongs and injuries, and suing and being sued in any civil 
proceedings; and her husband  shall not be liable in respect of any contact, act or costs entered into, 
done, omitted or incurred by her during the separation:  
Provided that where, upon any such judicial separation, alimony has been decreed or ordered to be 
paid to the wife, and the s ame is not duly paid by the husband, he shall be liable for necessaries 
supplied for her use:  
Provided also that nothing shall prevent the wife from joining, at any time during such separation, 
in the exercise of any joint power given to herself and her hu sband.  
Reversal of Decree of Separation  
26. Decree of Separation  obtained during absence of husband or wife may be                       
reversed. —Any husband or wife, upon the application of whose wife or husband, as the case may be, 
a decree of judicial separation has been pronounced, may, at any time thereafter, present a petition to 
the Court by which the decree was pronounced, praying for a reversal of such decree, on the ground 
that it was obtained in his or her absence, and that there was reasonable excuse for the alleged 
desertion, where desertion was the ground of such decree.  
The Court may, on being satisfied of the truth of the allegations of such petition reverse the decree 
accordingly; but such reversal shall not prejudice or affect the rights o r remedies which any other 
person would have had, in case it had not been decreed, in respect of any debts, contracts, or acts of 
the wife incurred, entered into, or done between the times of the sentence of separation and of the 
reversal thereof.  
VI.—PROT ECTION -ORDERS  
27. Deserted wife may apply to court for protection .—Any wife to whom section 4 of th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 11]
ION -ORDERS  
27. Deserted wife may apply to court for protection .—Any wife to whom section 4 of the 
Indian Succession Act, 1865 (10 of 1865)1does not apply, may, when deserted by her husband, 
present a petition to the District Court  2***, at any time afte r such desertion, for an order to protect 
any property which she may have acquired or may acquire, and any property of which she may have 
become possessed or may become possessed after such desertion, against her husband or his creditors, 
or any person cla iming under him.  
28. Court may grant protection -order .—The Court, if satisfied of the fact of such desertion, and 
that the same was without reasonable excuse, and that the wife is maintaining herself by her own 
industry or property, may make and give to the wife an order protecting her earnings and other 
property from her husband and all creditors and persons claiming under him. Every such order shall 
state the time at which the desertion com menced, and shall, as regards all persons dealing with the 
wife in reliance thereon, be conclusive as to such time.  
29. Discharge or variation of orders .—The husband or any creditor of, or person claiming under 
him, may apply to the Court by which such order was made for the discharge or variation thereof, and 
the Court, if the desertion has ceased, or if for any other reason it thinks fit so to do, may discharge or 
vary the order accordingly.  
30. Liability of husband seizing wife ’s property after notice of order .—If the husband, or any 
creditor of, or person claimi ng under, the husband, seizes or continues to hold any property of the 
wife after notice of any such order, he shall be liable, at the suit of the wife (which she is hereby 
empowered to bring), to return or deliver to her the specific property, and also to  pay her a sum equal 
to double its value.  
31. Wife’s legal position during continuance of order .—So long as any such order of protection 
remains in force the wife shall be and
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 11]
ntinuance of order .—So long as any such order of protection 
remains in force the wife shall be and be deemed to have been, during such desertion of her, in the 
                                                      
1. See now the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925).  
2. The words “or the High  Court ” omitted by Act 51  of 2001, s . 18 (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 12]
12 
 like position in al l respects, with regard to property and contracts and suing and being sued, as she 
would be under this Act if she obtained a decree of judicial separation.  
VII.— RESTITUTION OF CONJUGAL  RIGHTS  
32. Petition for restitution of conjugal rights .—When either th e husband or the wife has, 
without reasonable excuse, withdrawn from the society of the other, either wife, or husband may 
apply, by petition to the District Court  1*** for restitution of conjugal rights, and the Court, on being 
satisfied of the truth of t he state ments made in such petition, and that there is no legal ground why the 
application should not be granted, may decree restitution of conjugal rights accordingly.  
33. Answer to petition .—Nothing shall be pleaded in answer to a petition for restituti on of 
conjugal rights, which would not be ground for a suit for judicial separation or for a decree of nullity 
of marriage.  
VIII. —DAMAGES AND COSTS  
34. [Husband may claim damages from adulterer ].—[Omitted by the Indian Divorce 
(Amendment) Act, 2001 (51 of 2001),  s. 19 (w.e.f.  3-10-2001)] . 
35. [Power to order adulterer to pay costs ].—[Omitted  by s. 20, ibid. (w.e.f.  3-10-2001)].  
IX.—ALIMONY  
36. Alimony pendente  lite.—In any suit under this Act, whether it be instituted by a husband or a 
wife, and whether or not she has obtained an order of protection  2[the wife may present a petition for 
expenses of the proceedings and alimony pending the suit .] 
Such petition shall be served on the husband; and the Court, on being satisfied of the truth of the 
statements therein contained, may make such order on the husband  3[for payment to the wife of the 
expenses of the proceedings and alimony pending the suit]  alimony pending the suit as it may deem 
just: 
4*   *   *   *   * 
5[Provided further that the petition for the e xpenses of the proceedings and alimony pending the 
suit, shall, as far as possible, be disposed of within sixty days of service of suc
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 12]
ony pending the 
suit, shall, as far as possible, be disposed of within sixty days of service of such petition on the 
husband.]  
37.  Power to order permanent alimony .—6[Where a decree of dissolution of the marriage or a 
decree of judicial separation is obtained by the wife, the District Court may order that the husband 
shall]  to the satisfaction of the court, secure to the wife such gross sum of money, or such annual sum 
of money for any term not exceeding her own life, as,  having regard to her fortune (if any), to the 
ability of the husband, and to the conduct of the parties, it thinks reasonable; and for that purpose may 
cause a proper instrument to be executed by all necessary parties.  
Power to order monthly or weekly pay ments .—In every such case the Court may make an order 
on the husband for payment to the wife of such monthly or weekly sums for her maintenance and 
support as the Court may think reasonable:  
Provided that if the husband afterwards from any cause becomes un able to make such payments, it 
shall be lawful for the Court to discharge or modify the order, or temporarily to suspend the same as 
to the whole or any part of the money so ordered to be paid, and again to revive the same order wholly 
or in part as to the  court seems fit.  
  
                                                      
1. The words “or the High Court ” omitted by Act 51  of 2001, s . 18 (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
2. Subs. by Act 49 of 2001, s. 2, for “the wife may present a petition for alimony pending the suit ” (w.e.f. 24 -9-2001).  
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “for payment to the wife of alimony pending the suit ” (w.e.f. 24 -9-2001).  
4. The proviso omitted by Act 51 of 2001, s. 21 (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
5. Ins. by Act 49 of 2001, s . 2 (w.e.f. 24 -9-2001).  
6. Subs. by Act 51 of 2001, s. 22, for certain words (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 13]
13 
 38.  Court may direct payment of alimony to wife or to her trustee .—In all cases in which the 
Court makes any decree or order for alimony, it may direct the same to be paid either to the wife 
herself, or to any trustee on her behalf to be approved by the court, and may impose any terms or 
restrictions which to the Court seem expedient, and may from time to time appoint a new trustee, if it 
appears to the Court expedient so to do.  
X.—SETTLEMENTS  
39. [Power to order settlement of wife ’s property for benefit of husband and children ].—[Omitted 
by the Indian Divorce  (Amendment ) Act, 2001 (51 of 2001),   s. 23 ( w.e.f.  3-10-2001)].  
40.  Inquiry into existence of ante -nuptial or post -nuptial settlements .—1[The District Court 
may, before passing a decree for dissolution of the marriage or a decree of nullity of marriage, inquire 
into]the existence of ante -nuptial or post -nuptial settlements made on the parties whose marriage is 
the subject of the decree, and may make such orders, with reference to  the application of the whole or 
a portion of the property settled, whether for the benefit of the husband or the wife, or of the children 
(if any) of the marriage, or of both children and parents, as to the Court seems fit:  
Provided that the Court shall n ot make any order for the benefit of the parents or either of them at 
the expense of the children.  
XI.—CUSTODY OF CHILDREN  
41.  Power to make orders as to custody of children in suit for separation .—In any suit for 
obtaining a judicial separation the Court  may from time to time, before making its decree, make such 
interim orders, and may make such provision in the decree, as it deems proper with respect to the 
custody, maintenance and education of the minor children, the marriage of whose parents is the 
subject of such suit, and may, if it thinks fit, direct proceedings to be taken for placing such children 
under the protection of the said Court : 
2[Provided that the application wit
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 13]
placing such children 
under the protection of the said Court : 
2[Provided that the application with respect to the maintenance and education of the minor children 
pending the s uit, shall, as far as possible, be disposed of within sixty days from the date of service of 
notice on the respondent.]  
42. Power to make such orders after decree .—The court , after a decree of judicial separation, 
may upon application (by petition) for this purpose make, from time to time, all such orders and 
provisions, with respect to the custody, maintenance and education of the minor children, the marriage 
of whose parents  is the subject of the decree, or for placing such children under the protection of the 
said court, as might have been made by such decree or by interim orders in case the proceedings for 
obtaining such decree were still pending.  
43. Power to make orders a s to custody of children in suits for dissolution or nullity .—3[In 
any suit for obtaining a dissolution of marriage or a decree of nullity of marriage instituted in a 
District Court, the Court may from time to time before making its decree, make such inter im orders as 
it may deem proper] with respect to the custody, maintenance and education of the minor children, the 
marriage of whose parents is the subject of the suit,  
and may, if it thinks fit, direct proceedings to be taken for placing such children und er the protection 
of the court.  
44.  Power to make such orders after decree or confirmation .—4[Where a decree of dissolution 
or nullity of marriage has been passed, the District Court may, upon applica tion] by petition for the 
purpose, make from time to time all such orders and provisions, with respect to the custody, 
maintenance and education of the minor children, the marriage of whose parents was the subject of 
the decree, or for placing such children under the protection of the said court , as might have 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 51 o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 13]
d court , as might have 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 51 of 2001, s. 24, for certain words (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
2. Ins. by Act 49 of 2001, s. 3 (w.e.f 24 -9-2001).  
3. Subs . by Act 51 of 2001, s . 25, for certain words (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
4. Subs. by, s . 26, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 14]
14 
 been made by such decree absolute or decree (as the case may be), or by such interim  orders as 
aforesaid.  
XII.—PROCEDURE  
45. Code of Civil Procedure to apply .—Subject to the provisions herein contained, all 
proceedings under this Act betwe en party and party shall be regulated by the1[Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) ]. 
46. Forms of petitions and statements .—The forms set forth in the Schedule to this Act, with 
such variation as the circumstances of each case require, may be used for  the respective purposes 
mentioned in such Schedule.  
47. Petition to state absence of collusion .—Every petition under this Act for a decree of 
dissolution of marriage, or of nullity of marriage, or of judicial separation  2*** shall  3*** state that 
there is  not any collusion or connivance between the petitioner and the other party to the marriage.  
Statements to be verified .—The statements contained in every petition under this Act shall be 
verified by the petitioner or some other competent person in manner required by law for the 
verification of plaints, and may at the hearing be referred to as evidence.  
48. Suits on behalf of lunatics .—When the husband or wife is a lunatic or idiot, any suit under 
this Act (other than a suit for restitution of conjugal righ ts) may be brought on his or her behalf by the 
committee or other person entitled to his or her custody.  
49. Suits by minors .—Where the petitioner is a minor, he or she shall sue by his or her next friend 
to be approved by the Court; and no petition presen ted by a minor under this Act shall be filed until 
the next friend has undertaken in writing to be answerable for costs.  
Such undertaking  4*** shall be filed in Court, and the next friend shall thereupon be liable in the same 
manner and to the same extent as if he were a plaintiff in an ordinary suit.  
50. Service of petition .—Every petition under this Act shall be served on the party to be affected 
thereby, either within or
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 14]
Every petition under this Act shall be served on the party to be affected 
thereby, either within or without  5[India], in such manner as the High Court by general or special 
order from time to time directs.  
Provided that the court may dispense with such service altogether in case it seems necessary or 
expedient so to do.  
51. Mode of taking evidence .—The witnesses in all proceedings before the court, where their 
attendance can be had, shall be examined orally, and any party may offer himself or herself as a 
witness, and shall be examined, and may be cross -examined and re -examined, like any other witness:  
Provided that the parties shall be at liberty to verify their respective cases in w hole or in part by 
affidavit, but so that the deponent in every such affidavit shall, on the application of the opposite 
party, or by direction of the Court, be subject to be cross -examined by or on behalf of the opposite 
party orally, and after such cross -examination may be re -examined orally as aforesaid by or on behalf 
of the party by whom such affidavit was filed.  
52. Competence of husband and wife to give evidence as to cruelty or deser tion.—On any 
petition presented,  6[by a husband or a wife, praying  that his or her marriage may be dissolved by 
reason of his wife or her husband, as the case may be, having been guilty of adultery, cruelty or 
desertion] , the husband and wife re spectively shall be competent and compellable to give evidence of 
or relatin g to such cruelty or desertion.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 51 of 2001, s. 27, for “Code of Civil Procedure ” (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
2. The Words “or of reversal of judicial separation, or for restitution of conjugal rights, or for damages, shall bear a stamp of 
five rupees, and ” rep. by Act 7 of 1870, s . 2 and the Schedule III.  
3. The words “in the first, second and third cases mentioned in this section, ” rep. by Act 7 of 1870, s . 2 and the Schedule
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 14]
t, second and third cases mentioned in this section, ” rep. by Act 7 of 1870, s . 2 and the Schedule III.  
4. The words “shall bear a stamp of eight annas and ” rep. by Act 7 of 1870, s. 2 and  the Schedule III.  
5. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for the Provinces , which had been substituted by the A.O. 1948, for “British India ”. 
6. Subs. by Act 51 of 2001, s . 28, for certain words (w.e.f 3 -10-2001).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 15]
15 
 53. Power to close doors .—The whole or any part of any proceeding under this Act may be heard, 
if the Court thinks fit, with closed doors.  
54. Power to adjourn .—The Court may, from time to time, adjourn the hearing of any pe tition 
under this Act, and may require further evidence thereon if it sees fit so to do.  
55. Enforcement of, and appeal from, orders and decree .—All decrees and orders made by the 
Court in any suit or proceedings under this Act shall be enforced and may be  appealed from, in the 
like manner as the decrees and orders of the Court made in the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction 
are enforced and may be appealed from, under the laws, rules and orders for the time being in force:  
1*   *   *   *   * 
No app eal as to costs . —2[Provided] that there shall be no appeal on the subject of costs only.  
56. Appeal to the Supreme Court .—Any person may appeal to  3[the Supreme Court] from any 
decree (other than a decree nisi) or order under this Act of a High Court made  on appeal or otherwise,  
and from any decree (other than a decree nisi) or order made in the exercise of original jurisdiction by 
Judges of a High Court or of any Division Court from which an appeal shall not lie to the High Court,  
when the High Court declares that the case is a fit one for appeal to  3[the Supreme Court].  
XIII.—RE-MARRIAGE . 
4[57. Liberty to parties to marry again .—Where a decree for dissolution or nullity of marriage 
has been passed and either the time for appeal has expired without an appeal having been presented to 
any court including the Supreme Court or an appeal has been presented but has been dismissed and 
the decree or dismissal has become final, it shall be lawful for either party to the marriage to marry 
again.]  
58. English clergyman not compelled to solemnize marriages of persons divorced for 
adultery .—No clergyman in Holy Orders of the  5*** Church of England  6*** shall be compelled to 
solemnize the marriage of any 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 15]
ly Orders of the  5*** Church of England  6*** shall be compelled to 
solemnize the marriage of any  person whose former marriage has been dissolved on the groun d of his 
or her adultery, or shall be liable to any suit, penalty or censure for solemnizing or refusing to 
solemnize the marriage of any such person.  
59.  English Minister refusing to perform ceremony to permit use of his Church . — When any 
Minister of an y Church or Chapel of the said  5*** Church refuses to perform such marriage -service 
between any persons who but for such refusal would be entitled to have the same service performed in 
such Church or Chapel, such Minister shall permit any other Minister in  Holy Orders of the said 
Church, entitled to officiate within the di ocese in which such Church or Chapel is situate, to perform 
such marriage -service in such Church or Chapel.  
XIV.—MISCLLANEOUS  
60. Decree for separation or protection -order valid as to pers ons dealing with wife before 
reversal . — Every decree for judicial separation or order to protect property, obtained by a wife 
under this Act shall, until reversed or discharged, be deemed valid, so far as necessary, for the 
protection of any person dealin g with the wife.  
No reversal, discharge or variation of such decree or order shall affect any rights or remedies 
which any person would otherwise have had in respect of any contracts or acts of the wife entered into 
or done between the dates of such decree  or order, and of the reversal, discharge or variation thereof.  
Indemnity of persons making payment to wife without notice of reversal of decree or 
protection order . — All persons who in reliance on any such decree or order make any payment to, 
or permit any transfer or act to be made or done by, the wife who has obtained the same shall, 
notwithstanding such decree or order may then have been reversed, discharged or v aried, or the 
separation of the wife from her husband may have ceased, or at some time since the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 15]
v aried, or the 
separation of the wife from her husband may have ceased, or at some time since the making of the 
                                                      
1. The first proviso omitted by Act 51 of 2001, s. 29 (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
2. Subs. by s. 29, ibid., for “Provided also” (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “Her Majesty in Council”.  
4. Subs. by Act 5 1 of 2001, s. 30, for section 57 (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
5. The word “United” rep. by Act 12 of 1873, s. 1 and the Schedule.  
6. The words “and Ireland” rep. by s. 1, ibid. and the Schedule.   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 16]
16 
 decree or order been discontinued, be protected and indemnified as if, at the time of such payment, 
transfer or other act, such decree or order w ere valid and still subsisting without variation, and the 
separation had not ceased or been discontinued , 
unless, at the time of the payment, transfer or other act, such persons had notice of the reversal, 
discharge or variation of the decree or order or o f the cessation or dis continuance of the separation.  
61. Bar of suit for criminal conversation .— After this Act comes into operation, no person 
competent to present a petition under sections 2 and 10 shall maintain a suit for criminal conversation 
with hi s wife.  
62. Power to make rules .— The High Court shall make such rules under this Act as it may from 
time to time consider expedient, and may from time to time alter and add to the same:  
Provided that such rules, alterations and additions are consistent wi th the provisions of this Act and 
the1[Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) ]. 
All such rules, alteration and additions shall be published in the Official Gazette.  
 
  
 
 
 
                                                      
1. Subs . by Act 51 of 2001, s . 31, for “Code of Civil Procedure ” (w.e.f. 3 -10-2001).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 17]
17 
 THE SCHEDULE  
______________  
 
SCHEDULE OF FORMS  
No. 1 . —PETITION  by husband for a dissolution of marriage with damages against co -respondent, by 
reason of adultery.  
(See sections  10 and 34). 
In the (High) Court of   
To the Hon ’ble Mr. Justice      [or To the Judge of    ] 
      The  day of    186  .  
The petition of A.B., of 
SHEWETH , 
1. That your petitioner was on the   day of             , one thousand eight hundred 
and  , lawfully married to C.B., then C.D., spinster at   .  (a) 
2. That from his said married, your petitioner lived and cohabited with his said wife at                 
and at   , in  , and lastly at   , in         , and that your 
petitioner and his said wife have had issue of their said marriage,  five children, of whom  two sons 
only survive, aged respectively  twelve  and fourteen  years.  
3. That during the thr ee years immediately preceding the    day of     
one thousand eight hundred and                                 , X.Y. was constantly with a few exceptions, 
residing in the house of your petitioner at  aforesaid, and that on diverse occasions 
during the said period, the dates of which are unknown to your petitioner, the said C.B. in your 
petitioner ’s said house committed adultery with the said X.Y. 
4. That no collusion or connivance exists between me and  my said wife for the purpose of 
obtaining a dissolution of our said marriage or for any other purpose.  
Your petitioner, therefore, prays that this (Hon ’ble) Court will decree a disso lution of the said 
marriage, and that the said X.Y. do pay the sum of ru pees 5,000 as damages by reason of his 
having committed adultery with your petitioner ’s said wife, such damages to be paid to your 
petitioner, or otherwise paid or applied as to this (Hon ’ble) Court seems fit.  
(Signed) A. B.  (a) 
Form of Verification  
 
I, A.B., the petitioner named in the above petition, do declare that what is stated therein is true to 
the best of my information and bel
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 17]
bove petition, do declare that what is stated therein is true to 
the best of my information and belief.  
_________  
 
No. 2 .—Respondent ’s statement in answer to No . 1 
In the court of      the   day of   , 
Between A.B., petitioner,  
  C.B., respondent, and  
      X.Y., co-respondent . 
C.B., the respondent, by D.E. her attorney ( or vakil) , in answer to the petition of A.B. says that she 
denies that she has on diverse or any occasions committed adultery with X.Y., as alleged in the third 
paragraph of the said petition.  
Wherefore the respondent prays that this (Hon ’ble) Court will reject the said petition.  
(Signed) C.B. 
______________________________________________________________________________  
(a) If the marriage was solemn ized out of India, the adultery must be shown to have bee n committed in 
India.  
(b) The petition must be signed by the petitioner.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 18]
18 
  
No. 3.—Co-respondent ’s statement in answer to No.  1 
In the (High) Court of        
The      day of   
Between A.B.,  petitioner,  
C.B.,  respondent, and  
X.Y., co-respondent.  
X.Y., the co -respondent, in answer to the petition filed in this cause, saith  that he denies that he 
committed adultery with the said C.B., as alleged in the said petition.  
Wherefore the said X.Y. , prays that this (Hon ’ble) Court will reject the prayer of the said petitioner 
and order him to pay the costs of and incident to the said petition.  
(Signed) X.Y. 
_____  
 
No. 4 .—PETTION  for Decree of Nullity of Marriage  
(See section  18) 
In the (High) Court of    
To the Hon ’ble Mr. Justice      [or To the  
 Judge of     ]. 
    The   day of  , 186  .  
    The Petition of A.B, falsely called A.D., 
SHEWETH , 
1. That on the        day of                           , one thousand                             
eight hundred and                                                                                       , your petitioner, then a 
spinster, eighteen years of age, was married in fact, though not in law, to C.D., then a bachelor of 
about thirty years of age, at [ some place in India ]. 
2. That from the said    day of                                                    , one thousand 
eight hundred and    , until the month of              , your petitioner lived 
and cohabited with the sa id C.D.,  at diverse places, and particularly at aforesaid.  
3. That the said C.D.  has never consummated the said pretended marriage by carnal copulation.  
4. That at the time of the celebration of your petitioner ’s pretended marriage, the said C.D.  was, by 
reason of the impotency or malformation, legally incompetent to enter into the contract of marriage.  
5. That there is no collusion or connivance between her and the said C.D.  with respect to the 
subject of this suit.  
Your petitioner therefore prays that thi s (Hon ’ble) Court will declare that the said marriage is nu
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 18]
our petitioner therefore prays that thi s (Hon ’ble) Court will declare that the said marriage is null 
and void.  
(Signed) A.B. 
Form of Verification : See No. 1 
__________  
No. 5 .—PETITION  by wife for judicial separation on the ground of her husband ’s adultery  
(See section  22) 
In the (High) Court of       To the Hon ’ble Mr. Justice 
            [or 
To the Judge of      ]. 
The     day of    , 186.
       
The petition  of C.B., of     the wife of A.B. 
SHEWETH , 
1. That on the     day of    , one thousand eight 
hundred and sixty      your petitioner, then C.D.,  was lawfully 
married to A.B.,  at the Church of   , in the  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 19]
19 
 2. That after her said marriage, your petitioner cohabited with the said A.B. at   and 
that your petitioner and her said husband have issue living of their said marriage, three children, to 
wit, etc., etc., ( a). 
3. That on diverse occasions in or about the months of  August , September  and October, one 
thousand eight  hundred and sixty   the, said A.B., at     
aforesaid, committed adultery with E.F., who was then living in the service of the said A.B., and your 
petitioner at their said residence      aforesaid.  
4. That on diverse occasions in the months of October , November and December,  one thousand 
eight hundred and sixty         the said A.B.,at 
    aforesaid, committed adultery with G.H., who was then living in the 
service of the said A.B. and your petitioner at their said residence   aforesaid.  
5. That no collusion or connivance exists between your petitioner and the said A.B., with respect to 
the subject of the present suit.  
Your petitioner, therefore, prays that this (Hon ’ble) Court will decree a judicial separation to your 
petitioner from her said husband by reason of his aforesaid adultery.  
(Signed ) C.B . (b) 
Form of Verification : See No . 1 
________  
No. 6.—Statement in answer to No . 5 
In the (High) Court of  
B. against B.  
The     day of  
The respondent, A.B. by W.Y.,  his attorney [or vakil] saith, — 
1. That he denies that he committed adultery with E.F. as in the third paragraph of the petitio n 
alleged.  
2. That the petitioner condoned the said adultery with E.F., if any.  
3. That he denies that he committed adultery with G.H., as in the fourth para graph of the petition 
alleged.  
4. That the petitioner condoned the said adultery with G.H.,  if any . 
Wherefore this respondent prays that this (Hon ’ble) Court will reject the prayer of the said petition.  
(Signed) A.B. 
_________  
No. 7 .—Statement in reply to No. 6  
In the (High) Court of  
B. against B. 
The      day of         
 The petitioner, C.B., by
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 19]
o No. 6  
In the (High) Court of  
B. against B. 
The      day of         
 The petitioner, C.B., by her attorney [or vakil], says — 
1. That she denies that she condoned the said adultery of the respondent with E.F. as in the second 
paragraph of the  statement in answer alleged.  
2. That even if she had condoned the said adultery, the same has been re vived by the subsequent 
adultery of the  respondent with G.H., as set forth in the fourth paragraph of the petition.  
(Signed) C.B 
__________  
________________________________________________________________________________  
(a) State the respective ages of th e children.  
(b) The petition must be signed by the petitioner.
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 20]
20 
 No. 8 —PETITION  for a judicial separation by reason of cruelty  
(See section  22) 
In the (High) Court of  
To the Hon ’ble Mr. Justice     [or To the Judge  of  ]. 
     The   day of     186  
      The petition of A.B. (wife of C.B.) of 
SHEWETH , 
1. That on the  day of      , one thousand eight hundred and   , 
your petitioner, then  A.D., spinster, was lawfully marri ed to C.B., at  
2. That from her said marriage, your petitioner lived and cohabited with her said husband                          
at    until the   day of    , one thousand                      eight 
hundred and     , when your petitioner sepa rated from her said husband a s 
hereinafter more particularly mentioned, and that your petitioner and her said husband have had no issue of 
their said marriage.  
3. That from and shortly after your petitioner ’s said marriage, the said C.B. habitu ally conducted 
himself towards your peti tioner with great harshness and cruelty, fre quently abusing her in the coarsest and 
most insulting language, and beating her with his fists, with a cane, or with some other weapon.  
4. That on an evening in or about the month of     one thousand eight hundr ed 
and        , the said C.B.in the highway and opposite to the house 
in which your petitioner and the said C.B. were then residing at     aforesaid, 
endeavoured to knock your petitioner down, and was only prevented from so doing by the interference of 
F.D., your petitioner ’s brother.  
5. That subsequently on the same evening, the said C.B. in his said house  at  aforesaid, 
struck your petitioner with his clenched fists a violent blow on her face.  
6. That on one Friday night in the month of                    one 
thousand eight hundred and     , the said C.B., in    
without provocation, threw a knife at your petitioner, thereby inflicting a severe wound on her right hand.  
7. That on the afternoon of the    day of      one 
thousand eight hundred and          , your petitioner, by reason of th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 20]
on of the    day of      one 
thousand eight hundred and          , your petitioner, by reason of the great and 
continued cruelty practi sed towards her by her said husband, with assistance withdrew from the house of 
her said husband to the house of her father at      that from and after the said
    day of                   , one thousand eight 
hundred and      your petitioner hath lived separate and apart from her said 
husband, and hath never returned to his house or to cohabitation with him.  
8. That there is no collusion or connivance between your petitioner and  her said husband with respect to 
the subject of the present suit.  
Your petitioner, therefore, prays that this (Hon ’ble) Court will decree a judicial separation between 
your petitioner and the said C.B., and also order that the said C.B., do pay the costs of and incident 
to these proceedings.  
(Signed) A.B. 
Form of Verification : See No . 1 
______  
No. 9 .—Statement in answer to No . 8 
In the (High) Court of  
The             day of  
Between A.B., petitioner,  and  
  C.B., respondent  
C.B., the respondent, in answer  to the petition filed in this cause by W.J. his attorney [ or vakil] saith 
that he denies that he has been guilty of cruelty towards the said A.B., as alleged in the said petition.  
 
(Signed) C.B. 
 
_______
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 21]
21 
 No. 10.—PETITION  for reversal of decree of separation  
(See section  24) 
In the (High) Court of          To the 
Hon’ble Mr. Justice         [or To the Judge of  
   ]. 
The   day of      186
 The petition of  A.B., of  
SHEWETH , 
1. That your petitioner was on the       day of     
lawfully married to  
2. That on the    day of       this (Hon ’ble) 
Court at the petition of     ,  pronounced a decree affecting the petitioner to the 
effect following , to wit, — 
[Here set out the decree ] 
3. That such decree was obtained in the absence of you r petitioner, who was then residing at        
[State facts tending to show that the petitioner did not know of the proceedings; and further, that had 
he known he might have offered a sufficient defence .] 
or 
That there was reasonable ground for your petitio ner leaving his said wife, for that his said wife 
[Here state any legal grounds justifying the petitioner ’s separation from his wife .] 
Your petitioner, therefore, prays that this (Hon ’ble) Court will reverse the said decree.  
(Signed) A.B. 
Form of Verifications: See No . 1. 
________  
 
No. 11. —PETITION  for Protection -order  
(See section  27) 
In the (High) Court of          To the 
Hon’ble Mr. Justice         [or To the Judge of  
   ]. 
The   day of    186  .   
The petition of C.B., of    the wife of 
A.B. 
SHEWETH , 
That on the      day of     she was lawfully married to 
A.B., at  
That she lived and cohabited with the said A.B. for        
years at      , and also at      , and hath 
had      children, issue of her said marriage, of whom  are now living 
with the applicant, and wholly depen dent upon her earnings.  
That on or about      the said A.B., without any reasonable cause, 
deserted the applicant, and hath ever since remined separate and apart from her.  
That since the desertion of her said husband, the applic ant hath maintained herself by her own 
industry [or on her own property , as the case may be ], and hath thereby and othe
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 21]
rself by her own 
industry [or on her own property , as the case may be ], and hath thereby and otherwise acquired 
certain property consisting of    [here s tate generally  the nature of the property ]. 
Wherefore she prays an order for the p rotection of her earnings and property acquired since the  
said,     day of,        from the said A.B., 
and from all creditors and persons claiming under him.  
(Signed) C.B. 
 
______
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 22]
22 
 No. 12.—PETITION  for Alimony pending the suit  
(See section 36) 
In the (High) Court of   
B. against B.  
To, the Hon ’ble Mr. Justice       [or To the Judge of  
  ]. 
The    day of    186           .  
The petition of C.B., the lawful 
wife of A.B. 
SHEWETH , 
1. That the said A.B. has for some years carried on the business of     , at 
     , and from such business derives the net annual income of 
from Rs . 4,000  to 5000 . 
2. That the said A.B. is possessed of plate, furniture, linen and other effects at his said house,  
   aforesaid, all of which he acquired in right of your petition er as his wife, or 
purchased with money he acquired through her, of the value of Rs. 10,000.  
3. That the said A.B. is entitled, under the will of his father, subject to the life interest of his mother 
therein to property of the value of Rs. 5,000 or some o ther considerable amount ( a). 
Your petitioner, therefore, prays that this (Hon ’ble) Court will decree such sum or sums of money 
by way of alimony, pending the suit, as to this (Hon ’ble) Court may seem meet.  
(Signed) C.B. 
Form of Verification : See No. 1 
________  
No. 13.—Statement in answer to No. 12  
In the (High) Court of  
B, against B. 
A.B., of             , the above -named respondent, in 
answer to the petition for alimony, pending the suit, of C.B., says — 
1. In answer to the first paragraph of the said petition, I say that I have for the last three  years 
carried, on the business of       ,  at   and 
that, from such business, I have derived a net annual income of Rs. 900, but less than Rs. 1,000.  
2. In answer  to the second paragraph of the said petition, I say that I am possessed of plate, 
furniture, linen and other chattels and effects at my said house       
aforesaid, of the value of Rs. 7,000 , but as I verily believe of no larger value. And I say that a port ion 
of the said plate, furniture and other chattels and effects of the value of Rs. 1,500 belonged to my said 
wife before our
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 22]
niture and other chattels and effects of the value of Rs. 1,500 belonged to my said 
wife before our marriage, but the remaining portions thereof I have since purchased with my own 
monies. And I say that, save as hereinbefore set f orth, I am not possessed of the plate and other effects 
as alleged in the said paragraph in the said petition, and that I did not acquire the same as in the said 
petition also mentioned.  
3. I admit that I am entitled under the will of my father, subject to  the life -interest of my mother 
therein, to property of the value of Rs. 5,000, that is to say , I shall be entitled under my said father ’s 
will, upon the death of my mother, to a legacy of Rs. 7,000, out of which I shall, have to pay to my 
father's executo rs the sum of Rs. 2,000 the amount of a debt owing by me to his estate, and upon 
which debt I am now paying interest at the rate of five per cent per annum.  
4. And, in further answer to the said petition, I say that I have no income whatever except that 
derived from my aforesaid business, that such income, since my said wife left me, which she did on 
the    day of      last, has been considerably 
diminished, and that such diminution is likely to continue. And I say that out of my said income, I 
have to pay t he annual sum of Rs. 100 for such interest as aforesaid to my late father's executors, and 
also to support myself and my two oldest children.  
________________________________________________________________________________  
(a) The Petitioner sh ould state her husband’s income as accurately as possible
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DIVORCE ACT, 1869.pdf - page 23]
23 
 5. And, in further answer to the said petition, I say that, when my wife left, my dwelling -house on 
the    day of          last, 
she took with her, and has ever since withheld and still withholds fro m me, plate, watches and other 
effects in the second paragraph of this my answer mentioned, of the value of, as I verily believe,                
Rs. 800 at the least; and I also say “that, within five days of her departure from my house as aforesaid, 
my sa id wife received bills due to me from certain lodgers of mine, amounting in the aggregate to            
Rs.     and that she has ever since withheld and still withholds from me the 
same sum.  
(Signed) A.B. 
_______  
No. 14.—UNDERTAKING  by minor’s next friend to be answerable for respondent ’s costs  
(See section  49) 
In the (High) Court of          I, 
the undersigned A.B., of       being the next friend of C.D. 
who is a minor, and who is desirous of filing a petition in this Court, under the Indian Divorce Act, 
against D.D.  of      , hereby undertake to be responsible for the costs of 
the said D.D. in such suit, and that, if the said C.D. fail to pay to the said D.D.  when and in such 
manner as the court shall order all such costs of such suit as the court shall di rect him [or her] to pay 
to the said D.D., will forthwith pay the same to the proper officer of this court.  
Dated this.     day of   186     . 
(Signed) A.B. 
_______  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DOCK WORKERS (SAFETY, HEALTH AND WELFARE) ACT, 1986.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE DOCK WORKERS (SAFETY, HEALTH AND WELFARE) ACT, 1986  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Inspectors . 
4. Powers of Inspectors . 
5. Powers of Inspectors where employment of dock workers are dangerous . 
6. Facilities to be afforded to an Inspector . 
7. Restrictions on disclosure of information . 
8. Appeal.  
9. Advisory Committee . 
10. Power of appropriate Government to direct inquiry into cases of accidents or diseases . 
11. Obligations of dock workers . 
12. Power to exempt . 
13. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
14. Penalties . 
15. Determination of the persons responsible for the offence in certain cases . 
16. Power of court to make orders . 
17. Provisions relating to jurisdiction . 
18. Provision regarding fine . 
19. General provision for punishment for other offences.  
20. Power to make rules . 
21. Power to make regulations.  
22. General provision relating to rules and regulations . 
23. Amendment of Act 9 of 1948 . 
24. Repeal . 
25. Savings . 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DOCK WORKERS (SAFETY, HEALTH AND WELFARE) ACT, 1986.pdf - page 2]
2 
 THE DOCK WORKERS (SAFETY, HEALTH AND WELFARE) ACT, 1986  
ACT NO. 54 OF 1986  
[7th December , 1986 .] 
An Act to provide for the safety, health and welfare of dock workers and for matters connected 
therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application .—(1) This Act may be called the Dock 
Workers (Safety, Health and Welfare) Act, 1986.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official  Gazette, appoint.  
(4) It shall not apply to any ship of war of any nationality.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appropriate Government ” means, in relation to any major port, the Central Government, and, 
in relation to any ot her port, the State Government;  
(b) “cargo” includes anything carried or to be carried in a ship or other vessel;  
(c) “Chief Inspector ” means the Chief Inspector of Do ck Safety, appointed under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 3;  
(d) ”dock work ” means any work in or within the vicinity of any port in connection with, or 
required for, or incidental to, the loading, unloading, movement or storage of cargoes into or from 
ship or  other vessel, port, dock, storage place or landing place, and includes — 
(i) work in connection with the preparation of ships or other vessels for receipt or discharge of 
cargoes or leaving port; and  
(ii) chipping, painting or cleaning of any hold, tank, structure or lifting machinery or any other 
storage area in board the ship or in the docks;  
(e) “dock worker ” means a person employed or to be employed directly or by or through any 
agency (including a contractor) with or without knowledge of the principal  employer, whether for 
remuneration or not, on dock work;  
(f)“employer ”, in relation to a dock worker, means the person by whom he is employed or is to be 
e
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DOCK WORKERS (SAFETY, HEALTH AND WELFARE) ACT, 1986.pdf - page 2]
(f)“employer ”, in relation to a dock worker, means the person by whom he is employed or is to be 
employed on dock work,  whether for remuneration or not;  
(g) “principal employer ”, in relation to a do ck worker employed or to be employed by or through 
any agency (including a contractor), means the person in connection with those work he is employed 
or is to be employed by such agency;  
(h) “regulation ” means a regulation made under this Act.  
 3. Inspectors .—(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
appoint such person as it thinks fit to be the Chief Inspector of Dock Safety and such persons as it thinks 
fit to be Inspectors subordinate to the Chief Inspector for  the purposes of this Act at such ports as may be 
specified in the notification.  
(2) The Chief Inspector shall also exercise the powers of an Inspector.  
(3) The Chief Inspector and all Inspectors shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning 
of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
                                                           
1.15th April , 1987 , vide notification No. G.S.R. 399(E),  dated 15th April, 1987, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,            
sec. 3 (i). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DOCK WORKERS (SAFETY, HEALTH AND WELFARE) ACT, 1986.pdf - page 3]
3 
 4. Powers of Inspectors .—An Inspector may, at any p ort for which he is appointed, — 
(a) enter, with such assistance (if any), as he thinks fit, any ship, dock, warehouse or other 
premises, where any dock work is being ca rried on, or where he has reason to believe that any dock 
work is being carried on;  
(b) make examination of the ship, dock, lifting machinery, cargo gear, stagings, transport 
equipment, warehouses or other  premises, used or to be used, for any dock work;  
(c) require the production of any register, muster roll or other document relating to the 
employment of dock workers and  examine such document;  
(d) take on the spot or otherwise such evidence of any person which he may deem necessary:  
Provided that no perso n shall be compelled under this section to answer any question or give any 
evidence tending to incriminate himself;  
(e) take copies of registers, records or other documents or portions thereof as he may consider 
relevant in respect of any  offence which he has reason to believe has been committed or for the 
purpose of any inquiry;  
(f) take photograph, sketch, sample, measure or record as he may consider necessary for the 
purpose of any examination or  inquiry;  
(g) hold an inquiry into the causes of an y accide nt which he has reason t o believe was the result 
of the collapse or failure of lifting machinery, transport equipment, staging or non -compliance with 
any of the provisions of this Act or the regulations;  
(h) issue show cause notice relating to the safety, health and welfare provisions arising under this 
Act or the regulations;  
(i) prosecute, conduct or defend before any court any complaint or other proceedings arising 
under this Act or the regulations;  
(j) exercise such other powers as may be conferred upon  him by the regulations.  
5. Powers of Inspectors where employment of dock workers are dangerous .—(1) If it appears to 
an Inspector that any place at which any dock work is being carried on i
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DOCK WORKERS (SAFETY, HEALTH AND WELFARE) ACT, 1986.pdf - page 3]
ous .—(1) If it appears to 
an Inspector that any place at which any dock work is being carried on is in such a condition that it is 
dangerous to life, safety or health, of dock workers, he may, in writing, serve on the owner or on the 
person in charge of such place an order prohibiting any dock work in such place until measures have been 
taken to remove the cause of the danger to his satisfaction.  
(2) An Inspector  serving an order under sub -section ( 1) shall endorse a copy to the Chief In spector 
who may modify or cancel  the order without waiting for an appeal.  
6. Facilities to be afforded to an Inspector .—The owner or the person in charge of the place at 
which any dock work is being carried on, shall afford the Chief Inspector or the Inspector all reasonable 
facilities for making any entry, inspection, survey, measurement, examination or inquiry under this Act or 
the regulations.  
7. Restrictions on disclosure of information .—(1) All copies of, and extracts from, registers or 
other records in relation to any dock work and all other information required by the Chief Inspector or an 
Inspector or by any one assisting him, in the course of the inspection or investigati on carried out for the 
purposes of this Act or the regulations shall be regarded as confidential and shall not be disclosed to any 
person or authority unless such disclosure is for the purpose of any action or proceeding under this Act or 
the regulations o r under any other law or unless the Chief Inspector or the Inspector considers such 
disclosure necessary to ensure the health, safety or welfare of any dock worker.  
(2) The Chief Inspector or the Inspector shall not disclose the source of any complaint bri nging to his 
notice a defect or breach of any legal provisions and if any visit or inspection is to be made in connection 
with such a complaint, he shall give no intimation to the employer that the visit is made in consequence of 
receipt of such a complain t: 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DOCK WORKERS (SAFETY, HEALTH AND WELFARE) ACT, 1986.pdf - page 3]
 to the employer that the visit is made in consequence of 
receipt of such a complain t: 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DOCK WORKERS (SAFETY, HEALTH AND WELFARE) ACT, 1986.pdf - page 4]
4 
 Provided that the restrictions imposed under this sub -section shall not apply to any case where the 
complainant himself has expressed his willingness to have the source of complaint disclosed.  
(3) If the Chief Inspector or an Inspector or any other pers on referred to in sub -section ( 1) discloses, 
contrary to the provisions of this section, any information as aforesaid, the shall he punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one yea r, or with fine, or with both.  
8. Appeal .—Any person aggrieved by an order under section 5 may, within fifteen days from the date 
on which the order is communicated to him, prefer an appeal to the Chief Inspector or where such order is 
by the Chief Inspector, to such authority as may be specified by the regulations and the Chief Inspector on 
such authority shall, after giving the appellant an opportunity of being heard, dispose of the appeal  as 
expeditiously as possible:  
Provided that the Chief Inspector or such authority may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the 
said period of fifteen days if he is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing 
the appeal in time:  
Provided further that an order under section 5 shall be complied with, pending the decision of the 
Chief Inspector or such authority.  
9. Advisory Committee .—(1) The appropriate Government may constitute an Advisory Committee 
to advise upon such matters arising out of the administration of this Act and the regulations as that 
Government may refer to it fo r advice.  
(2) The members of the Advisory Committee shall be appointed by the appropriate Government and 
shall be of such number and chosen in such manner as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act:  
Provided that the Advisory Committee shall include an equal number of members representing — 
(i) the appropriate Government,  
(ii) the dock workers, and  
(iii) the employers of dock  workers and shipping companies.  
(3) The Chairman 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DOCK WORKERS (SAFETY, HEALTH AND WELFARE) ACT, 1986.pdf - page 4]
dock workers, and  
(iii) the employers of dock  workers and shipping companies.  
(3) The Chairman of the Advisory Committee sh all be one of the members appointed to represent the 
appropriate Government, nominated in this behalf by that Government.  
(4) The appropriate Government shall publish in the Official Gazette the names of all members of the 
Advisory Committee.  
(5) The term of office of the members of the Adviso ry Committee and the manner of f illing vacancies 
among , and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of their functions by, the members shall be such 
as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act.  
10. Power of  appropriate Government to direct inquiry into cases of accidents or diseases .—(1) 
The appropriate Government may, if it considers it expedient to do so, appoint a competent person to 
inquire into the causes of any accident occurring in connection with any  dock work or into any cases 
where a disease specified by regulations as a disease connected with dock work has been or is suspected 
to have been contracted by dock workers and may also appoint one or more persons possessing legal or 
special knowledge to a ct as assessors in such inquiry.  
(2) The person appointed to hold an inquiry under this section shall have all the powers of a civil 
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) for the purposes of enforcing the attendance of 
witness es and com pelling the production of documents and material objec ts and may also, so far as may 
be necessary for the purposes of the inquiry, exercise any of the powers of an Inspector under this Act; 
and every person required by the person making the inquiry to furnish any information shall be deemed to 
be legally bound so to do within the meaning of section 176 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
(3) The person holding the inquiry under this section shall make a report to the appropriate 
Government stating th e causes of the accident or, as the case may be
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DOCK WORKERS (SAFETY, HEALTH AND WELFARE) ACT, 1986.pdf - page 4]
e a report to the appropriate 
Government stating th e causes of the accident or, as the case may be, disease and any attendant 
circumstances and adding any observations which he or any of the assessors may think fit to make.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DOCK WORKERS (SAFETY, HEALTH AND WELFARE) ACT, 1986.pdf - page 5]
5 
 (4) The procedure to be followed at inquiries under this section shall be such as t he appropriate 
Government may prescribe by rules under section 20.  
11. Obligations of dock workers .—(1) No dock worker shall — 
(a) wilfully interfere with, or misuse, any appliance, convenience or other thing provided in 
connection with any dock work for th e purpose of securing the health, safety and welfare of dock 
workers;  
(b) wilfully and without reasonable cause do anything likely to endanger himself or others; and  
(c) wilfully neglect to make use of any appliance, convenience or other thing provided in 
connection with any dock work for the purpose of securing the health, safety and welfare of dock 
workers.  
(2) If any dock worker contravenes any of the provisions of sub -section (1), he shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to one 
hundred rupees, or with both.  
12. Power to exempt .—The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
exempt from all or any of the provisions of this Act and of the regu lations, or such conditions, if any, as it 
thinks fit— 
(a) any port or place, dock, wharf, quay or similar premises, if that Government is satisfied that 
dock work is only occasionally carried on or the traffic is small and confined to small ships and 
fishing vessels at such port, dock, wharf, quay or similar premises; or  
(b) any specified ship or class of ships, if that Government is satisfied, having regard to the 
features of such ship or ships, the nature, quantum and periodicity of dock work carried thereon and 
all other relevant factors, that it is necessary so to do:  
Provided that the appropriate Government shall not grant exemption under this section unless it is 
satisfied that such exemption will not adversely affect the health, safety and welfare of dock worker s. 
13. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other lega
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DOCK WORKERS (SAFETY, HEALTH AND WELFARE) ACT, 1986.pdf - page 5]
of dock worker s. 
13. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
14. Penalties .—(1) Whoever, — 
(a) wilfully obstructs  an Inspector in exercise of any power conferred by or under this Act or fails 
to produce on demand by an Inspector any register or other documents kept in pursuance of the 
regulations or otherwise in connection with any dock work or conceals or prevents o r attempts to 
prevent any person from appearing before, or being examined by, an Inspector; or  
(b) unless duly authorised or in case of necessity, removes any fencing, gangway, gear, ladder,  
life-saving means or appliance, light, mark, stage or other thing  required to be provided by, or under, 
the regulations; or  
(c) having in case of necessity removed any such fencing, gangway, gear, ladder, life -saving 
means or appliance, light, mark, stage or other thing, omits to restore it at the end of the period for 
which its removal was necessary,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which 
may extend to five thousands rupees, or with both.  
(2) If any person, being a person whose duty is to comply with any of the regulations, contravenes 
such regulations and such contravention results — 
(a) in any fatal accident to a dock worker, or  
(b) an accident which incapacitates a dock worker from earning his full wages for more than a 
fortnight,  
such person shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with 
fine which shall not be less than two thousand rupees in a case falling under clause ( a) and five hundred 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DOCK WORKERS (SAFETY, HEALTH AND WELFARE) ACT, 1986.pdf - page 6]
6 
 rupees in a case falling under clause ( b) but which may extend, in either case, to five thousand rupees, or 
with both, and the court may order the whole or part of th e fine to be paid to the depende nt of the  
deceased dock worker or, as the case may be, to the injured dock worker.  
Explanation .—The provisions of this sub -section shall be in addition to any provi sions which may be 
made under sub -section ( 4) of section 21.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of sectio n 11, if any dock worker contravenes any provision of this Act 
or the regulations imposing any duty or liability on dock workers, he shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with tine which may extend to two 
hundred rupees, or with both.  
(4) If any person who has been convicted for an offence punishable under any of the provisions of 
this Act or the regulations is again convicted for an offence committed within two year of the previous 
conviction and involving a contravention of the same provision, he shall be punishable for each 
subsequent conviction with double the im prisonment to which he would have been liable for the first 
contravention of such provision.  
15. Determination of the persons responsible for the offence in certain cases .—If the person 
committing an offence made punishable by this Act or the regulations or any abetment thereof is a firm or 
other association of individuals or a company or a local authority, all or any of the partners or members or 
directors thereof as well as the firm, association of individuals, company or local authority shall be 
deemed to be guilty of the offence or abetment and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that where a firm, associati on or company has given notices in writing to the Chief Inspector 
and the Inspector of the port where any dock work is being carried that it has nominated, — 
(a) in the case of a firm, any of its partners;  
(b) in 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DOCK WORKERS (SAFETY, HEALTH AND WELFARE) ACT, 1986.pdf - page 6]
is being carried that it has nominated, — 
(a) in the case of a firm, any of its partners;  
(b) in the case of an association, any of its membe rs; 
(c) in the case of a company, any of its directors,  
who is resident, in each case in any place to which this Act extends and who is in each case either in fact 
in charge of the management of, or holds the largest number of shares in, such firm, associa tion or 
company, to assume the responsibility of the person in charge of any dock work for the purposes of this 
Act, such partner, member or director, as the case may be, shall, so long as he continues to so reside and 
be in charge or hold the largest numb er of shares as aforesaid , be deemed to b e the person in charge of 
such dock work for the purposes of this Act unless a notice in writing cancelling his nomination or stating 
that he has ceased to be a partner, member or director, as the case may be, is re ceived by the Chief 
Inspector.  
16. Power of court to make orders .—(1) Where a person is convicted of an offence punishable 
under this Act the court may, in addition to awarding him any punishment, by order in writing, require 
him within a period specified in the order (which may be extended by the court from time to time o n 
application made in this behalf) to take such measures as may be so specified for remedying the matters in 
respect of which offence was committed.  
(2) Where an order is made under sub -section ( 1), the person shall not be liable under this Act in 
respect of the continuance of the offence during the period, or extended period, if any, but if on the expiry 
of such period or extended period the order of the court has not been fully complied with, the person shal l 
be deemed to have committed a further offence and shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees for every day after 
such expiry on which the order has not been complied with, or
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DOCK WORKERS (SAFETY, HEALTH AND WELFARE) ACT, 1986.pdf - page 6]
ne hundred rupees for every day after 
such expiry on which the order has not been complied with, or with both.  
17. Provisions relating to  jurisdiction .—(1) No court inferior to that of a metropolitan magistrate or 
a magistrate of the first class shall try any offence under this Act or the regulations.  
(2) No prosecution for any offence under this Act or the regulations shall be instituted e xcept by or 
with the previous sanction of an Inspector.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DOCK WORKERS (SAFETY, HEALTH AND WELFARE) ACT, 1986.pdf - page 7]
7 
 (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), no 
court shall take cognizance of an offence under this Act or the regulations unless c omplaint thereof has 
been made — 
(a) in the case of an  offence punishable with fine, — 
(i) within six months from the date of the offence; or  
(ii) where the commission of the offence was not known to the Inspector, within six months from 
the first day on  which the offence comes to the knowledge of the Inspector; or  
(iii) where it is not known by whom the offence was committed, within six months from the first 
day on which the identity of the offender is known to the Inspector; or  
(b) in the case of an offence  punishable with impr isonment, — 
(i) within one year from the date of the offence; or  
(ii) where the commission of the offence was not known to the Inspector, within one year from 
the first day on which the offence comes to the knowledge of the Inspector; or  
(iii) where it is n ot known by whom the offence was committed, within six months from the first 
day on which the identity of the offender is known to the Inspector.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, in the case of a continuing offence a fresh period of 
limitatio n shall begin to run at every movement of the time during which the offence continues.  
18. Provision regarding fine .—Notwithstanding anything contained in section 29 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), it shall be lawful for a metropolitan magistrate or a magistrate of 
the first class to pass a sentence of fine exceeding five thousand rupees authorised by this Act or the 
regulations on any person convicted of any offence thereunder.  
19. General provision for punis hment for other offences .—Any person who contravenes any 
provision of this Act shall, if no other penalty is provided for such contravention under this Act, be 
punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.  
20. Power to make 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DOCK WORKERS (SAFETY, HEALTH AND WELFARE) ACT, 1986.pdf - page 7]
der this Act, be 
punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.  
20. Power to make rules .—The appro priate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules consistent with this Act for all or any of the following purposes, namely: — 
(a) the manner in which an Inspector is to exercise the powers conferred upon him under this Act;  
(b) the inspection of premises of ships where any dock work is carried on;  
(c) the manner of services of orders made under this Act;  
(d) the term of office and other conditions of service of members of the Advisory Committee, the 
manner of filling vacancies among, and the procedure to be followed in, the discharge of their 
functions under sub -section ( 5) of section 9;  
(e) the procedure at inquiries under section 10; and  
(f) any other matter  which is to be provided for by rules under this Act.  
21. Power to mak e regulations .—(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with this Act for providing for the safety, health and welfare 
of dock workers.  
(2) Such regulations may provide for all or any of t he following purposes, namely: — 
(a) providing for the general requirement relating to the construction, equipping and maintenance 
for the safety of working places on shore, ship, dock, structure and other places at which any dock 
work is carried on;  
(b) provi ding for the safety of any regular approaches over a dock, wharf, quay or other places 
which dock workers have to  use for going for work and for fencing of such places and projects;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DOCK WORKERS (SAFETY, HEALTH AND WELFARE) ACT, 1986.pdf - page 8]
8 
 (c) providing for the efficient lighting of all areas of dock, ship, any o ther vessel, dock structure 
or working places where any dock work is carried on and of a ll approaches to such places to which 
dock workers are required to go in the course of their employment;  
(d) providing and maintaining adequate ventilation and suitable  temperature in every building or 
an enclosure on ship  where dock workers are employed;  
(e) providing for the fire and explosion prevention and protection;  
(f) providing for safe means of access to ships, holds, staging s, equipment, lifting appliances and 
other working places;  
(g) providing for the safety of workers engaged in the opening and closing of hatches, protection 
of ways and other openings in the docks which may be dangerous to them;  
(h) providing for the safely of workers on dock s from the risk of falling overb oard being struck 
by cargo during loading or unloading operations;  
(i) providing for the construction, maintenance and use of lifting and other cargo handling 
appliances and services, such as, pallets containing or supporting loads and prov ision of safety 
appliances on them, if necessary;  
(j) providing for the safety of workers employed in freight container terminals or other terminals 
for handling unitised cargo;  
(k) providing for the fencing of machinery, live electrical conductors, steam pipes and hazardous 
openings;  
(l) providing for the construction, maintenance and use of staging;  
(m) providing for the rigging and use of ship ’s derricks;  
(n) providing for the testing, examination, inspection and certification as appropriate of loose 
gears including chains and ropes and of slings  and other lifting  devices used in the dock work;  
(o) providing for the precautions to be taken to facilitate escape of workers when employed in a 
hold, bin, hopper or the like or between decks of a hold while han dling coal or other bulk cargo;  
(p) providing for the measures to be taken in ord
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DOCK WORKERS (SAFETY, HEALTH AND WELFARE) ACT, 1986.pdf - page 8]
a hold while han dling coal or other bulk cargo;  
(p) providing for the measures to be taken in order to prevent dangerous methods of working in 
the stacking, unstacking,  stowing and un stowing of cargo or handling in connection therewith;  
(q) providing  for the handling of dangerous substances and working in dangerous or harmful 
environments and the precautions to be taken in connection with such handling;  
(r) providing for the work in connection wi th cleaning, chipping, painting  operations and 
precautions to be taken in connection with such work;  
(s) providing for the employment of persons for handling cargo, handling appliances, power 
operated hatch covers or other power operated ship ’s equipment, such as, door in the hull of a ship, 
ramp, retraceable car deck or similar equipment or to give signals to the drivers of such machinery;  
(t) providing for the transport of dock workers;  
(u) providing for the precautions to be taken to protect dock workers against harmful effects of 
excessive noise, vibrations and air pollution at the work place;  
(v) providing for protective equipment or protective clothing;  
(w) providing for the sanitary, washing and welfare facilities;  
(x) providing for — 
(i) the medical supervision;  
(ii) the ambulance rooms, first aid and rescue facilities and arrangements for the removal of 
dock workers to the nearest place of treatment;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DOCK WORKERS (SAFETY, HEALTH AND WELFARE) ACT, 1986.pdf - page 9]
9 
 (iii) the safety and health organisation; and  
(iv) the training of dock workers and for the obligations and rights of the dock workers for 
their safety and health at the work place;  
(y) providing for the investigation of occupational accidents, dangerous occurrences and diseases, 
specifying such diseases and the forms of notices, the persons and authorities to whom, they are to be  
furnished, the particulars to b e contained in them and the time within which they are to be submitted; 
and 
(z) providing for the submission of statement of accidents, man -days lost, volume of cargo 
handled and particulars of dock workers.  
(3) The reg ulation s made under this section may, — 
(a) provide for the circumstances in which and the conditions subject to which, exemptions from 
any of the regulations made under this section may be given specifying the authorities who may grant 
such exemptions and regulating their procedure; and  
(b) make special provision to meet the special requirement of any particular port or ports.  
(4) In making a regulation under this section the appropriate Government may direct that a breach 
thereof shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine 
which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both, and, if the breach is continued after conviction, 
with a further fine which may extend to one hundred rupees for each day on which the breach is so 
continued.  
22. General provision relating to rules and regulations .—(1) The power to make rules and 
regulations conferred by sections 20 and 21 is subject to the condition of the rules and regulations being 
made after previous publications . 
(2) The date to be specified in accordance with clause ( 3) of section 23 of the General  Clauses Act, 
1897 (10 of 1897)  as that after which a draft of rules or regulations proposed to be made will be taken 
under consideration, shall not be less than forty -five days from the date on which the dra
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DOCK WORKERS (SAFETY, HEALTH AND WELFARE) ACT, 1986.pdf - page 9]
e taken 
under consideration, shall not be less than forty -five days from the date on which the draft of the proposed 
rules or regulations is published for general information.  
(3) Every rule and every regulation made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, befo re each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive  sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule 
or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified 
form or be of no effe ct, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation, as the case may 
be. 
(4) Every rule and every regulation, made under this Act by a State Government shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it  is made, before the State Legislature.  
23. Amendment of Act 9 of 1948 .—In the Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act, 1948, in 
section 3, in sub -section ( 2),— 
(a) in clause ( g), the words “and welfare ” shall be omitted:  
(b) clause ( h) shall be omitted.  
24. Repeal .—The Indian D ock Labourers Act, 1934 (19 of 1 934), is here by repealed.  
25. Saving s.—The Indian Dock Labourers  Regulations, 1948 made under section 5 of the Indian 
Dock Labourers  Act, 1934 (19 of 1934)  so repealed and the Dock Workers (Safety, Health and Welfare) 
Scheme 1961 made under section 4 of the Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act, 1948 (9 of 
1948)  shall be deemed to be regulation framed under this Act and shall be in force unless they are altered 
or repealed under this Act.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DOCK WORKERS (SAFETY, HEALTH AND WELFARE) ACT, 1986.pdf - page 9]
ce unless they are altered 
or repealed under this Act.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016  
______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Declaration of Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central Agricultural University as an institution of national 
importance  
3. Definitions.  
4. Establishment and incorporation of Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central Agricultural University.  
5. Objects of the University.  
6. Powers of the University . 
7. Jurisdiction.  
8. University open to all classes, castes and creed.  
9. The Visitor.  
10. Officers of the University.  
11. The Chancellor.  
12. The Vice -Chancellor.  
13. Deans and Director . 
14.  The Registrar . 
15. The Comptroller.   
16. Other officers.  
17. Authorities of the U niversity . 
18. Board of Management.   
19. The Academic Council.   
20. The Research Council . 
21. The Extension Education Council . 
22. The Finance Committee . 
23. Faculties.  
24. The Board of Studies.  
25. Other authorities  
26. Power to make Statutes.   
27. Statutes how to be made.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 2]
2 
 SECTIONS  
28. Power to make Ordinances.  
29. Regulations.   
30. Annual report.  
31. Annual accounts.   
32. Conditions of service of employees . 
33. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students . 
34. Right to  appeal.   
35. Provident and pension funds.   
36. Disputes as to constitution of University authorities.  
37. Constitution of committees.   
38. Filling of casual vacancies.  
39. Proceedings of University authorities not invalidated by vacancy.  
40. Protection of  action taken in good faith.  
41. Mode of proof of University records.  
42. Effect of establishment of University.  
43. Power to remove difficulties.  
44. Transitional provisions.   
45. Repeal of Bihar Agricultural University Act.  
46. Statutes, Ordinances and R egulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid 
before Parliament.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 3]
3 
  
THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016  
ACT NO. 32 OF 2016  
[28th May , 2016 .] 
An Act to provide for the establishment and incorporation of a University by conversion of 
the existing Rajendra Agricultural University, Pusa, Bihar to Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central 
Agricultural University for the development of agriculture and for the furt herance of the 
advancement of learning and pursuit of research in agriculture and allied sciences and to 
declare it to be an institution of national importance.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central 
Agricultural University Act, 2016.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Decla ration of Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central Agricultural University as an institution of 
national importance .— Whereas the objects of the institution known as the Dr. Rajendra Prasad 
Central Agricultural University are such as to make the institution one of the national importance, it is 
hereby declared that the institution known as the Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central Agricultural University 
is an institution of national importance.  
3. Definitions .— In this Act, and in all Statutes made hereunder, unless the context otherwise 
requires,  — 
(a) “Academic Council ” means the Academic Council of the University;  
(b) “academic staff ” means such categories of staff as are designated as academic staff by the 
Ordinances;  
(c) “agriculture ” means the basic and applied sciences of the soil and water management, crop 
production including production of all garden crops, control of plants, pests and diseases, horticulture 
including floriculture, animal husbandry including veterinary and dairy sc ience, fisheries, forestry 
including farm forestry, home -science, agricultural engineering 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 3]
iry sc ience, fisheries, forestry 
including farm forestry, home -science, agricultural engineering and technology, marketing and 
processing of agricultural and animal husbandry products, land use and management;  
(d) “Board ” means the Board of Management of the Uni versity;  
(e) “Board of Studies ” means the Board of Studies of the University;  
(f) “Chancellor ” means the Chancellor of the University;  
(g) “college ” means a constituent college of the University whether located at the headquarters, 
campus or elsewhere;  
(h) “Department ” means a Department of Studies of the University;  
(i) “employee ” means any person appointed by the University and includes teachers and other 
staff of the University;  
(j) “extension education ” means the educational activities concerned with th e training of 
orchardists, farmers and other groups serving agriculture, horticulture, fisheries and improved 
practices related thereto and the various phases of scientific technology related to agriculture and 
agricultural production including post -harves t technology and marketing;  
(k) “Faculty ” means Faculty of the University;  
(l) “Ordinances ” means the Ordinances of the University;  
                                                           
1. 7th October, 2016, vide notification  S.O. 3184 (E), dated 7 th October, 2016, see Gazette of India,  Extraordinary Part II,    
s. 3 (ii).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 4]
4 
 (m) “Regulations ” means the Regulations made by any prescribed authority of the University;  
(n) “Research Advisory Committee ” means the Research Advisory Committee of the University;  
(o) “Statutes ” means the Statutes of the University;  
(p) “student ” means a person enrolled in the University for undergoing a course of study for 
obtaining a degree, diploma or other academic disti nction duly instituted;  
(q) “teachers ” means Professors, Associate Professors, Assistant Professors, Teaching Faculty 
Members and their equivalent appointed for imparting instruction or conducting research or extension 
education programmes or combination o f these in the University, college or any institute maintained 
by the University and designated as teachers by the Ordinances;  
(r) “University ” means the Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central Agricultural University established under 
this Act;  
(s) “Vice -Chancellor ” means the Vice -Chancellor of the University; and  
(t) “Visitor ” means the Visitor of the University.  
4. Establishment and incorporation of Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central Agricultural 
University . —(1) The University established and incorporated under the Bihar Agricultural 
University Act, 1987 (Bihar Act 8 of 1988), in so far as it relates to the Rajendra Agricultural 
University shall be established as a body corporate under this Act by the name of th e “Dr. Rajendra 
Prasad Central Agricultural University ”. 
(2) The headquarters of the University shall be at Pusa in the State of Bihar and it may also 
establish campuses at such other places within its jurisdiction as it may deem fit ; 
Provided that the Uni versity shall integrate the existing campus and other associated facilities of 
the Rajendra Agricultural University, Pusa and the effective date of take -over shall be as specified in 
the notification published in the Official Gazette.  
(3) The first Chancel lor, the first Vice -Chancellor and the first members of the Board, the 
academic Council a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 4]
 Chancel lor, the first Vice -Chancellor and the first members of the Board, the 
academic Council and all persons who may hereafter become such officers or members, so long as 
they continue to hold such office or membership are hereby constituted a body corporate by  the name 
of the Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central Agricultural University.  
(4) The University shall have perpetual succession and a common seal and shall sue and be sued 
by the said name.  
5. Objects of the University .—The objects of the University shall be — 
(a) to impart education in different branches of agriculture and allied sciences as it may deem 
fit; 
(b) to further the advancement of learning and conducting of research in agricultural and 
allied sciences;  
(c) to undertake programmes of extension education in the country with particular attention to 
the State of Bihar;  
(d) to promote partnership and linkages with national and international educational 
institutions; and  
(e) to undertake such other activities as it may, from time to time, determine.  
6. Powers of the University .— The University shall have the following powers, namely:  — 
(i) to make provisions for instructions in agriculture and allied sciences;  
(ii) to make provisions for conduct of research in agriculture and allied branches of learning;  
(iii) to make provisions for dissemination of the findings of research and technical 
information through extension programmes;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 5]
5 
 (iv) to grant, subject to such conditions as it may determine, diplomas or certificates to, and 
confer degrees or other academic  distinctions on the basis of examination, evaluation or any other 
method of testing, on persons, and to withdraw any such diplomas, certificates, degrees or other 
academic distinction for good and sufficient cause;  
(v) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in the manner prescribed by the Statutes;  
(vi) to provide lectures and instructions for field workers, village leaders and other persons 
not enrolled as regular students of the University and to grant certificates to them as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes;  
(vii) to co -operate or collaborate or associate with any other University or authority or 
institution of higher learning in such manner and for such purpose as the University may 
determine;  
(viii) to establish and maintain colleges relatin g to agriculture, horticulture, fisheries, forestry, 
veterinary and animal science, dairying, home -science and allied sciences, as necessary;  
(ix) to establish and maintain such campuses, Krishi Vigyan Kendras, special centres, 
specialised laboratories, li braries, museums or other units for research and institution as are, in its 
opinion, necessary for the furtherance of its objects;  
(x) to create teaching, research and extension education posts and to make appointments 
thereto;  
(xi) to create administrativ e, ministerial and other posts and to make appointments thereto;  
(xii) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(xiii) to determine standards of admission to the University which may include examination, 
evaluation  or any other method of testing;  
(xiv) to provide and maintain residential accommodation for students and employees;  
(xv) to supervise the residences of the students of the University and to make arrangements 
for promoting their health and general welfare;  
(xvi) to lay down conditions of
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 5]
make arrangements 
for promoting their health and general welfare;  
(xvi) to lay down conditions of service of all categories of employees, including their code of 
conduct;  
(xvii) to regulate and enforce discipline among the students and the employees and to take 
such disciplinary measures in this regard as it may deem necessary;  
(xviii) to fix, demand and receive such fees and other charges as may be prescribed by the 
Statutes;  
(xix) to borrow, with the approval of the Central Government on the security of its property, 
money for the purpose of the University;  
(xx) to r eceive benefactions, donations and gifts and to acquire, hold, manage and dispose of 
any property, movable or immovable including trust and endowment properties, for its purposes; 
and 
(xxi) to do all such other acts and things as may be necessary, incident al or conducive to the 
attainment of all or any of its objects.  
7. Jurisdiction .— (1) The jurisdiction and responsibility of the University with respect to 
teaching, research and programmes of extension education at the University level, in the field of 
agriculture and allied subjects shall extend to the whole country with special reference to the State of 
Bihar.  
(2) All colleges, directorates, research stations, experiment stations and Krishi Vigyan Kendras  of 
the existing Rajendra Agricultural University and other institutions coming under the jurisdiction and 
authority of the University shall be constituent unit and no other units shall be recognised as affiliated 
units.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 6]
6 
 (3) The University may assume respo nsibility for the training of field extension workers and 
others and may develop such training centres as may be required in various regions under its 
jurisdiction.  
8. University open to all classes, castes and creed .— The University shall be open to perso ns of 
every sex, caste, creed, race or class, and it shall not be lawful for the University to adopt or impose 
on any person, any test whatsoever of religious belief or profession in order to entitle him to be 
appointed as a teacher of the University or to  hold any other office therein or be admitted as a student 
in the University or to enjoy or exercise any privilege thereof:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the University from making 
special provisions for the employment or  admission of women, persons with disability or of persons 
belonging to the weaker sections of the society and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes, the 
Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes.  
 9. The Visitor .—(1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of the University.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4), the Visitor shall have the right to cause 
an inspection to be made, by such person or persons as he may direct, of the University, its buildings, 
laboratories, librar ies, museums, workshops and equipments, and of any institution or college and also 
of the examination, instruction and other work conducted or done by the University, and to cause an 
inquiry to be made in like manner in respect of any matter connected with  the administration and 
finances of the University.  
(3) The Visitor shall, in every case, give notice to the University of his intention to cause, an 
inspection or inquiry to be made and the University shall, on receipt of such notice, have the right to 
make, within thirty days from the date of receipt of the notice or such other period as the Visitor may 
determine, such representations
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 6]
te of receipt of the notice or such other period as the Visitor may 
determine, such representations to him as it may consider necessary.  
(4) After considering the representations, if any, made by the University, the Visito r may cause to 
be made such inspection or inquiry as is referred to in sub -section ( 2). 
(5) Where an inspection or inquiry has been caused to be made by the Visitor, the University shall 
be entitled to appoint a representative who shall have the right to a ppear in person and to be heard on 
such inspection or inquiry.  
(6) The Visitor may address the Vice -Chancellor with reference to the results of such inspection 
or inquiry together with such views and advice with regard to the action to be taken thereon as the 
Visitor may be pleased to offer and on receipt of the address made by the Visitor, the Vice -Chancellor 
shall communicate forthwith to the Board, the results of the inspection or inquiry and the views of the 
Visitor and the advice tendered by him upon t he action to be taken thereon.  
(7) The Board shall communicate through the Vice -Chancellor to the Visitor such action, if any, 
as it proposes to take or has been taken by it upon the results of such inspection or inquiry.  
(8) Where the Board does not, with in reasonable time, take action to the satisfaction of the 
Visitor, the Visitor may, after considering any explanation furnished or representation made by the 
Board, issue such directions as he may think fit and the Board shall be bound to comply with such  
directions.  
(9) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this section, the Visitor may, by an order in 
writing, annul any proceeding of the University which is not in conformity with this Act, the Statutes 
or the Ordinances:  
Provided that before m aking any such order, he shall call upon the University to show cause why 
such an order should not be made and, if any cause is shown within a reasonable time, he shall 
consider the same.  
(10) The Vis
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 6]
ade and, if any cause is shown within a reasonable time, he shall 
consider the same.  
(10) The Visitor shall have such other powers as may be prescribed b y the Statutes.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 7]
7 
 10. Officers of the University .—The following shall be the officers of the University,        
namely:  — 
(1) the Chancellor;  
(2) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(3) the Deans;  
(4) the Directors;  
(5) the Registrar;  
(6) the Comptroller;  
(7) the University Librarian; and  
(8) such other officers as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
11. The Chancellor .—(1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such manner as 
may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Chancellor shall, by virtue of his  office, be the Head of the University.  
(3) The Chancellor shall, if present, preside at the convocations of the University held for 
conferring degrees.  
12. The Vice -Chancellor .—(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such 
manner as ma y be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be the principal executive and academic officer of the University 
and shall exercise general supervision and control over the affairs of the University and give effect to 
the decisions of all t he authorities of the University.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor may, if he is of the opinion that  immediate action is necessary on any 
matter, exercise any power conferred on any authority of the University by or under this Act and shall 
report to such authority the action taken by him on such matter:  
Provided that if the authority concerned is of opi nion that such action ought not to have been 
taken, it may refer the matter to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final:  
Provided further that any person in the service of the University who is aggrieved by the action 
taken by the Vice -Chancellor under this sub -section shall have the right to appeal against such action 
to the Board within three months from the date on which decision on such action is communicated to 
him and thereupon the Board may confirm, modify or reverse the action taken by the Vice -
Chancellor.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor, if he is of the opinion that any
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 7]
 action taken by the Vice -
Chancellor.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor, if he is of the opinion that any decision of any authority of the 
University is beyond the powers of the authority conferred by the provisions of this Act, the Statutes 
of the Ordinances or that any decision taken is not in the interest of the University, may ask the 
authority concerned to review its decision within sixty days of such decision and if the authority 
refuses to review the decision either in whole or in part or no decision is taken by it within the said  
period of sixty days, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final.  
(5) The Vice -Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may 
be prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
13. Deans and Director .— Every Dean and every Director shall be appointed in such manner 
and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
14.  The Registrar .— (1) The Registrar shall be appointed in such manner as may b e prescribed 
by the Statutes.  
(2) The Registrar shall have the power to enter into agreements, sign documents and authenticate 
records on behalf of the University and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 8]
8 
 15. The Comptroller .—The Comptroller shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise 
such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
16. Other officers .—The manner of appointment and powers and duties of the other officers of  
the University shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
17. Authorities of the University .—The following shall be the authorities of the University, 
namely:  — 
(1) the Board;  
(2) the Academic Council;  
(3) the Research Council;  
(4) the Extension Education Counc il; 
(5) the Finance Committee;  
(6) the Faculties and Board of Studies; and  
(7) such other authorities as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
18. Board of Management . —(1) The Board shall be the principal executive body of the 
University.  
(2) The constitution of the Board, the term of office of its members and its powers and functions 
shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
19. The Academic Council . —(1) The Academic Council shall be the principal academic body of 
the University and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes and Ordinances, have 
the control and general regulation of, and be responsible for the maintenance of standards of learning, 
education, instruction, evaluation and examination within the University and shall exer cise such other 
powers and perform such other functions as may be conferred or imposed upon it by the Statutes.  
(2) The constitution of the Academic Council and the term of office of its members shall be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
20. The Research Council .—The constitution, powers and functions of the Research Council 
shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
21. The Extension Education Council .—The constitution, powers and functions of the 
Extension Education Council shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
22. The Finance Committee .—The constitution, powers and functions of the Finance Committee 
shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
23. Faculties .—The University shall
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 8]
f the Finance Committee 
shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
23. Faculties .—The University shall have such Faculties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
24. The Board of Studies .—The constitution, powers and functions of the Board of Studies shall 
be prescribed by the Statutes.  
25. Other authorities .—The constitution, powers and functions of other authorities of the 
University referred to in clause ( 7) of section 17 shall be such as ma y be prescribed by the Statutes  
26. Power to make Statutes .— Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for 
all or any of the following matters, namely:  — 
(a) the constitution, powers and functions of the authorities of the University,  as may be 
constituted from time to time;  
(b) the appointment and continuance in office of the members of the authorities, the filling up 
of vacancies, and all other matters relating to the authorities for which it may be necessary or 
desirable to provide;  
(c) the appointment, powers and duties of the officers of the University and their emoluments;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 9]
9 
 (d) the appointment of teachers, academic staff and other employees of the University and 
their emoluments;  
(e) the appointment of teachers and academic staff working in any other University or 
organisation for a specific period for undertaking a joint project;  
(f) the conditions of service of employees including provision for pension, insurance and 
provident fund , the manner of termination of service and disciplinary action;  
(g) the principles governing the seniority of service of employees of the University;  
(h) the procedure for arbitration in cases of dispute between employees or students and the 
University;  
(i) the procedure for appeal to the Board by any employee or student against the action of any 
officer or authority of the University;  
(j) the establishment and abolition of departments, centres, colleges and institutions;  
(k) the conferment of honorary degrees;  
(l) the withdrawal of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions;  
(m) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(n) the delegation of powers vested in the authorities or officers of the Uni versity;  
(o) the maintenance of discipline among the employees and students; and  
(p) all other matters which are to be, or may be, prescribed by the Statutes.  
27. Statutes how to be made .— (1) The first Statutes are those set out in the Schedule.  
(2) The B oard may from time to time make Statutes or may amend or repeal the Statutes referred 
to in sub -section ( 1): 
Provided that the Board shall not make, amend or repeal any Statute affecting the status, powers 
or constitution of any authority of the University  until such authority has been given an opportunity of 
expressing an opinion in writing on the proposed changes, and any opinion so expressed shall be 
considered by the Board.  
(3) Every Statute or any amendment or repeal of a Statute shall require the asse nt of the Visitor 
who may assent thereto or withh
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 9]
ent or repeal of a Statute shall require the asse nt of the Visitor 
who may assent thereto or withhold assent therefrom or remit it to the Board for consideration.  
(4) A Statute or a Statute amending or repealing an existing Statute shall have no validity unless it 
has been assented to by the Visitor.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub -sections, the Visitor may amend or 
repeal the Statutes referred to in sub -section ( 1) during the period of three years immediately after the 
commencement of this Act.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub -sections, the Visitor may direct the 
University to make provisions in the Statutes in respect of any matter specified by him and if the 
Board is unable to implement such direction within sixty days of its receipt, the Visitor  may, after 
considering the reasons, if any, communicated by the Board for its inability to comply with such 
direction, make or amend the Statutes suitably.  
28. Power to make Ordinances .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and Statutes, the 
Ordinance s may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the admission of students to the University and their enrolment as such;  
(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas and certificates of the 
University;  
(c) the medi um of instruction and examination;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 10]
10 
 (d) the award of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions, the 
qualifications for the same and the means to be taken relating to the granting and obtaining of the 
same;  
(e) the fees to be charged fo r courses of study in the University and for admission to the 
examinations, degrees, diplomas and certificates of the University;  
(f) the conditions for award of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(g) the conduct of examinations, i ncluding the term of office and manner of appointment and 
duties of examining bodies, examiners and moderators;  
(h) the conditions of residence of the students;  
(i) the special arrangements, if any, which may be made for the residence, discipline and 
teaching of women students and the prescribing of special courses of studies for them;  
(j) the appointment and emoluments of employees other than those for whom provision has 
been made in the Statutes;  
(k) the establishment of special centres, specialised laboratories and other committees;  
(l) the manner of co -operation and collaboration with other Universities and authorities 
including learned bodies or associations;  
(m) the creation, composition and functions of any other body which is considered necessar y 
for improving the academic life of the University;  
(n) such other terms and conditions of service of teachers and other academic staff as are not 
prescribed by the Statutes;  
(o) the management of colleges and institutions established by the University;  
(p) the setting up of a mechanism for redressal of grievances of employees; and  
(q) all other matters which by this Act or the Statutes may be provided for by the Ordinances.  
(2) The first Ordinances shall be made by the Vice -Chancellor with the previous ap proval of the 
Central Government and the Ordinances so made may be amended or repealed at any time by the 
Board in the manner prescribed by the Statutes.  
29. Regulations . —The authorities of the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 10]
by the 
Board in the manner prescribed by the Statutes.  
29. Regulations . —The authorities of the University may make Regulations, consistent with this 
Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances for the conduct of their own business and that of the Committees 
appointed by them and not provided for by this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances in the manner 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
30. Annual report .— (1) The annual  report of the University shall be prepared under the 
direction of the Board, which shall include, among other matters, the steps taken by the University 
towards the fulfilment of its objects and shall be submitted to the Board on or after such date as may  
be prescribed by the Statutes and the Board shall consider the report in its annual meeting.  
(2) The Board shall submit the annual report to the Visitor along with its comments, if any.  
(3) A copy of the annual report as prepared under sub -section ( 1) sha ll also be submitted to the 
Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before both the Houses 
of Parliament.  
31. Annual accounts .—(1) The annual accounts of the University shall be prepared under the 
directions of the Boa rd and shall, once at least every year and at intervals of not more than fifteen 
months, be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or by such persons as he may 
authorise in this behalf.  
(2) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report thereon shall be submitted to the 
Board and the Visitor along with the observations of the Board.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 11]
11 
 (3) Any observations made by the Visitor on the annual accounts shall be brought to the notice of 
the Board and observations of the Board, if any , shall be submitted to the Visitor.  
(4) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report as submitted to the Visitor, shall 
also be submitted to the Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be 
laid before both the Houses of Parliament.  
(5) The audited annual accounts after having been laid before both the Houses of Parliament shall 
be published in the Official Gazette.  
32. Conditions of service of employees .— (1) Every employee of the University shall be 
appointed u nder a written contract which shall be lodged with the University and a copy of which 
shall be furnished to the employee concerned . 
(2) Any dispute arising out of the contract between the University and any employee shall, at the 
request of the employee, b e referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed 
by the Board, one member nominated by the employee concerned and an umpire appointed by the 
Visitor.  
(3) The decision of the Tribunal shall be final, and no suit shall lie in any ci vil court in respect of 
the matters decided by the Tribunal.  
(4) Every request made by the employee under sub -section ( 2) shall be deemed to be a submission 
to arbitration upon the terms of this section within the meaning of the Arbitration and Conciliation 
Act, 1996 (26 of 1996).  
(5) The procedure for regulating the work of the Tribunal shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
33. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students .— (1) Any 
student or candidate for an examination whose name has been removed from the rolls of the 
University by the orders or resolution of the Vice -Chancellor, Discipline Committee or Examination 
Committee, as the case may be, and who has been debarred from appearing at the examinations of the 
University for more than one ye
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 11]
and who has been debarred from appearing at the examinations of the 
University for more than one year, may, within ten days of the date of receipt of such orders or copy 
of such resolution by him, appeal to the Board and the Board may confirm, modify or reverse the 
decision of the Vice -Chancellor or the Committee, as t he case may be.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of any disciplinary action taken by the University against a student 
shall, at the request of such student, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration and the provisions of sub -
sections ( 2), (3), (4) and ( 5) of sec tion 32 shall, as far as may be, apply to a reference made under this 
sub-section.  
34. Right to appeal .— Every employee or student of the University or of a college or institution 
maintained by the University shall, notwithstanding anything contained in th is Act, have a right to 
appeal, within such time as may be prescribed by the Statutes, to the Board against the decision of any 
officer or authority of the University or any college or an institution, as the case may be, and 
thereupon the Board may confirm , modify or reverse the decision appealed against.  
35. Provident and pension funds .— (1) The University shall constitute for the benefit of its 
employees such provident or pension fund or provide such insurance schemes as it may deem fit in 
such manner and  subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) Where such provident fund or pension fund has been so constituted, the Central Government 
may, if deem fit, declare that the provisions of the Provident Funds Act, 1925 (19 of 1925), sha ll 
apply to such fund, as if it were a Government provident fund.  
36. Disputes as to constitution of University authorities .—If any question arises as to whether 
any person has been duly appointed as, or is entitled to be, a member of any authority of the 
University, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final.  
37. Cons
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 11]
rsity, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final.  
37. Constitution of committees .— Where any authority of the University is given power by this 
Act or the Statutes to appoint Committees, such Committees shall, s ave as otherwise provided, consist 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 12]
12 
 of the members of the authority concerned and of such persons, if any, as the authority in each case 
may think fit.  
38. Filling of casual vacancies .— All casual vacancies among the members (other than ex officio  
members) of any authority or other body of the University shall be filled, as soon as may be, by the 
person or body who appoints or co -opts the member whose place has become vacant and the person or 
body appointed or co -opted to a casual vacancy shall be a member of such authority or body for the 
residue of the term, for which the person whose place he fills would have been a member.  
39. Proceedings of University authorities not invalidated by vacancy .— No act or proceedings 
of any authority of the Univers ity shall be invalid merely by reason of the existence of a vacancy or 
vacancies among its members.  
40. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings 
shall lie against the Board, Vice -Chancellor, any authority or  officer or other employee of the 
University for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of any of the 
provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances . 
41. Mode of proof of University records .—A copy of any receipt, application, notice, order, 
proceeding, resolution of any authority or Committee of the University, or other documents in 
possession of the University, or any entry in any register duly maintained by the University, if verified 
by the Registrar, shall be r eceived as prima facie  evidence of such receipt, application, notice, order, 
proceeding, resolution or documents or the existence of entry in the register and shall be admitted as 
evidence of the matters and transactions therein where the original thereof would, if produced, have 
been admissible in evidence, notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence                 
Act, 1872 (1 of 1872) , or in any other law for the time being in force.  
42. Effe
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 12]
                
Act, 1872 (1 of 1872) , or in any other law for the time being in force.  
42. Effect of establishment of University .—(1) On and from the date of commencement of this 
Act,— 
(a) any reference to the Rajendra Agricultural University in any contract or other instrument 
shall be deemed as a reference to the University;  
(b) all property, movable and immovable, of or belonging to the Raje ndra Agricultural 
University shall vest in the University;  
(c) all rights and liabilities of the Rajendra Agricultural University shall be transferred to, and 
be the rights and liabilities of, the University.  
(2) Every person permanently employed in the Ra jendra Agricultural University immediately 
before the commencement of the Act who meets the requisite qualification and criteria of recruitment 
in the University shall be provided an opportunity to be employed as such:  
Provided that every member of the aca demic staff and member of Faculty who does not meet the 
requisite qualification and criteria shall be given an opportunity for two years to upgrade the 
qualification and to meet the criteria:  
Provided further that every other person permanently employed sh all be given an opportunity to 
upgrade the qualification and to meet the criteria, in the manner provided by the Regulations:  
Provided also that the tenure, remuneration, terms and conditions, rights and privileges as to 
pension, leave, gratuity, provident  fund and all other matters of every other person permanently 
employed by the Rajendra Agricultural University shall be determined by the State Government of 
Bihar.  
(3) All efforts shall be made by the State Government of Bihar to engage any surplus or 
temporary academic staff, teacher, member of Faculty or other employee of the Rajendra Agricultural 
University, by or against whom any dispute is pending.  
(4) Any dispute or litigation, the cause of action for which has arisen between any member of 
academic staff, teacher, member of
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 12]
, the cause of action for which has arisen between any member of 
academic staff, teacher, member of Faculty or other employee and the Rajendra Agricultural 
University before the commencement of this Act shall be instituted, prose cuted or continued between 
the academic staff, teacher, member of Faculty or other employee and the Rajendra Agricultural 
University, as if this Act had not been enacted, and all such cases shall be managed by a special cell to 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 13]
13 
 be constituted by the State Government of Bihar and all expenses relating to the management of such 
cases including any compensation payable to any person thereof shall be borne by the State 
Government.  
(5) Any academic course, programme or scheme as on the date of commencement of th e Act shall 
be continued, till the completion of the course, programme or scheme with such modifications as the 
University may deem fit.  
(6) The State Government of Bihar and the University shall bear the proportionate cost of pension 
and other liabilities  of every academic staff, teacher, member of Faculty or other employee, 
proportionate to the extent of the respective period of service of the person and the State Government 
shall provide its contribution to the University which may discharge any liabilit y on account of this.  
(7) Any matter relating to permanent record of students, teachers, academic staff, Faculty and 
every other employee shall be provided by Regulations.  
(8) Pension and all other post -retirement benefits including medical benefits of eve ry academic 
staff, teacher, faculty member and every other employee who has superannuated before the 
commencement of this Act shall be borne by the State Government of Bihar, the payment of which 
shall be made through the University and shall be governed b y the rules relating thereof made by the 
State Government of Bihar in this behalf.  
(9) The retirement age of every teacher, academic staff, Faculty and every other employee of the 
University shall be governed by any law for the time being in force.  
(10) An y matter governing the conditions of service relating to the teacher, academic staff, 
Faculty and every other employee for which no provision has been made in this Act, shall be 
determined by the corresponding provisions made by the Central Government.  
43. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provision of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 13]
any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provision of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient 
for removing the difficulties:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three years from 
the commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament.  
44. Transitional provisions .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, and the       
Statutes, — 
(a) the first Chancellor and the first Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visi tor and 
shall hold office for a term of five years;  
(b) the first Registrar and the first Comptroller shall be appointed by the Visitor and each of 
the said officers shall hold office for a term of three years;  
(c) the first members of the Board shall be n ominated by the Visitor and shall hold office for a 
term of three years;  
(d) the first members of the Academic Council shall be nominated by the Visitor and shall 
hold office for a term of three years:  
Provided that if any vacancy occurs in the above offic es or authorities, the same shall be filled 
by appointment or nomination, as the case may be, by the Visitor, and the person so appointed or 
nominated shall hold office for so long as the officer or member in whose place he is appointed or 
nominated would have held office, if such vacancy had not occurred.  
45. Repeal of Bihar Agricultural University Act .—(1) The Bihar Agricultural University     
Act, 1987 (Bihar Act 8 of 1988) , in so far as it relates to the Rajendra Agricultural University, Pusa, 
Bihar is hereby repealed . 
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal,  — 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 14]
14 
 (a) all appointments made, orders issued, degrees and other academic distinctions conferred, 
diplomas and certificates awarded, privileges granted or other things done under the Bihar 
Agricultural Universi ty Act, 1987  (Bihar Act 8 of 1988) , in so far as it relates to the Rajendra 
Agricultural University, Pusa, Bihar, shall be deemed to have been respectively made, issued, 
conferred, awarded, granted or done under the corresponding provisions of this Act, an d, except 
as otherwise provided by or under this Act or the Statues, continue in force unless and until they 
are superseded by any order made under this Act or the Statues; and  
(b) all proceedings of Selection Committees for the appointment or promotions of teachers 
that took place before the commencement of this Act and all actions of the Governing Body in 
respect of the recommendations of such Selection Committees where no orders of appointment on 
the basis thereof were passed before the commencement of this Act, in so far as it relates to 
Rajendra Agricultural University, shall, notwithstanding that the procedure for selection has been 
modified by this Act, be deemed to have been valid but further proceeding in connection with 
such pending selections sha ll be taken in accordance with the provisions of this Act and be 
continued from the stage where they stood immediately before such commencement, except if the 
concerned authorities take, with the approval of the Visitor, a decision to the contrary.  
46. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to be 
laid before Parliament .—(1) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be 
published in the Official Gazette.  
(2) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regula tion made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more succe
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 14]
ion for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, befor e the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the Statutes, Ordinance or Regulation or both Houses 
agree that the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation should not be made, the Statute, Ordinance or 
Regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything pr eviously done under that Statute, Ordinance or Regulation.  
(3) The power to make Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations shall include the power to give 
retrospective effect from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this Act, to the Statutes, 
Ordinances or Regulations or any of them but no retrospective effect shall be given to any Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person to whom such 
Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations may be applicable.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 15]
15 
 THE SC HEDULE  
(See section 27)  
THE STATUTES  OF THE UNIVERSITY  
The Chancellor:  
1. (1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from a panel of not less than three persons 
recommended by the Board from amongst persons of eminence in education in general and  
agricultural sciences in particular:  
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve any of the persons so recommended, he may call for 
fresh recommendations from the Board.  
(2) The Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years and shall not be elig ible for 
reappointment:  
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of his term of office, the Chancellor shall continue to 
hold office until his successor enters upon his office.  
The Vice -Chancellor:  
2. (1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visit or from a panel of not less than three 
persons who shall be recommended by a Committee as constituted under clause ( 2). 
(2) The Committee referred to in clause ( 1) shall consist of the following: — 
(i) Secretary, Department of Agricultural Research and Education, Government of India who 
shall be the Chairman;  
(ii) one nominee of the Visitor as Member, who shall also be the convener;  
(iii) one nominee of the Central Government.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the Universi ty. 
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters 
upon his office, or until he attains the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier, and he shall be 
eligible for reappointment for a further term of five years, or until he attains the age of seventy years 
whichever is earlier:  
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of the said period of five years, he shall continue in 
office for a period not exceeding one year or until his successor is appointed an d enters upon his 
office.  
(5) The emoluments and other conditions of service of the Vice -Chancellor shall be as follows:  — 
(i) the Vice -Chanc
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 15]
and other conditions of service of the Vice -Chancellor shall be as follows:  — 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor shall be paid a monthly salary and allowances other than the house 
rent allowance, at the rate fixed by the C entral Government from time to time and he shall be 
entitled, without payment of rent, to use a furnished residence throughout his term of office and 
no charge shall fall on the Vice -Chancellor in respect of the maintenance of such residence;  
(ii) the Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to such terminal benefits and allowances as may be 
fixed by the Board with the approval of the Visitor from time to time:  
Provided that where an employee of the University or a college or an institution maintained 
by it, or an y other University or any institution maintained by or affiliated to such other 
University, is appointed as the Vice -Chancellor, he may be allowed to continue to contribute to 
any provident fund of which he is a member and the University shall contribute t o the account of 
such person in that provident fund at the same rate at which the person had been contributing 
immediately before his appointment as the Vice -Chancellor:  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 16]
16 
 Provided further that where such employee had been a member of any pension scheme, the  
University shall make the necessary contribution to such scheme;  
(iii) the Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to travelling and other allowances as per rate fixed 
from time to time by the Government of India for the officers equivalent to the rank of Secre tary 
to the Government of India;  
(iv) the Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to transfer travelling allowances and other 
allowances as admissible to officers of the rank of Secretary to the Government of India for 
joining and after relinquishing the post;  
(v) the Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to leave on full pay at the rate of thirty days in a 
calendar year and the leave shall be credited to his account in advance in two half -yearly 
instalments of fifteen days each on the first day of January and July e very year:  
Provided that if the Vice -Chancellor assumes or relinquishes charge of the office of the           
Vice -Chancellor during the currency of a half year, the leave shall be credited proportionately at 
the rate of two and -a-half days for each comple ted month of service;  
(vi) in addition to the leave referred to in sub -clause ( iv), the Vice -Chancellor shall also be 
entitled to half -pay leave at the rate of twenty days for each completed year of service. This     
half-pay leave may also be availed of a s commuted leave on full pay on medical certificate:  
Provided that when commuted leave is available, twice the amount of half -pay leave shall be 
debited against half -pay leave due;  
(vii) the Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to Leave Travel Concession and Home Travel 
Concession as per rules of Government of India;  
(viii) the Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to the benefit of leave encashment at the time of 
laying down the office as per rules of Government of India.  
(6) If the office of the Vice -Chancellor becomes vacant due to death, resignation or otherwise, or 
if he
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 16]
 the office of the Vice -Chancellor becomes vacant due to death, resignation or otherwise, or 
if he is unable to perform his duties due to ill health or any other cause, the senior -most Dean or 
Director, as the case may be, shall perform the duties of the Vice -Chancellor until a new Vice -
Chancellor assumes office or until the Vice -Chancellor attends to the duties of his office, as the case 
may be.  
Powers and duties of the Vice -Chancellor:  
3. (1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be ex officio  Chairman of the Board, the Academic Council, the 
Finance C ommittee, the Research Council and the Extension Education Council and shall, in the 
absence of the Chancellor, preside over the Convocations held for conferring degrees.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to be present at, and address, any meeting of any 
authority of the University, but shall not be entitled to vote thereat unless he is a member of such 
authority.  
(3) It shall be the duty of the Vice -Chancellor to see that this Act, the Statutes, the Ordinances and 
the Regulations are duly observed,  and he shall have all the powers necessary to ensure such 
observance.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall exercise control over the affairs of the University and shall give 
effect to the decisions of all the authorities of the University.  
(5) The Vice -Chancello r shall have all the powers necessary for the proper maintenance of 
discipline in the University and he may delegate any such powers to such person or persons as he may 
deem fit.  
(6) The Vice -Chancellor shall have the power to convene or cause to be conven ed the meetings of 
the Board, the Academic Council, the Research Council, the Extension Education Council and the 
Finance Committee.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 17]
17 
 The Dean of colleges and Faculties:  
4. (1) Each Faculty shall have a Dean who shall also be the head of the college concerned.  
(2) If any Faculty has more than one college, the Vice -Chancellor may nominate one of the Deans 
as the Dean of the Faculty.  
(3) The Dean of the college shall be appointed by the Board on the recommendations of the 
Selection Committee constituted  for the purpose as per statute 18 and he shall be a whole -time 
salaried officer of the University.  
(4) The Dean shall be entitled to rent free and unfurnished residential accommodation.  
(5) The Dean shall hold the office for a term of five years and shall  be eligible for reappointment:  
Provided that a Dean on attaining the age of sixty -five years shall cease to hold office as such.  
(6) When the office of the Dean is vacant or when the Dean is, by reason of illness, absence or 
any other cause, unable to perform duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed by 
such persons as the Vice -Chancellor may appoint for the purpose.  
(7) The Dean shall be responsible to the Vice -Chancellor for the conduct and maintenance of the 
standards of teach ing in the college and Faculty and shall perform such other functions as may be 
prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(8) The Dean shall be the ex officio  Chairman of the Board of Studies of the Faculty, a member of 
the Academic Council, the Research Council and t he Extension Education Council of the University.  
The Director of Education:  
5. (1) The Director of Education shall be appointed by the Board on the recommendations of the 
Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be  a whole -time salarie d officer of the 
University.  
(2) The Director of Education shall be entitled to rent free and unfurnished residential 
accommodation.  
(3) The Director of Education shall hold office for a term of five years and shall be eligible for 
reappointment:  
Provided that Director of Education on attaini
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 17]
ive years and shall be eligible for 
reappointment:  
Provided that Director of Education on attaining the age of sixty -five years shall cease to hold 
office as such.  
(4) The Director of Education shall be responsible for planning, co -ordination and supervision for 
all educational programmes in the various Faculties o f the University.  
The Director of Research:  
6. (1) The Director of Research shall be appointed by the Board on the recommendations of the 
Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the 
University.  
(2) The Director of Research shall be entitled to rent free and unfurnished accommodation.  
(3) The Director of Research shall hold office for a term of five years and shall be eligible for 
reappointment:  
Provided that the Director of Research on attaining the age of sixty -five years shall cease to hold 
office as such.  
(4) The Director of Research shall be responsible for supervision and coordination of all research 
programmes of the University and shall be responsible to the Vice -Chancellor for performance of h is 
duties.  
(5) The Director of Research shall be ex officio  Member -Secretary of the Research Council of the 
University.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 18]
18 
 The Director of Extension Education:  
7. (1) The Director of Extension Education shall be appointed by the Board on the 
recommendations of the Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole -time 
salaried officer of the University.  
(2) The Director of Extension Education shall be entitled to rent free and unfurnished 
accommodation.  
(3) The Director of Extension Educ ation shall hold office for a term of five years and shall be 
eligible for reappointment:  
Provided that the Director of Extension Education on attaining the age of sixty -five years shall 
cease to hold office as such.  
(4) The Director of Extension Education  shall be responsible for supervision and coordination of 
all Extension Education Programmes in the University and shall be responsible to the Vice -Chancellor 
for performance of his duties.  
(5) The Director of Extension Education shall be ex officio  Member -Secretary of the Extension 
Education Council of the University.  
The Registrar:  
8. (1) The Registrar shall be appointed by the Board on the recommendations of a duly constituted 
Selection Committee under Statute 18 and he shall be a whole -time salar ied officer of the University.  
(2) The Registrar shall be responsible to the Vice -Chancellor for performance of his duties.  
(3) The Registrar shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible for 
reappointment.  
(4) He may also be appointed on deputation for a specified period not exceeding five years.  
(5) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Registrar shall be such as 
may be prescribed by the Ordinances:  
Provided that the Registrar shall retire on attaining the age  of sixty years.  
(6) In case of a person appointed on deputation, his tenure, emoluments and other terms of service 
shall be according to the terms of deputation.  
(7) When the office of the Registrar is vacant or when the Registrar is, by reason of illness , 
absence, or any ot
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 18]
fice of the Registrar is vacant or when the Registrar is, by reason of illness , 
absence, or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be 
performed by such person as the Vice -Chancellor  may appoint for the purpose.  
(8)  (a) The Registrar shall have the power to take disciplinary actio n against such of the 
employees excluding teachers, as may be specified in the order of the Board and to suspend them 
pending inquiry, to administer warnings to them or to impose on them the penalty of censure or the 
withholding of increment:  
Provided that  no such penalty shall be imposed unless the person concerned has been given a 
reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken in regard to him.  
(b) An appeal shall lie to the Vice -Chancellor against any order of the Registr ar imposing any of 
the penalties specified in sub -clause ( a). 
(c) In a case where the inquiry discloses that a punishment beyond the power of the Registrar is 
called for, the Registrar shall, upon conclusion of inquiry, make a report to the Vice -Chancellor  along 
with his recommendations:  
Provided that an appeal shall lie to the Board against an order of the Vice -Chancellor imposing 
any penalty.  
(9) The Registrar shall be the ex officio  Secretary of the Board and the Academic Council, but 
shall not be deemed  to be a member of any of these authorities.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 19]
19 
 (10) It shall be the duty of the Registrar  — 
(a) to be the custodian of the records, the common seal and such other property of the 
University as the Board shall commit to his charge;  
(b) to issue all notice convening meeting of the Board, the Academic Council and of any 
Committee appointed by those authorities;  
(c) to keep the minutes of all the meetings of the Board, the Academic Council and of any 
committees appointed by those authorities;  
(d) to conduct th e official correspondence of the Board and the Academic Council;  
(e) to arrange for the examinations of the University in accordance with the manner 
prescribed by the Ordinances or notifications;  
(f) to supply to the Visitor, copies of the agenda of the me etings of the authorities of the 
University as soon as they are issued and the minutes of such meetings;  
(g) to represent the University in suits or proceedings by or against the University, sign 
powers of attorney and verify pleadings or depute his repres entatives for the purpose; and  
(h) to perform such other duties as may be specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances or the 
Regulations or as may be required, from time to time, by the Board or the Vice -Chancellor.  
The Comptroller:  
9. (1) The Comptroller sh all be appointed by the Board on the recommendations of a duly 
constituted Selection Committee under Statute 18 and he shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the 
University.  
(2) The Comptroller shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be el igible for 
reappointment.  
(3) The Comptroller may also be appointed on deputation for a specified period not exceeding 
five years.  
(4) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Comptroller shall be such as 
may be prescribed by the Ord inances.  
(5) In case of a person being appointed as Comptroller on deputation, his tenure, emoluments and 
other terms of service shall be according to the standard of deputation:  
Provided that the Com
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 19]
nd 
other terms of service shall be according to the standard of deputation:  
Provided that the Comptroller shall retire on attaining the age of sixty year s. 
(6) When the office of the Comptroller is vacant or when the Comptroller is, by reason of illness, 
absence or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be 
performed by such person as the Vice -Chancellor may appoint for the purpose.  
(7) The Comptroller shall be the ex officio  Secretary of the Finance Committee, but shall not be 
deemed to be a member of such Committee.  
(8) The Comptroller shall — 
(a) exercise general supervision over the funds of the University and shall advise it as regards 
its financial policy; and  
(b) perform such other duties as may be specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances or as may be 
required, from time to time, by the Boar d or the Vice -Chancellor.  
(9) Subject to the control of the Board, the Comptroller shall — 
(a) hold and manage the property and investments of the University including trust and 
endowed property;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 20]
20 
 (b) ensure that the limits fixed by the Board for recurring a nd non -recurring expenditure for a 
year are not exceeded and that all moneys are expended on the purpose for which they are granted 
or allotted;  
(c) be responsible for the preparation of annual accounts and the budget of the University and 
for their presen tation to the Board;  
(d) keep a constant watch on the state of the cash and bank balances and on the state of 
investments;  
(e) watch the progress of the collection of revenue and advise on the methods of collection 
employed;  
(f) ensure that the registers o f buildings, land, furniture and equipment are maintained up -to-
date and that stock -checking is conducted, of equipment and other consumable materials in all 
offices, specialised laboratories, colleges and institutions maintained by the University;  
(g) bring to the notice of the Vice -Chancellor unauthorised expenditure and other financial 
irregularities and suggest disciplinary action against persons at fault; and  
(h) call for from any office, laboratory, college or institution maintained by the University and 
information or returns that he may consider necessary for performance of his duties.  
(10) Any receipt given by the Comptroller or the person or persons duly authorised in this behalf 
by the Board for any money payable to the University shall be suffici ent discharge for payment of 
such money.  
Heads of Departments:  
10. (1) Each Department shall have a Head appointed by the Vice -Chancellor who shall be not 
below the rank of an Associate Professor and whose duties and functions and terms and conditions of 
appointment shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(2) The Head of Department shall be responsible to the Dean for teaching, to Director of Research 
for research, to Director of Extension Education for extension education work.  
(3) The Dean shall be the administrative controlling officer of the Heads of Departments in 
college concerned:  
Provided tha
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 20]
administrative controlling officer of the Heads of Departments in 
college concerned:  
Provided that if there is more than one Professor in any Department, the Head of the Department 
shall be appointed by the Vice -Chancellor from amongst the Professors:  
Prov ided further that in the case of Department where there is only one Professor, the Vice -
Chancellor shall have the option, to appoint either the Professor or an Associate Professor as the Head 
of the Department.  
(4) It shall be open to a Professor or an Ass ociate Professor to decline the offer of appointment as 
the Head of the Department.  
(5) A Professor or an Associate Professor appointed as Head of the Department shall hold office 
as such for a period of three years and shall be eligible for reappointment.  
(6) A Head of the Department may resign his office at any time during his tenure of office.  
(7) A Head of the Department shall perform such functions as may be prescribed by the 
Ordinances.  
(8) The Head of the Department shall retire at the age of sixty -five years.  
Librarians:  
11. (1) Every Librarian shall be appointed by the Board on the recommendations of the Selection 
Committee constituted for the purpose under Statute 18 and he shall be a whole -time salaried officer 
of the University.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 21]
21 
 (2) Every Librari an shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be assigned to him 
by the Vice -Chancellor.  
Constitution, powers and functions of the Board of Management:  
12. (1) The Board shall consist of the following members, namely:  — 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor, ex officio  Chairman;  
(ii) three Secretaries, from amongst the Secretaries -in-charge of the Departments of 
Agriculture or Animal Husbandry, Fishery and Horticulture of the State of Bihar to be nominated 
by the Visitor by rotation;  
(iii) three eminent scientists to be nominated by the Visitor;  
(iv) one distinguished person representing Agro -based industries or a manufacturer having a 
special knowledge in agricultural development to be nominated by the Visitor;  
(v) the Deputy Director -General (Education) representing the Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research;  
(vi) one Dean of college and one Director to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor on 
rotational basis;  
(vii) two persons representing farmers to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor;  
(viii) one woman social worker representing woman social organisation to be nominated by 
the Vice -Chancellor;  
(ix) an Advisor (Agriculture), NITI Aayog;  
(x) a distinguished authority on natural resource or environment management to be nominated 
by the Vis itor; 
(xi) two persons not below the rank of Joint Secretary representing respectively the 
Departments of Government of India dealing with the Agriculture and Animal Husbandry to be 
nominated by the concerned Secretary to the Government of India;  
(xii) nom inee of the Secretary representing the Department of Agricultural Research and 
Education, Government of India;  
(xiii) the Registrar of the University -Secretary.  
(2) The term of office of the members of the Board, other than ex officio  members, shall be thr ee 
years.  
(3) The Board shall have the power of management and administration of the revenue and 
property of the University and the conduct of a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 21]
of management and administration of the revenue and 
property of the University and the conduct of all administrative affairs of the University not otherwise 
provided for.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Ac t, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Board shall in 
addition to all other powers vested in it, have the following powers, namely: — 
(i) to create teaching and academic posts, to determine the number and emoluments of such 
posts and to define the duties and conditions of service of University staff, subject to the approval 
of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research;  
(ii) to appoint such teachers and other academic staff, as may be necessary, and Deans of 
colleges, Director and Heads of other instituti ons maintained by the University on the 
recommendations of the Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and to fill up temporary 
vacancies therein;  
(iii) to create administrative, ministerial and other necessary posts and to make appointments 
theret o in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 22]
22 
 (iv) to regulate and enforce discipline among employees in accordance with the Statutes and 
Ordinances;  
(v) to manage and regulate the finances, accounts, investments, property, business and all 
other administr ative affairs of the University, and for that purpose to appoint such agents as it 
may think fit;  
(vi) to fix limits on the total recurring and the total non -recurring expenditure for a year on the 
recommendations of the Finance Committee;  
(vii) to invest any money belonging to the University, including any unapplied income, in 
such stocks, funds shares or securities, from time to time, as it may think fit or in the purchase of 
immovable property in India, with the like powers of varying such investment fro m time to time;  
(viii) to transfer or accept transfers of any movable or immovable property on behalf of the 
University;  
(ix) to provide buildings, premises, furniture and apparatus and other means needed for 
carrying on the work of the University;  
(x) to enter into, vary, carry out and cancel contracts on behalf of the University;  
(xi) to entertain, adjudicate upon, and, if thought fit, to redress any grievances of the 
employees and students of the University;  
(xii) to fix fees, honorarium, emoluments and travelling allowances of examiners or experts or 
consultants, advisors and officers on special duty;  
(xiii) to select a common seal for the University and provide for the custody and use of such 
seal; 
(xiv) to make such special arrangements as may be necessary for the residence and discipline 
of women students;  
(xv) to delegate any of its powers to the Vice -Chancellor, Deans, Directors, Registrar or 
Comptroller or such other employee or authority of the University or to a Committee appointed 
by it as i t may deem fit;  
(xvi) to institute fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(xvii) to provide for appointment of Visiting Professor, Emeritus Professor, Consultant and 
Officers on Special Du
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 22]
de for appointment of Visiting Professor, Emeritus Professor, Consultant and 
Officers on Special Duty and scholars and to determine the terms and conditions of such 
appointment;  
(xviii) to exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred on it 
by the Act, or the Statutes.  
Quorum for meetings of the Board:  
13. Five members of the Board shall form the quorum for a meeting o f the Board.  
Constitution and powers of the Academic Council:  
14. (1) The Academic Council shall consist of the following members, namely:  — 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor, ex officio  Chairman;  
(ii) all the Deans of the colleges of the University;  
(iii) the Director of Research of the University;  
(iv) the Director of Extension Education of the University;  
(v) the Director of Education;  
(vi) a Librarian to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor on rotational basis;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 23]
23 
 (vii) two eminent scientists to be co -opted from  outside the University to be nominated by 
the Vice -Chancellor;  
(viii) seven Heads of the Departments, at least one from each Faculty to be nominated by 
the Vice -Chancellor;  
(ix) the Registrar of the University, ex officio  Secretary.  
(2) The term of office of the members of the Academic Council other than ex officio  members 
shall be three years.  
(3) Subject to the Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Academic Council shall, in addition to 
all other powers vested in it, have the following powers, namely :— 
(a) to exercise general supervision over the academic policies of the University and to giv e 
directions regarding methods of instruction, co -operative teaching among colleges and institutions, 
evaluation and improvements in academic standards;  
(b) to bring about inter -college coordination and establish or appoint Committee on academic 
matters;  
(c) to consider matters of general academic interest either on its own initiative or on a reference 
by a college or the Board and to take appropriate action thereon; and  
(d) to frame such regulations and rules consistent with the Statutes and the Ordinances  regarding 
the academic functioning of the University, discipline, residences, admissions, award of fellowships 
and studentships, fees, concessions, corporate life and attendance.  
Quorum for meetings of the Academic Council:  
15. One-third members of the Ac ademic Council shall form the quorum for a meeting of the 
Academic Council.  
Board of Studies:  
16. (1) Each Faculty shall have a Board of Studies.  
(2) The Board of Studies of each Faculty shall be constituted as under:  — 
(i) Dean of Faculty —Chairperson;  
(ii) Director of Research —Member;  
(iii) Director of Extension Education —Member;  
(iv) All Heads of Departments of the Faculty not below the rank of Associate           
Professor —Member;  
(v) One representative of the Academic Council not belonging to the part
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 23]
      
Professor —Member;  
(v) One representative of the Academic Council not belonging to the partic ular Faculty to be 
nominated by the Vice -Chancellor;  
(vi) Two eminent scientists from agricultural education system not belonging to the 
University to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor;  
(vii) One final year Post -Graduate student with highest Overall Grad e Point Average     
(OGPA)  —Member;  
(viii) Assistant Registrar (Academic) of the Faculty —Member;  
(ix) Director of Education —Member.  
(3) The functions of the Board of Studies shall be to recommend to the Academic Council, the 
course curriculum to be prescribed for various degrees to be offered by the concerned faculty and to 
make suitable recommendations for the teaching of the prescribed approved course, namely:  — 
(a) courses of studies and appointment of examiners for courses, but excluding research  
degrees;  
(b) appointment of supervisors of research; and  
(c) measures for the improvement of the standard of teaching and research.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 24]
24 
 Finance Committee:  
17. (1) The Finance Committee shall consist of the following members, namely:  — 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor —Chairman;  
(ii) Financial Advisor, Department of Agricultural Research and Education or his nominee not 
below the rank of Deputy Secretary;  
(iii) three persons to be nominated by the Board, out of whom at least one shall be a member 
of the Board;  
(iv) thre e persons to be nominated by the Visitor; and  
(v) the Comptroller of the University —Member -Secretary.  
(2) Three members of the Finance Committee shall form the quorum for meeting of the Finance 
Committee.  
(3) The members of the Finance Committee other than  ex officio  members, shall hold office for a 
term of three years.  
(4) A member of the Finance Committee shall have the right to record a minute of dissent if he 
does not agree with any decision of the Finance Committee.  
(5) The Finance Committee shall meet  at least twice a year to examine the accounts and to 
scrutinise proposals for expenditure.  
(6) Every proposal relating to creation of posts and those items which have not been included in 
the Budget, shall be examined by the Finance Committee before they are considered by the Board.  
(7) The annual accounts and the financial estimates of the University prepared by the 
Comptroller, shall be laid before the Finance Committee for consideration and comments and 
thereafter submitted to the Board for approval.  
(8) The Finance Committee shall recommend limits for the total recurring expenditure and the 
total non -recurring expenditure for the year, based on the income and resources of the University 
(which, in case of productive works, may include the proceeds of lo ans).  
Selection Committees:  
18. (1) There shall be a selection Committee for making recommendations to the Board for 
appointment to the post of teachers, Comptroller, Registrar, Librarians, Deans of colleges, Directors 
and Heads of other institutions maint ained by the University.  

<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 24]
ans, Deans of colleges, Directors 
and Heads of other institutions maint ained by the University.  
(2) The Selection Committee for appointment to the posts specified in column 1 of the Table 
below shall consist of members as specified in the corresponding entries in column 2 of the said 
Table:  
TABLE  
 
1 2 3 
A. Directors/Deans  (i) Vice -Chancellor or his nominee —Chairman  
(ii) One nominee of the Visitor —Member  
(iii) Three eminent scientists not below the rank of Vice -
Chancellor or equivalent (serving or retired) to be 
nominated by the Vice -Chancellor from a panel of six 
names approv ed by the Board -Member.  
B. Professors/Equivalent  (i) Vice Chancellor or his nominee —Chairman  
(ii) One nominee of the Visitor —Member  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 25]
25 
 (iii) Dean of concerned Faculty —Member  
(iv) Director of Research or Director of Extension 
Education or Director of Education to be nominated by 
the Vice -Chancellor —Member  
(v) Three eminent subject specialists not below the rank 
of Head of Departments (serving or retired) to be 
nominated by the Vice -Chancellor out of a panel of six 
names approved by the Board —Member.  
C. Associate Professor/Assistant 
Professor/Equivalent  (i) Vice -Chancellor or his nominee —Chairman  
(ii) One nominee of the Visitor —Member  
(iii) Dean of concerned Faculty —Member  
(iv) Director of Education or Director of Research or 
Director of Extension Educ ation to be nominated by the 
Vice -Chancellor —Member  
(v) Two eminent teachers or scientists not below the rank 
of Professor or equivalent (serving or retired) to be 
nominated by the Vice -Chancellor out of a panel of six 
names approved by the Board —Members.  
D. Registrar/Comptroller/Librarian  (i) Vice -Chancellor or his nominee —Chairman             
(ii) One nominee of the Visitor —Member  
(iii) One Director/Dean to be nominated by the           
Vice -Chancellor —Member  
(iv) Two experts in the concerned subject to be nominated 
by the Vice -Chancellor, out of a panel of six names 
approved by the Board —Members.  
 (3) The Vice -Chancellor, or in his absence, his nominee shall preside at the meeting of the 
Selection Committee:  
Provided that the meetings of the Selection Committee shall be fixed after prior consultation with 
the nominees of the Visitor:  
Provided further that the proceedings of the Selection Committee shall not be valid unless at least 
two members, not in the service of the University are present in the meeting.  
(4) The meeting of the Selection Committee shall be convened by the Vice -Chancellor or in his 
absence by his nominee.  
(5) The procedure to be followed by the Selection Committee in making recommendations shall 
be decided by the Committee pr ior to the interview.  
(6)
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 25]
ommittee in making recommendations shall 
be decided by the Committee pr ior to the interview.  
(6) If the Board is unable to accept the recommendations made by the Selection Committee, it 
shall record its reasons and submit the case to the Visitor for final orders.  
(7) Appointments to temporary posts shall be made in the manner  indicated below: — 
(i) The Vice -Chancellor shall have the authority to appoint a person on ad hoc  basis for a 
period not exceeding six months extendable by a further period of six months with the approval of 
the Board:  
Provided that if the Vice -Chancellor is satisfied that in the interest of work it is necessary to 
fill the vacancy, the appointment may be made on a purely temporary basis by the local Selection 
Committee referred to in sub -clause ( ii) for the period not exceeding six months.    1 2 3 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 26]
26 
 (ii) If the temporary vacancy is for a period less than one year, an appointment to such 
vacancy shall be made on the recommendation of the local Selection Committee consisting of the 
Dean of the college concerned, the Head of the Department and a nominee of the                     
Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided that if the same person holds the offices of the Dean and the Head of the 
Department, the Selection Committee may contain two nominees of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided further that in case of sudden casual vacancies of teaching posts caused by death or 
any other reason, the Dean may, in consultation with the Head of the Department concerned, 
make a temporary appointment for one month and report to the Vice -Chancellor and the Registrar 
about such appointment.  
(iii) No teacher appointed temporarily shall, if he is not recommended by the regular 
Selection Committee for appointment under the Statutes, be continued in service on such 
temporary employment, unless he is subsequently selected by the local Selection Commit tee or 
the regular Selection Committee, for a temporary or permanent appointment, as the case may be.  
(8) Mode of constitution of the Selection Committee for non -academic staff, not prescribed in the 
Statutes, shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
Special  mode of appointment:  
19. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Statute 18, the Board may invite a person of high 
academic distinction and professional attainments to accept a post of Professor or Associate Professor 
or any other academic post in the U niversity, as the case may be, on such terms and conditions as it 
deems fit, and on the person agreeing to do so, appoint him to the post.  
(2) The Board may appoint a teacher or any other academic staff working in any other University 
or organisation for u ndertaking a joint project in accordance with the manner laid down in the 
Ordinances.  
Appointment for a fixed tenure:  
20. The Board may appoint a person 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 26]
aid down in the 
Ordinances.  
Appointment for a fixed tenure:  
20. The Board may appoint a person selected in accordance with the procedure laid down in 
Statute 18 for a fixed tenure on such terms and conditions as it deems fit.  
Qualifications of Director, Dean, Professor, etc.:  
21. (1) Qualifications of Director, Dean, Professor, Associate Professor and Assistant Professor of 
different Faculties and their equivalents in Research and Extension Education  shall be as prescribed 
by the Ordinances.  
(2) Qualification of non -academic staff shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
Committees:  
22. (1) The authorities of the University specified in section 17 may appoint as many standing or 
special Committees as it  may deem fit, and may appoint to such Committees persons who are not 
members of such authority.  
(2) Any such Committee appointed under clause ( 1) may deal with any subject delegated to it 
subject to confirmation by the authority appointing it.  
Terms and c onditions of service and code of conduct of the teachers, etc.:  
23. (1) All the teachers and other academic staff of the University shall, in the absence of any 
agreement to the contrary, be governed by the terms and conditions of service and code of conduct as 
are specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances and the Regulations.  
(2) Every teacher and other staff of the University shall be appointed on a written contract, the 
term of which shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(3) A copy of every contrac t referred to in clause ( 2) shall be deposited with the Registrar.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 27]
27 
 Terms and conditions of service and code of conduct of other employees:  
24. All the non -academic employees of the University, shall in the absence of any contract to the 
contrary, be governed by the terms and conditions of service and code of conduct as are specified in 
the Statutes, the Ordinances and the Regulations as made from time to time.  
Seniority list:  
25. (1) Whenever, in accordance with the Statutes, any person is to hold an office or be a member 
of an authority of the University by rotation according to seniority, such seniority shall be determined 
according to the length of continuous service of such person in his grade and, in accordance with such 
other principles as the Bo ard may, from time to time, prescribe.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the Registrar to prepare and maintain, in respect of each class of persons 
to whom the provisions of these Statutes apply, a complete and up -to-date seniority list in accordance 
with the pr ovisions of clause ( 1). 
(3) If two or more persons have equal length of continuous service in a particular grade  or the 
relative seniority of any persons is otherwise in doubt, the Registrar may, on his own motion and 
shall, at the request of any person, submit the matter to the Board whose decision thereon shall be 
final.  
Removal of employees of the University:  
26. (1) Where there is an allegation of misconduct against a teacher, a member of the academic 
staff or other employee of the University, the Vice -Chancellor, in case of the teacher or member of the 
academic staff and the authority competent to appoint (herei nafter referred to as the appointing 
authority) in the case of other employee, may, by order in writing, place such teacher, member of the 
academic staff or other employee, as the case may be, under suspension and shall forthwith report to 
the Board, the c ircumstances in which the order was made:  
Provided that the Board may, if it is of the opinion, that the circumstances of the
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 27]
rder was made:  
Provided that the Board may, if it is of the opinion, that the circumstances of the case do not 
warrant the suspension of the teacher or a member of the academic staff, revoke such order.  
(2) Notwithstanding anythi ng contained in the terms of the contract of appointment or of any 
other terms and conditions of service of the employees, the Board in respect of teacher and other 
academic staff and the appointing authority, in respect of other employees, shall have the power to 
remove a teacher or a member of the academic staff, or other employees, as the case may be, on 
grounds of misconduct.  
(3) Save as aforesaid, the Board or the appointing authority, as the case may be, shall not be 
entitled to remove any teacher, me mber of the academic staff or other employees except for a good 
cause and after giving three months, notice or on payment of three months salary in lieu thereof.  
(4) No teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall be removed under clause 
(2) or clause ( 3) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the 
action proposed to be taken in regard to him.  
(5) The removal of a teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall take effect 
from the date on wh ich the order of removal is made:  
Provided that where the teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee is under 
suspension at the time of his removal, such removal shall take effect from the date on which he was 
placed under suspension.  
(6) Notw ithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this Statute, a teacher, 
member of the academic staff or other employee may resign, — 
(a) if he is a permanent employee, only after giving three months' notice in writing to the Board or 
the appo inting authority, as the case may be, or by paying three months' salary in lieu thereof;  
(b) if he is not a permanent employee, only after giving one month's notice in writing to the Board 
or, the
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 27]
e is not a permanent employee, only after giving one month's notice in writing to the Board 
or, the appointing authority, as the case may be, or by paying one month's salary in lieu thereof:  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 28]
28 
 Provided that such resignation shall take effect only on the date from which the resignation is 
accepted by the Board or the appointing authority, as the case may be.  
Honorary degrees:  
27. (1) The Board may, on the recommendation of the Academic Council and by a resolution 
passed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the members present and voting, make proposals to 
the Visitor for the conferment of honorary degrees:  
Provided that in case of emergency, the Boa rd may, on its own motion, make such proposals.  
(2) The Board may, by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the 
members present and voting, withdraw, with the previous sanction of the Visitor, any honorary degree 
conferred by the  University.  
Withdrawal of degrees, etc.:  
28. The Board may, by a special resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the 
members present and voting, withdraw any degree or academic distinction conferred on, or any 
certificate or diploma  granted to, any person by the University for good and sufficient cause:  
Provided that no such resolution shall be passed until a notice in writing has been given to that 
person calling upon him to show cause within such time as may be specified in the not ice why such a 
resolution should not be passed and until his objections, if any, and any evidence he may produce in 
support of them, have been considered by the Board.  
Maintenance of discipline among students of the University:  
29. (1) All powers relating to discipline and disciplinary action in relation to students of the 
University shall vest in the Vice -Chancellor.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor may delegate all or any of his powers as he deems proper to such 
officers as he may specify in this behalf.  
(3) Witho ut prejudice to the generality of his powers relating to the maintenance of discipline and 
taking such action, as may seem to him appropriate for the maintenance of discipline, the              
Vice
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 28]
uch action, as may seem to him appropriate for the maintenance of discipline, the              
Vice -Chancellor may, in exercise of his powers, by order, dire ct that any student or students be 
expelled, or rusticated, for a specified period, or be not admitted to a course or courses of study in a 
college, institution or Department of the University for a stated period, or be punished with fine for an 
amount to be specified in the order, or be debarred from taking an examination or examinations 
conducted by the University, college, institution or Department for one or more years, or that the 
results of the student or students concerned in the examination or exami nations in which he or they 
have appeared be cancelled.  
(4) The Dean of colleges, institutions and Heads of the teaching Departments in the University 
shall have the authority to exercise all such disciplinary powers over the students in their respective 
colleges, institutions and teaching Departments in the University as may be necessary for the proper 
conduct of such colleges, institutions and teaching in the Departments.  
(5) Without prejudice to the powers of the Vice -Chancellor, the Deans and other pers ons specified 
in clause ( 4), detailed rules of disciplines and proper conduct shall be made by the University.  
(6) The Deans of the colleges, institutions and Heads of the teaching Departments in the 
University may also make the supplementary rules as they  deem necessary for the purposes referred to 
in clause ( 5). 
(7) At the time of admission, every student shall be required to sign a declaration to the effect that 
he submits himself to the disciplinary jurisdiction of the Vice -Chancellor and other authorit ies of the 
University.  
Maintenance of discipline among students of colleges, etc.:  
30. All powers relating to discipline and disciplinary action in relation to the students of the 
college or an institution maintained by the University, shall vest in the De an of the Col
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 28]
s of the 
college or an institution maintained by the University, shall vest in the De an of the College or 
institution, as the case may be, in accordance with the procedure prescribed by the Ordinances.   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 29]
29 
  
Convocations:  
31. Convocations of the University for the conferring of the degrees or for other purposes shall be 
held in such manner as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
Acting Chairman:  
32. When no provision is made for a Chairman to preside over a meeting of any Committee or 
when the Chairman so provided for is absent, or the Vice -Chancellor has not in writing made any 
arrangement, th e members shall elect one from among themselves to preside over meeting.  
Resignation:  
33. Any member, other than an ex officio member of the Board, Academic Council or any other 
authority of the University or any Committee of such authority may resign by l etter addressed to the 
Registrar and the resignation shall take effect as soon as such letter is received by the Registrar.  
Disqualifications:  
34. (1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of any of the 
authorities of the University, — 
(i) if he is of unsound mind;  
(ii) if he is an undischarged insolvent;  
(iii) if he has been convicted by a court of law of an offence involving moral turpitude and 
sentenced in respect thereof to imprisonment for a period of not less than six months.  
(2) If any question arises as to whether a person is or has been subjected to any of the 
disqualifications mentioned in clause ( 1), the question shall be referred to the Visitor and his decision 
thereon shall be final  and no suit or other proceeding shall lie in any civil court against such decision.  
Residence condition for membership and office:  
35. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Statutes, a person who is not ordinarily resident in 
India shall not be eligib le to be an officer of the University or a member of any authority of the 
University.  
Membership of authorities by virtue of membership of other bodies:  
36. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Statutes, a person who holds any post in the 
University o r is a member of any authority of the Univ
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 29]
tatutes, a person who holds any post in the 
University o r is a member of any authority of the University in his capacity as a member of a 
particular authority or as the holder of a particular appointment shall hold such office or membership 
only for so long as he continues to be a member of that particular auth ority or the holder of that 
particular appointment, as the case may be.  
Alumni Association:  
37. (1) There shall be an Alumni Association for the University.  
(2) The subscription for membership of the Alumni Association shall be prescribed by the 
Ordinances.  
(3) No member of the Alumni Association shall be entitled to vote or stand for election unless he 
has been a member of the said association for at least one year prior to the date of the election and is a 
degree holder of the University of at l east five years standing:  
Provided that the condition relatin g to the completion of one year’ s membership shall not apply in 
the case of the first election.  
Students' Council:  
38. (1) There shall be, in each Colleg e of the University, a Students’  Council for each academic 
session for the purpose of making recommendations to the authorities of the University with regard to 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 30]
30 
 various activities relating to students welfare, including games, sports, dramatics, debates, cultural 
activities, etc., and su ch Council shall consist of:  — 
(i) the Dean of the College —Chairperson;  
(ii) all Hostel Wardens;  
(iii) Campus Estate Officer;  
(iv) five Heads of the Departments to be nominated by the Dean;  
(v) Hostel Prefects;  
(vi) one student from each class or year who has secured the Highest Overall Grade Point 
Average (OGPA) in the previous academic session;  
(vii) Students Welfare Officer —Member -Secretary.  
(2) The Students Council shall meet at least once in each semester.  
Ordinances how made:  
39. (1) The first Ordinances made under sub -section ( 2) of section 27 may be amended or 
repealed at any time by the Board in the manner specified below.  
(2) No Ordinances in respect of the matters enumerated in section 27, other than those enumerated 
in clause ( n) of sub -section ( 1) thereof shall be made by the Board unless a draft of such Ordinance 
has been proposed by the Academic Council.  
(3) The Board shall not have power to amend any draft of any Ordinance proposed by the 
Academic Council under clause ( 2), but  may reject the proposal or return the draft to the Academic 
Council for reconsideration either in whole or in part, together with any amendment which the Board 
may suggest.  
(4) Where the Board has rejected or returned the draft of an Ordinance proposed by  the Academic 
Council, the Academic Council may consider the question afresh and in case the original draft is 
reaffirmed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the members present and voting and more than 
half the total member of numbers of the Acad emic Council, the draft may be sent back to the Board 
which shall either adopt it or refer it to the Visitor whose decision shall be final.  
(5) Every Ordinance made by the Board shall come into effect immediately.  
(6) Every Ordinance made by the Board shal l be submitted to the Visitor within
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 30]
ffect immediately.  
(6) Every Ordinance made by the Board shal l be submitted to the Visitor within two weeks from 
the date of its adoption.  
(7) The Visitor shall have the power to direct the University within four weeks of the receipt of 
the Ordinance to suspend the operation of any such Ordinance and he shall, as so on as possible, 
inform the Board about his objection to the proposed Ordinance.  
(8) The Visitor may, after receiving the comments of the University, either withdraw the order 
suspending the Ordinance, or disallow the Ordinance and his decision shall be fin al. 
 Regulations:  
40. (1) The authorities of the University may make Regulations consistent with the Act, the 
Statutes and the Ordinances for the following matters, namely: — 
(i) laying down the procedure to be observed at meetings and the number of members  
required to form a quorum;  
(ii) providing for all matters which are required by the Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances to 
be specified by the Regulations;  
(iii) providing for all other matters concerning such authority or Committees appointed by 
them and  not provided for by the Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 31]
31 
 (2) Every authority of the University shall make Regulations providing for the giving of notice to 
the members of such authorities of the dates of meetings and of the business to be considered a t 
meetings and for the keeping of a record of the proceedings of meetings.  
(3) The Board may direct the amendment in such manner as it may specify of any Regulation 
made under the Statutes or the annulment of any such Regulation.  
Delegation of Powers:  
41. Subject to the provisions of the Act and the Statutes, any officer or authority of the University 
may delegate his or its power to any other officer or authority or person under his or its respective 
control and subject to the condition that overall respon sibility for the exercise of power so delegated 
shall continue to vest in the officer or authority delegating such power.  
Collaboration with other Institution and Organisations:  
42. The University shall have the authority to enter into an agreement through  a Memorandum of 
Understanding with any research and/or academic institution of higher learning to conduct 
collaborative Post -Graduate Research Programme to fulfil the partial requirement for the award of 
Master's and Ph. D. degrees of the University.  
Cons titution and Function of Research Council:  
43. (1) There shall be a Research Council of the University to exercise general supervision over 
the research policies and programmes of the University in the area of Agriculture and allied 
disciplines.  
(2) The Research Council shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor —Chairman;  
(ii) Director of Extension Education —Member;  
(iii) Director of Education —Member;   
(iv) all Deans of the colleges of the University —Members;  
(v) Nominee of the State Governments not below the rank of Director —Members;  
(vi) all co -ordinators of the Research Teams of the University —Members;  
(vii) two eminent agricultural scientists to be nominated by the Vice -Chancello
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 31]
versity —Members;  
(vii) two eminent agricultural scientists to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor for three 
years —Members;  
(viii) Director of Research —Member -Secretary.  
(3) The Research Council shall meet at least once in a year.  
(4) One -third members of the Research Council shall form a quorum for the meeting of the 
Research Council.  
(5) If a vacancy occurs due to resignation or o therwise the same shall be filled up for the 
remaining period.  
Constitution and function of the Extension Education Council:  
44. (1) There shall be an Extension Education Council of the University to exercise general 
supervision over the extension education policies and programmes of the University in the area of 
Agriculture and allied disciplines.  
(2) The Extension Education Council shall consist of the following members, namely:  — 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor —Chairman;  
(ii) Director of Research —Member;  
(iii) Director of Education —Member;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE DR. RAJENDRA PRASAD CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 2016.pdf - page 32]
32 
 (iv) all Deans of the colleges of the University —Members;  
(v) Nominee of the State Governments not below the rank of Director —Members;  
(vi) two farmers' representatives and one woman social worker to be nominated by the      
Vice -Chancellor for a term of three years —Members;  
(vii) two eminent scientists from outside the University to be nominated by the                   
Vice -Chancellor for two years —Members;  
(viii) Director of Extension Education —Member -Secretary.  
(3) The Extension Education Council shall meet at least once in a year.  
(4) One -third members of the Extension Education Council shall form a quorum for the meeting 
of the Extension Education Council.  
Application of the Central Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1972, etc.:  
45. (1) All regular employees of the University shall be governed by the provisions of the Central 
Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1972, and the General Provident Fund (Central Services) Rules, 1960, 
in respect of grant of Pension and Gratuity and General Provident Fund.  
(2) Any amendment made by the Government of India in the Central Civil Services (Pension) 
Rules, 1972, and t he General Provident Fund (Central Services) Rules, 1960, shall also be applicable 
to employees of the University.  
(3) In respect of commutation of pension, with any amendments there to the provisions of the 
Central Civil Services (Commutation of Pension) Rules, 1981, shall apply.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall be the pension sanctioning authority and the pension authorisation 
authority.  
(5) Pension payment shall be centralised and controlled by Comptroller's office.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS  
PROVISIONS ACT, 1952  
____________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and application . 
2. Definitions . 
2A. Establishment to include all departments and branches.  
3. Power to apply Act to an establishment which has a common provident fund with another 
establishment . 
4. Power to add to Schedule I . 
5. Employees’ Provident Fund Schemes . 
5A. Central Board . 
5AA. Executive Committee . 
5B. State Board . 
5C. Board of Trustee s to be body corporate . 
5D. Appointment of officers . 
5DD. Acts and proceedings of the Central Board or its Executive Committee or the State Board not to 
be in validated on certain grounds . 
5E. Delegation . 
6. Contributions and matters which may be provided for in Schemes . 
6A. Employees’ Pension Scheme . 
6C. Employees’ Deposit -linked Insurance Scheme . 
6D. Laying of schemes before Parliament . 
7. Modification of Scheme . 
7A. Determina tion of moneys due from employer s. 
7B. Review of orders passed under section 7A . 
7C. Determination of escaped amount . 
7D. Tribunal . 
7E. [Omitted .]. 
7F. [Omitted .]. 
7G. [Omitted .]. 
7H. [Omitte d.]. 
7-I. Appeals to Tribunal . 
7J. Procedure of Tribunals . 
7K. Right of appellant to take assistance of legal practitioner and of Government, etc., to appoint 
presenting officers . 
7L. Orders of Tribunal . 
7M. [Omitted .].  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 2]
2 
 SECTIONS  
7N. [Omitted .]. 
7-O. Deposit of amount due, on filing appeal . 
7P. Transfer of certain  applications to Tribunals.  
7Q. Interest payable by the employer.  
8. Mode of recovery of moneys due from employers . 
8A. Recovery of moneys by employers and contractors . 
8B. Issue of certificate to the Recovery Officer . 
8C. Recovery Officer to whom certificate  is to be forwarded . 
8D. Validity of certificate and amendment thereof . 
8E. Stay of proceedings under certificate and amendment or withdrawal thereof . 
8F. Other modes of recovery . 
8G. Application of certain provisions of Income -tax Act . 
9. Fund to be recognis ed under Act 11 of 1922 . 
10. Protection against attachment . 
11. Priority of payment of contributions over other debts . 
12. Employer not to reduce wages, etc . 
13. Inspectors . 
14. Penalties . 
14A. Offences by companies . 
14AA. Enhanced punishment in certain cases after previous conviction . 
14AB. Certain offences to be cognizable . 
14AC. Cognizance and trial of offences . 
14B. Power to recover damages . 
14C. Power of court to make orders . 
15. Special provisions relating to existing provident funds . 
16. Act not to apply to certain establishme nts. 
16A. Authorising certain employers to maintain provident fund accounts . 
17. Power to exempt . 
17A. Transfer of accounts . 
17AA. Act to have effect notwithstanding anything contained in Act 31 of 1956 . 
17B. Liability in case of transfer of establishment . 
18. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
18A. Authorities and inspector to be public servant . 
19. Delegation of powers . 
20. Power of Central Government to give directions . 
21. Power to make rules . 
22. Power to remove difficulties . 
SCHEDULE I.  
SCHEDULE II.  
SCHEDULE III.  
SCHEDULE IV.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 3]
3 
 THE EMPLOYEES ’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND  MISCELLANEOUS  PROVISIONS            
ACT, 1952  
ACT NO. 19 OF 19521 
[4th March , 1952.]  
An Act to provide for the i nstitution of provident funds 2[,3[pension fund ] and deposit -linked 
insurance fund] for employees in factories and other establishments.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and application .—4[(1) This Act may be called the Employees ’ Provident 
Funds and Misce llaneous Provisions Act, 1952.]  
(2) It extends to the whole of India 5***. 
6[(3) Subject to the provisions contai ned in section 16, it applies — 
(a) to every establishment which is a factory engaged in any industry specifi ed in Schedule I and 
in which 7[twenty] or  more persons are employed, and  
(b) to any other establishment employing 6[twenty] or more persons or class of such 
establishments which the Central Government may, by notification in the Official G azette, specify in 
this behalf:  
Provided that the Central Government may, after giving not less than two months ’ notice of its 
intention so to do, by notification in the Official Gazette, apply the provisions of this Act to any 
establishment employing suc h number of persons less than 6[twenty] as may be specified  in the 
notification.]  
8[(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 3) of this section or sub -section ( 1) of 
section 16, where it appears to the Central Provident Fund Commissioner, whether on an application 
made to him in this behalf or otherw ise, that the employer and the majority of employees in relation to 
any establishment have agreed that the provisions of this Act should be made applicable to the 
establishment, he may, by notification in the Official Gazette, apply the provisions of this Act to that 
establishment on and from the date of such agreement or from any subsequent dat e specified in such 
agreement.]  
9[(5) An establishment to which this Act applies shall continue to be governed by this Act 

<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 3]
ent.]  
9[(5) An establishment to which this Act applies shall continue to be governed by this Act 
notwithstanding that the number of persons  employed therein at any time  falls below twenty. ] 
10*    *    *    *    * 
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
11[(a) “appropriate Government ” means — 
                                                           
1. This Act has been extended to Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and the First Schedule: Pondicherry by Reg.  
7 of 1963, s. 3 and the First Schedule and Goa, Daman and Diu by Reg. 11 of 1963, s. 3 and Schedule  (1-7-1964) . 
2. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 16, for “and family pension fund” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
3. Subs. by Act 25 of 1996, s. 2, for “family pension fund” (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  
4. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 17, for sub -section (1) (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
5. The Words “except the State of Ja mmu and Kashmir ” omitted by Act 34 of 2019 , s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule  (w.e.f. 31 -10-
2019)  and extended to the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir and Union territory of Ladakh by notification No. S.O. 
3962(E), Part II -section 3 -Sub-section ( ii) dated 3 1-10-20 (w.e.f. 1 -1-2020).  
6. Subs. by Act 94 of 1956, s. 2, for sub -section (3).  
7. Subs. by Act 46 of 1960, s. 2, for “fifty” (w.e.f. 31 -12-1960).  
8. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 2, for sub -section (4) (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
9. Ins. by Act 46 of 1960, s. 2 (w .e.f. 31 -12-1960).  
10. The proviso omitted by Act 16 of 1971, s. 13 (w.e.f. 23 -4-1971).  
11. Subs. by Act 22 of 1958, s. 2, for clause ( a). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 4]
4 
 (i) in relation to an establishment belonging to, or under the control of, the Central 
Government or in relation to an establishment connected with a railway company,  a major port, a 
mine or an oil field or a controlled industry, 1[or in relation to an establishment having 
departments or branches in more than one Stat e,] the Centr al Government; and  
(ii) in relation to any other establ ishment, the State Government;]  
2[(aa) “authorised officer ” means the Central Provident Fund Commissioner, Additional Central 
Provident Fund Commissioner, Deputy Provident Fund Commissioner, Regional Provident Fund 
Commissioner or such other officer as may be authorised by the Central Government, by notification 
in the Official Gazette;]  
(b) “basic wages ” means all emoluments which are earned by  an employee while on duty or 3[ on 
leave or on holidays with wages in either case] in accordance with the terms of the contract of 
employment and which are paid or payable in cash  to him, but does not include — 
(i) the cas h value of any food concession;  
(ii) any dearness allowance (that is to say, all cash payments by whatever name called paid to 
an employee on account of a rise in the cost of living), house -rent allowance, o vertime  allowance, 
bonus commission or any other similar allowance payable to the employee in respect of his 
employment or of work done in such employment;  
(iii) any  presents made by the employer;  
(c) “contribution ” means a contribution payable in respe ct of a member under a Scheme 4[or the 
contribution payable in respect of an employee to whom  the Insurance Scheme applies];  
(d) “controlled industry ” means any industry the control of which by the Union has been declared 
by a Central Act to be expedient in  the public interest;  
5[(e) “employer ” means — 
(i) in relation to an establishment which is a factory, the owner or occupier of the factory, 
including the agent of such owner or occupier, the legal representative of a de
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 4]
ier of the factory, 
including the agent of such owner or occupier, the legal representative of a deceased owner or 
occupier and, where a  person has been named as a manager of the factory under clause ( f) of  
sub-section ( 1) of section 7 of the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948), the person so named; and  
(ii) in relation to any other establishment, the person who, or the authority which, has the 
ultimate control over the affairs of the establishment, and where the said affairs are entrusted to a 
manager, managing director or managing agent, such manager, managi ng director or managing 
agent;]  
(f) “employee ” means any person who is employed for wages in any kind of work, manual or 
otherwise, in or i n connection with the work of 6[an establishment], and who gets his wages directly 
or indirectly from the employe r, 7[and includes any person — 
(i) employed by or t hrough a contractor in or in connection with  the work of the 
establishment;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 22 of 1965, s. 2 (w.e.f. 24 -11-1964).  
2. Ins. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
3. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “on leave with wages” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
4. Ins. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 18 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
5. Subs. by Act 94 of 1956, s. 4, for clause ( e). 
6. Subs. by ibid., s. 3, for “a factory”.  
7. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 3, for “and includes an y person employed by or through a contractor in or in connection with the 
work of the establishment” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 5]
5 
 (ii) engaged as an apprentice, not being an apprentice engaged under the Apprentices Act, 
1961 (52 of 1961), or under the standin g orders of the establishment;]  
1[(ff) “exempted employee ” means  an employee to whom a Scheme 2[or the Insurance Scheme, as 
the case may be,] would, but for the exemption granted under3*** section 17, have applied;  
(fff) “exempted 4[establishment] ” means 5[an establishment] in respect of which an exemption has 
been granted under section 17 from the operation of all or any of  the provisions of any Scheme 2[or 
the Insurance Scheme, as the case may be], whether such exem ption has been granted to the 
4[establishment] as such or to any person or clas s of persons employed therein;]  
(g) “factory ” means any premises, including the precincts thereof, in any part of which a 
manufacturing process is being carried on or is ordinarily so carried on, whether with the aid of pow er 
or without the aid of power;  
6*   *   *  *   * 
(h) “Fund ” means the provident f und established under a Scheme;  
(i) “industry ” means any industry specified in Schedule I, and includes any other industry added 
to the Schedule b y notification under section 4;  
2[(ia) “Insurance Fund ” means the Deposit -linked Insurance Fund established under  
sub-section ( 2) of section 6C;  
(ib) “Insurance Scheme ” means the Employees ” Deposit -linked Insurance Scheme framed under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 6C;]  
7[8[(ic)] “manufacture ” or “manufacturing process ” means any process for making, altering, 
repairing, ornamenting, finishing, packing, oiling, washing, cleaning, breaking up, demolishing or 
otherwise treating or adapting any article or substance with a view to its use, sale, tr ansport, delivery 
or disposal;]  
(j) “member ” means a member of the Fund;  
(k) “occupier of a factory ” means the person who has ultimate control over the affairs of the 
factory, and, where the said affairs are entrusted to a managing agent, such agent shall be 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 5]
of the 
factory, and, where the said affairs are entrusted to a managing agent, such agent shall be deemed to 
be the occupier of the factory;  
9[(kA) “Pension Fund” means the Employees’ Pension Fund established under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 6A;  
(kB) “Pension Scheme” means the Employees’ Pension Scheme framed under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 6A;]  
10[(ka) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 37 of 1953, s. 3.  
2. Ins. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 18 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
3. The words, brackets and figure “sub -section ( 1) of” omitted by Act 28 of 1963, s. 2 (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  
4. Subs. by Act 94 of 1956, s. 3, for “factory”.  
5. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “a factory”.  
6. Omitted by Act 25 of 1996, s. 3 (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  
7. Subs. by Act 28 of 1963, s. 2, for clause ( ia) (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  
8. Clause ( ia) re-lettered as clause ( ic) by Act 99 of 1976, s. 18 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
9. Ins. by Act 25 of 1996, s. 3 (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  
10. Ins. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 6]
6 
 (kb) “Recovery Officer ” means any officer of the Central Government, State Government or the 
Board of Trustees constituted under section 5A, who may be authorised by the Central Government, 
by notification in  the Official Gazette, to exercise the powers of a Recovery Officer under this Act;]  
1[(l) “Scheme ” means the Employees ’ Provident Fund Scheme framed under section 5.]  
2[(ll) “Superannuation”, in relation to an employee, who is the  member of the Pension Scheme 
means the attainment, by the said employee, of the age of fifty -eight years;]  
3[(m) “Tribunal ” means the Industrial Tribunal referred to in section 7 D ]. 
4[2A. Establishment to include all departments and branches. —For the removal of doubts, it is  
hereby declared that where an establishment consists of different departments or has branches, whether 
situate in the same place or in different places, all such departments or branches shall be treated as parts 
of the same establishment.]  
5[3. Power to a pply Act to an establishment which has a common provident fund with another 
establishment .—Where immediately before this Act becomes applicable to an establishment there is in 
existence a provident fund which is common to the employees employed in that est ablishment and 
employees in any other establishment, the Central Government may, by notification in Official Gazette, 
direct that the provisions of this Act shall also appl y to such other establishment.]  
4. Power to add to Schedule I .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, add to Schedule I any other industry in respect of the employees whereof it is of opinion that a 
provident fund scheme should be framed under this Act, and thereupon the industry so added shall be 
deemed to be an industry specified in Schedule I for the p urposes of this Act.  
(2) All notifications under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid before Parliament, as soon as  may be, after 
they are issued.  
5. Employees ’ Pr
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 6]
 1) shall be laid before Parliament, as soon as  may be, after 
they are issued.  
5. Employees ’ Provident Fund Schemes .—6[(1)] The Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, frame a Scheme to be called the Employees ’ Provident Fund Scheme for the 
establishment of provident funds under this Act for employees or for any class  of employees and specify 
the 7[establishments] or class of 7[establishments] to whic h the said Scheme shall apply 8[and there shall 
be established, as soon as may be after the framing of the Scheme, a Fund in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act and the Scheme].  
9[(1A) The Fund shall vest in, an d be administered by, the Central Board constituted under section 
5A. 
(1B) Subject to the provisions of this Act, a Scheme framed under sub -section ( 1) may provide for all 
or any of the mat ters specified in Schedule II.]  
10[(2) A Scheme framed under sub-section ( 1) may provide that any of its provisions shall take effect 
either prospectively or retrospectively on such date as may be specified  in this behalf in the Scheme.]  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 16 of 1971, s. 14, for claus e (l) (w.e.f. 23 -4-1971).  
2. Ins. by Act 25 of 1996, s. 3 (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  
3. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 159 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
4. Ins. by Act 46 of 1960, s. 3 (w.e.f. 31 -12-1960).  
5. Subs. by Act 94 of 1956, s. 5, for section 3.  
6. Section 5 re-numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 37 of 1953, s. 4.  
7. Subs. by Act 94 of 1956, s. 3, for “factories”.  
8. Added by Act 37 of 1953, s. 4.  
9. Ins. by Act 28 of 1963, s. 3 (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  
10. Ins. by Act 37 of 1953, s. 4.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 7]
7 
 1[5A. Central Board .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute, with effect from such date as may be specified therein, a Board of Trustees for the territories to 
which this Act extends (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the Central Board ) consisting of the 
following 2[persons as memb ers] namely: — 
(a) 3[a Chairman and a Vice -Chairman] to be appointed by the Central Government;  
4[(aa) the Central Provident F und Commissioner, ex officio ;] 
(b) not more than five persons appointed by the Central Government from amongst its officials;  
(c) not more than fifteen persons representing Governments of such States as the Central 
Government may specify in this behalf, appoi nted by the Central Government;  
(d) 5[ten persons] representing employers of the establishments to which the Scheme applies, 
appointed by the Central Government after consultation with such organisations of employers as may 
be recognised by the Central  Government in this behalf; and  
(e) 5[ten persons] representing employees in the establishments to which the Scheme applies, 
appoin ted by the Central Government after consultation with such organisations of employees as may 
be recognised by the Cen tral Government in this behalf.  
(2) The terms and conditions subject to which a member of the Central Board may be appointed and 
the time, place and procedure of the meetings of the Central Board shall be such as may be provided for 
in the Scheme.  
(3) The Central Board shall 6[, subject to  the provisions of section 6A 7[and section 6C ]] administer 
the Fund vested in it in such manner as may be specified in the Scheme.  
(4) The Central Board shall perform such other functions as it may be required to perform by or under 
any provisions of the Scheme 8[, the 9[Pension ] Scheme and the Insurance Scheme] . 
10[(5) The Central Board shall maintain proper accounts of its income and expenditure in such form 
and in such manner as the Cent
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 7]
 maintain proper accounts of its income and expenditure in such form 
and in such manner as the Central Government may, after consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor - 
General o f India, specify in the Scheme.  
(6) The accounts of the Central Board shall be audited annually by the Comptroller and Auditor -
General of India and any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be payable by 
the Cent ral Board to the Comptrolle r and Auditor -General of India.  
(7) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the Central Board shall have the same rights and privileges and auth ority 
in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General has, in connection with the audit of 
Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, 
connected vouchers, documents and pape rs and inspect any of th e offices of the Central Board.  
(8) The accounts of the Central Board as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or 
any other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be f orwarded 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 28 of  1963, s. 4.  
2. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 4, for “persons” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “a chairman” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
4. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
5. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “six persons” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
6. Ins. by Act 16 of 1971, s. 15 (w.e.f. 23 -4-1971).  
7. Ins. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 19 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
8. Subs. by s. 19, ibid., for “and the Family Pension Scheme” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
9. Subs. by Act 25 of 1996, s. 4, for “Family Pension” (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  
10. Ins. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 8]
8 
 to the Central Board which shall forward the same to the Central Government along with its comments on 
the report of the C omptroller and Auditor -General.  
(9) It shall be the duty of the Central Board to submit also to the Central Government an ann ual report 
of its work and activities and the Central Government shall cause a copy of the annual report, the audited 
accounts together with the report of the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and the comments of 
the Central Board thereon to be laid  before each House of Parliament. ] 
1[5AA. Executive Committee .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, constitute, with effect from such date as may be specified therein, an Executive Committee to 
assist the Central Board in the performance of its functions.  
(2) The Executive Committee shall consist of the followin g persons as members, namely: — 
(a) a Chairman appointed by the Central Government from amongst th e members of the Central 
Board;  
(b) two persons appointed by the Central Government from amongst the persons re ferred to in 
clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 5A;  
(c) three persons appointed by the Central Government from amongst the persons referred to in 
clause ( c) of sub-section ( 1) of section 5A;  
(d) three per sons re presenting the employer s elected by the Central Board from amongst the 
persons referred to in clause ( d) of sub-section ( 1) of section 5A;  
(e) three persons representing the employees elected by the Central Board from amongst the 
persons referred to  in clause ( e) of sub-section ( 1) of section 5A;  
(f) the Central Provident  Fund Commissioner, ex officio . 
(3) The terms and conditions subject to which a member of the Central Board may be appointed or 
elected to the Executive Committee and the time, place  and procedure of the meetings of the Executive 
Committee shall be such as may be provided for in the Scheme].  
5B. State Board .—(1) The Central Government
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 8]
 shall be such as may be provided for in the Scheme].  
5B. State Board .—(1) The Central Government may, after consultation with the Government of any 
State, by notification in the Official Gazette, co nstitute for that State a Board of Trustees (hereinafter in 
this Act referred to as the State Board) in such manner as may be provided for in the  Scheme.  
(2) A State Board shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as the Central Government may 
assign to it from time to time.  
(3) The terms and conditions subject to which a member of a State Board may be appointed and the 
time, place and procedure of the meetings of a State Board shall be such as may  be provided for in the 
Scheme.  
5C. Board of Truste es to body corporate .—Every Board of Trustees constituted under section 5A 
or section 5B shall be a body corporate under the name specified in the notification constituting it, having 
perpetual succession and a common seal and shall by  the said name sue and be sued.  
5D. Appointment of officers .—(1) The Central Government shall appoint a Central Provident Fund 
Commissioner who shall be the chief executive officer of the Central Board and shall be subject to the 
general control an d superi ntendence of that Board.  
(2) The Centra l Government may also appoint 2[a Financial Adviser and Chief Accounts Officer s] to 
assist the Central Provident Fund Commissioner in the discharge of his duties.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
2. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 6, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 9]
9 
 (3) The Central Board may appoint 1[, subject to the maximum scale of pay, as may be specified in 
the Scheme, as many Additional Central Provident Fund Commissioners, Deputy Provident Fund 
Commissioners, Regional Provident Fund Commissioners, Assistant Provident Fund Commissioners and] 
such other officers an d employees as it may consider necessary for the efficient  administration of the 
Scheme 2[, the 3[Pension ] Scheme and the Insura nce Scheme] . 
(4) No appointment to 4[the post of the Central Provident Fund Commissioner or an Additional 
Central Pr ovident Fund  Commissioner or a Financial Adviser and Chief Accounts Officer or any other 
post under the Central Board carrying a scale of pay equivalent to the scale of pay of any Group ‘A’ or 
Group ‘B’ post under the Central Government] shall be made except after consultation with the Union 
Public Service Commission:  
Provided that no such consultation shall be necessary in regard to any su ch appointment — 
(a) for a pe riod not exceeding one year; or  
(b) if the person to be appointed is a t the time of his appointment — 
(i) a member of the In dian Administrative Service, or  
(ii) in the service of the Central Government or a State Govern ment or the Central Board in a 
5[Group ‘A’ or Group ‘B’ post].  
(5) A State Board may, with the approval of the State Government concerned, appoint such staf f as it 
may consider necessary.  
(6) The method of recruitment, salary and allowances, discipline and other conditions of service of 
the Central  Provident Fund Commissioner, 6[and the Financial Adviser and Chief Accounts Officer] shall 
be such as may be specified by the Central Government and such salary and allowances  shall be paid out 
of the Fund.  
7[(7) (a) The method of recruitment, salary and allowances, discipline and othe r conditions of service 
of the Additional Central Provident Fund Commissioner, Deputy Provident Fund Commissioner, 
Regional Provident Fund Commissioner, Assistant Provide
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 9]
sioner, Deputy Provident Fund Commissioner, 
Regional Provident Fund Commissioner, Assistant Provident Fund Commissioner and other officers and 
employees of the Central Board shall be su ch as may be specified by the Central Board in accordance 
with the rules and orders applicable to the officers and employees of the Central Government drawing 
corresponding scales of pay:  
Provided that where the Central Board is of the opinion that it is n ecessary to make a departure from 
the said rules or orders in respect of any of the matters aforesaid, it shall obtain the prior appr oval of the 
Central Government.  
(b) In determining the corresponding scales of pay of officers and employees under clause ( a), the 
Central Board shall have regard to the educational qualifications, method of recruitment, duties and 
responsibilities of such officers and employees under the Central Government and in case of any doubt, 
the Central Board shall refer the matter to the Central Government whose d ecision thereon shall be final. ] 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 6. (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
2. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 20,  for “and the Family Pension Scheme” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
3. Subs. by Act 25 of 1996, s. 4, for “Family Pension” (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  
4. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 6, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
5. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “Class I or Class II post” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
6. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “,Deputy Provident Fund Commissioner and Regional Provident Fund Commissioner”  
(w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
7. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for sub -section ( 7) (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 10]
10 
  (8) The method of recruitment, salary and allowances, discipline and other conditions of service of 
officers and employees of a State Board shall be such as may be specified by that Board, wit h the 
approval of the State Government concerned.  
1[5DD. Acts and proceedings of the Central Board or its Executive Committee or the State 
Board not to be in  validated on certain grounds .—No act done or proceeding taken by the Central 
Board or the Executive Committee constituted under section 5AA or the State Board shall be questioned 
on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Central 
Board or the Executive Committee or the St ate Board, as the case may be.]  
5E. Delegation .—2[The Central Board may delegate to the Executive Committee or to the Chairman 
of the Board or to any of its officers and a State Board may delegate to its Chair man or to any of its 
officers] subject to such conditions and lim itations, if any, as it may specify, such of its powers and 
functions under this Act as it may deem necessary for the efficient  administration of the Scheme 3[, the 
4[Pension ] Scheme and the Insurance Scheme].]  
6. Contributions and matters which may be provided for in Schemes .—5*** The contribution 
which shall be paid by the employer to the Fund shall be 6[ten per cent.] of the basic wages, 7[dearness 
allowance and retaining allowance (if any)] for the time being pay able to each of the employees 
8[(whether employed by him directly or by or through a contractor)], and the employees ’ contribution 
shall be equal to the contribution payable by the employ er in respect of him and may, 9[if any employee 
so desires, be an amount exceeding 6[ten per cent.] of his basic wages, dearness allowance and retaining 
allowance (if any), subject to the condition that the employer shall not be under an obligation to pay any 
contribution over and above his contributi on payable under this section ]: 
9[Provided 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 10]
to pay any 
contribution over and above his contributi on payable under this section ]: 
9[Provided that in its application to any establishment or class of establishments which the Central 
Government, after making such inquiry as it deems fit, may, by notification in the Official Gazette 
specify, this section shall be subject to the modification that for the words 6[ten per cent. ], at both the 
places where they occur, the words 10[twelve per cent .]shall be substituted:]  
Provided further that where the amount of any contribution payable under this Act involves a fraction 
of a rupee, the Scheme may provide for the rounding off of such fraction to the nearest rupee, half of  a 
rupee or quarter of a rupee.  
11[Explanation 1 ].—For the purposes of this 12[section], dearness allowance shall be deemed to 
include also the cash value of any food conc ession allowed to the employ ee. 
13[Explanation 2 .—For the purposes of this 12[section], “retaining allowance ” means an allowance 
payable for the time being to an employee of any factory or other establishment during any period in 
which the establishment is not working, for retai ning his services.]  
14*    *    *    *    * 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 7. (w.e.f . 1-8-1988).  
2. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
3. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 20, for “and the Family Pension Scheme” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
4. Subs. by Act 25 of 1996, s. 4, for “Family Pension” (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  
5. The brackets  and figure “( 1)” omitted by Act 28 of 1963, s. 5 (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  
6. Subs. by Act 10 of 1998, s. 2, for “eight and one -third per cent.”  (w.e.f. 22 -9-1997).  
7. Subs. by Act 46 of 1960, s. 4, for “and the dearness allowance” (w.e.f. 31 -12-1960).  
8. Ins.  by Act 28 of 1963, s. 5 (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  
9. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 9, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
10. Subs. by Act 10 of 1998, s. 2, for “t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 10]
 33 of 1988, s. 9, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
10. Subs. by Act 10 of 1998, s. 2, for “ten per cent.” (w.e.f. 22 -9-1997).  
11. The Explanation re-numbered  as Explanation 1 by Act 46 of 1960, s. 4 (w.e.f. 31 -12-1960).  
12. Subs. by Act 28 of 1963, s. 5, for “sub -section” (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  
13. The Explanation  ins. by Act 46 of 1960, s. 4 (w.e.f. 31 -12-1960).  
14. Omitted by Act 28 of 1963, s. 5 (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 11]
11 
 1[6A. Employees ’ Pension Scheme .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, frame a scheme to be called the Employees ’ Pension Scheme for the purpose of 
providing for— 
(a) superannuation pension, retiring pension or permanent total disablement pension to the 
employees of any establishment or class of establishments to which this Act applies; and  
(b) widow or widower ’s pension, children pension or orphan pension payable to the beneficiaries  
of such employees.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 6, there shall be established, as soon as may be 
after framing of the Pension Scheme, a Pension Fund into which there shall be paid, from time to time, in 
respect of every employee who i s a member of the Pension Scheme, — 
(a) such sums from the employer ’s contribution under section 6, not exceeding eight and  
one-third per cent.  of the basic wages, dearness allowance and retaining allowance, if any, of the 
concerned employees, as may be sp ecified in the Pension Scheme;  
(b) such sums as are payable by the employers of exempted establishments under sub -section ( 6) 
of section 17;  
(c) the net assets of the Employees' Family Pension Fund as on the date of the establishment of 
the Pension Fund;  
(d) such sums as the Central Government may, after due appropriation by Parliament by law in 
this behalf, specify.  
(3) On the establishment of the Pension Fund, the Family Pension Scheme (hereinafter referred to as 
the ceased scheme) shall cease to operate and all assets of the ceased scheme shall vest in and shall stand 
transferred to, and all liabilities under the ceased scheme shall be enforceable against , the Pension Fund 
and the beneficiaries under the ceased scheme shall be entitled to draw the benefit s, not less than the 
benefits they were entitled to under the ceased scheme, from the Pension Fund.  
(4) The Pension Fund shall vest in and be administered by the Central Board in such manner as may
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 11]
  
(4) The Pension Fund shall vest in and be administered by the Central Board in such manner as may 
be specified in the Pension Scheme.  
(5) Subject to the pro visions of this Act, the Pension Scheme may provide for all or any of the matters 
specified in Schedule III.  
(6) The Pension Scheme may provide that all or any of its provisions shall take effect either 
prospectively or retrospectively on such date as may be specified in that behalf in that Scheme.  
(7) A Pension Scheme, framed under sub -section ( 1), shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
compr ised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the scheme or both Houses agree that  the scheme should not be made, the scheme shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the may be; so , however, that any 
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously don e 
under that Scheme.]  
2[6C. Employees ’ Deposit linked Insurance Scheme .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, frame a scheme to be called the Employees ’ Deposit -linked Insurance 
Scheme for the purpose of providing life insurance benefits to the employees of any establishment or 
class of establishm ents to which this Act applies.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 1996, s. 5, for sections 6A and 6B (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  
2. Ins. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 21 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 12]
12 
 (2) There shall be established, as soon as may be after the framing of the Ins urance Scheme, a 
Deposit -linked Insurance Fund into which shall be paid by the employer from time to time in respect of 
every such employee in relation to whom he is the employer, such amount, not being more than one per 
cent. of the aggregate of the basic  wages, dearness allowance and retaining allowance (if any) for the time 
being payable in relation to such employee as the Central Government may, by notification in  the Official 
Gazette, specify.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, the expr ession s “dearness allowance ” and 
“relating allowance ” have the  same meanings as in section 6.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
(4) (a) The employer shall pay into the Insurance Fund such further sums of money, not exceeding 
one-fourth of the contribution which he is required to make under sub -section ( 2), as the Central 
Government may, from time to time, determine to meet all the expenses in connection with the 
administration of the Insurance Scheme other than the expenses towards the cost of any benefits pr ovided 
by or under that scheme.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
(5) The Insurance Fund shall vest in the Central Board and be administered by it in such manner as 
may be spe cified in the Insurance Scheme.  
(6) The Insurance Scheme may provide for all or any of the ma tters specifi ed in Schedule IV.  
(7) The Insurance Scheme may provide that any of its provisions shall take effect either prospectively 
or retrospectively on such date as may be specified in this behalf in that Scheme.]  
2[6D. Laying  of schemes before Parliament .—Every scheme framed under section 5, section 6A 
and section 6C shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is framed, before each House of Parliament, while 
it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more  
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately follo
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 12]
 or in two or more  
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the scheme, or both 
Houses agree that the scheme should not be framed, th e scheme shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything prev iously done under that scheme.]  
7. Modi fication of scheme .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, add to 3[amend or vary, either prospectively or retrospectively, the Scheme, the 4[Family 
Pension ] Scheme or the Insuran ce Scheme, as the case may be].  
5[(2) Every  notification issued under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is issued, 
before each House of Parliament , while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days, which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive s essions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the notification, or both Houses agree that the notification should not be issued, the  
notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously  done under that notificatio n.] 
                                                           
1. Omitted by Act 25 of 1996, s. 6 (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  
2. Ins. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and Schedule (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  
3. Subs. by Act  99 of 1976, s. 22, for “amend or vary the Scheme or the Family Pension Scheme, as the case may be”  
(w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
4. Subs. by Act 25 of 1996, s. 4, for “Family Pension” (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  
5. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 12]
.f. 1 -8-1976).  
4. Subs. by Act 25 of 1996, s. 4, for “Family Pension” (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  
5. Subs. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and Schedule, for sub -sectio n (2) (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 13]
13 
 1[7A. Determination  of moneys due from employer s.—2[(1) The Central Provident Fund 
Commissioner, any Additional Central Provident Fund Commissioner, any Deputy Provident Fund 
Commissioner, any Regional Provident Fund Commissioner , or any Assistant Provident Fun d 
Commissioner may, by order, — 
(a) in a case where a dispute arises regarding the applicability of this Act to an establishment, 
decide such disput e; and  
(b) determine the amount due from any employer under any provision of t his Act, the Scheme or 
the 3[Pension ] Scheme or the Insura nce Scheme, as the case may be,  
and for any of the aforesaid purposes may conduct such inquiry as he may deem necess ary]; 
(2) The officer conducting the inquiry under sub -section ( 1) shall, for the purposes of such inquiry, 
have the same powers as are vested in a court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), for 
trying a suit in respect of the following mat ters, namely: — 
(a) enforcing the attendance of any p erson or examining him on oath ; 
(b) requiring the discove ry and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit;  
(d) issuing commissions fo r the examination of witnesses;  
and any such inquiry shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 
228, and for the purpose of section 196, of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
(3) No order 4*** shall be made under sub -section ( 1), unless 5[the empl oyer concerned] is given a 
reasonable opport unity of representing his case.  
6[(3A) Where the employer, employee or any other person required to attend the inquiry under  
sub-section ( 1) fails to attend such inquiry without assigning any valid reason or fails to produce any 
document or to file any report or return when called upon to do so, the officer conducting the inquiry may 
decide the applicability of the Act or determine the amount  due from any employer, as the case may be, 
on the basis of the evidence adduced during such
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 13]
amount  due from any employer, as the case may be, 
on the basis of the evidence adduced during such inquiry and other documents available on record.]  
7[(4) Where an order under sub -section ( 1) is passed against an employer ex parte , he may, within 
three months fr om the date of communication of such order, apply to the officer for setting aside such 
order and if he satisfies the officer that the show cause notice was not duly served or that he was 
prevented by any sufficient cause from appearing when the inquiry wa s held, the officer shall make an 
order setting aside his earlier order and shall appoint a date f or proceeding with the inquiry:  
Provided that no such order shall be set aside merely on the ground that there has been an irregularity 
in the service of the show cause notice if the officer is satisfied that the employer had notice of the date of 
hearing and had sufficient tim e to appear before the officer.  
Explanation .—Where an appeal has been preferred under this Act against an order passed ex parte  
and such  appeal has been disposed of otherwise than on the ground that the appellant has withdrawn the 
appeal, no application shall lie under this sub -section for se tting aside the ex parte  order.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 28 of 1963, s. 6 (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  
2. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 10, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
3. Subs. by Act 25 of 1996, s. 4, for “Family Pension” (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  
4. The words “determining the amount due from employer” omitted by Act 33 of 1988, s. 10. (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
5. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for “the employer” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
6. Ins. by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
7. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 14]
14 
 (5) No order passed under this section shall be set aside on any ap plication under sub -section ( 4) 
unless notice thereof has been served on the opposite pa rty.] 
1[7B. Review of o rders passed under section 7A .—(1) Any person aggrieved by an order made 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 7A, but from which no appeal has been preferred under this Act, and 
who, from the discovery of new and important matter or evidence which, after the exercise of due 
diligence was not within his knowledge or could not be produced by him at the time when the order was 
made, or on account of some  mistake or error apparent on the face of the record or for any other sufficient 
reason, desires to obtain a review of such order may apply for a review of that order to th e officer who 
passed the order:  
Provided that such officer may also on his own motio n review his order if he is satisfied that it is 
necessa ry so to do on any such ground.  
(2) Every application for review under sub -section ( 1) shall be filed in such form and manner and 
within such time as may be specified in the Scheme.  
(3) Where it appea rs to the officer receiving an application for review that there is no sufficient 
ground for a review, h e shall reject the application.  
(4) Where the officer is of opinion that the application for review should be granted, he shall g rant the 
same:  
Provided  that,— 
(a) no such application shall be granted without previous notice to all the parties before him to 
enable them to appear and be heard in support of the order in respect of whi ch a review is applied  
for, and  
(b) no such application shall be granted on the ground of discovery of new matter or evidence 
which the applicant alleges was not within his knowledge or could not be produced by him when the 
order was made, wi thout proof of such allegation.  
(5) No appeal shall lie against the order of the office r rejecting an application for review, but an 
appeal under this Act shall lie agains
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 14]
 of the office r rejecting an application for review, but an 
appeal under this Act shall lie against an order passed under review as if the order passed under review 
were the original order passed by him under section 7A.  
7C. De termination of escaped amount .—Where an order determining the amount due from an 
employer under section 7A or section 7B has been passed and if the  officer who passed the order — 
(a) has reason to believe that by reason of the omission or failure on the part of the employer to 
make any document o r report available, or to disclose, fully and truly, all material facts necessary for 
determining the correct amount due from the employer, any amount so due from such employer for 
any period has escaped his notice;  
(b) has, in consequence of information in his possession, reason to believe that any amount to be 
determined under section 7A or section 7B has escaped from his determination for any period 
notwithstanding that there has been no omission or failure as mentioned in clause ( a) on the part of 
the employer,  
he may, within a period of five years from the date of communication of the order passed under section 
7A or section 7B, re -open the case and pass appropriate orders re -determining the amount due from the 
employer in accordance with the provision s of this Act:  
Provided that no order re -determining the amount due from the employer shall be passed under this 
section unless the employer is given a reasonable opportunity of representing his case.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 33 of 1988, s. 11 (w.e.f. 1 -7-1977 ). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 15]
15 
 1[7D. Tribunal .—The Industrial Tribunal constituted by the Central Government under                       
sub-section ( 1) of section 7A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 shall, on and from the commencement 
of Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017, be the Trib unal for the purposes of this Act and the 
said Tribunal shall exercise the jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on it by or under this Act. ] 
7E. [Term of office .]Omitted by the Finance Act , 2017 (7 of 2017), s. 159 ( w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
7F. [Resignation .] Omitted by s . 159 , ibid. (w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
7G. [Salary and allowances and other terms and conditions of o r service of Presiding Officer .] 
Omitted  by s . 159, ibid. (w.e.f . 26-5-2017).  
7H. [Staff of Tribunal .] Omitted  by s . 159, ibid. (w.e.f . 26-5-2017).  
7-I. Appeals to Tribunal .—(1) Any person aggrieved by a notification issued by the Central 
Government, or an order passed by the Central Government or any authority, under the proviso to  
sub-section ( 3), or sub -section ( 4), of s ection 1, or section 3, or sub -section ( 1) of section 7A, or section 7B  
[except an order rejecting an application for review referred to in sub -section ( 5) thereof], or section  
7C, or section 14B, may prefer an appeal to a Tribunal agai nst such notification or o rder. 
(2) Every appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be filed in such form and manner, within such time and 
be accompanied by s uch fees, as may be prescribed.  
7J. Procedure of Tribunals .—(1) A Tribunal shall have power to regulate its own procedure in all 
matters arising out of the exercise of its powers or of the discharge of its functions including the places at 
which the Tr ibunal shall have its sittings.  
(2) A Tribunal shall, for the purpose of discharging its functions, have all the powers which are ves ted 
in the officers referred  to in section 7A and any proceeding before the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a 
judicial proceeding within t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 15]
tion 7A and any proceeding before the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a 
judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purpose of section 196, of the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 186 0) and the T ribunal shall be deemed to be a civil court for the all purposes of 
section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Crimin al Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
7K. Right of appellant to take assistance of legal practitioner and of Government, etc., t o 
appoint presen ting officers .—(1) A person preferring an appeal to a Tribunal under this Act may either 
appear in person or take the assistance of a legal practitioner of his choice to presen t his case before the 
Tribunal.  
(2) The Central Government or a State Government or any other authority under this Act may 
authorise one or more legal practitioners or any of its officers to act as presenting officers and every 
person so authorised may present the case with respect t o any appeal before a Tribunal.  
7L. Orders of Tribunal .—(1) A Tribunal may after giving the parties to the appeal , an opportunity 
of being heard, pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit, confirming, modifying or annulling the order 
appealed against or may refe r the case back to the authority which passed such order with such directions 
as the Tribunal may think fit, for a fresh adjudication or order, as the case may be, after taking add itional 
evidence, if necessary.  
(2) A Tribunal may, at any time within five years from the date of its order, with a view to rectifying 
any mistake apparent from the record, amend any order passed by it under sub -section ( 1) and shall make 
such amendment in the order if the mistake is brought to its notic e by the parties to the ap peal:  
Provided that an amendment which has the effect of enhancing the amount due from, or otherwise 
increasing the liability of, the employer shall not be made under this sub -section, unless the Tribunal has 
given notice to him of its intention to 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 15]
t be made under this sub -section, unless the Tribunal has 
given notice to him of its intention to do so a nd has allowed him a reasonable opportunity of being heard.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 159, for section 7D (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 16]
16 
 (3) A Tribunal shall send a copy of every order passed under this section to the parties to the appeal.  
(4) Any order made by a Tribunal finally disposing of an appeal shall not be questioned in a ny court 
of law.  
7M. [Filling up of vacancies .] Omitted by the Finance Act , 2017 (7 of 2017), s. 159                       
(w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
 7N. [Finality o rders constituting a tribunal .] Omitted by s. 159, ibid. (w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
7-O. Deposit of  amount due, on filing appeal .—No appeal by the employer shall be entertained by 
a Tribunal unless he has deposited with it seventy -five per cent. of the amount due from him as 
determined by an off icer referred to in section 7A:  
Provided that the Tribunal may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, waive or reduce the amount to 
be deposited under this section.  
7P. Transfer of cert ain applications to Tribunals .—All applications which are pending before the 
Central Government under section 19A before its repe al, shall stand transferred to a Tribunal exercising 
jurisdiction in respect of establishments in relation to which such applications had been made as if such 
applications were app eals preferred to the Tribunal.  
7Q. Interest pa yable by the employer .—The employer shall be liable to pay simple interest at the 
rate of twelve per cent. per annum or at such higher rate as may be specified in the Scheme on any 
amount due from him under this Act from the date on which the amount has become so due till the da te of 
its actual payment:  
Provided that higher rate of interest specified in the Scheme shall not exceed the lending rate of 
interest charged by any scheduled bank.]  
1[8. Mode of recovery  of moneys due from employers .—Any amount due — 
(a) from the employer in relation to 2[an establishment] to which any 3[Scheme or the Insurance 
Scheme] applies in respect of any contribution paya ble to 4[the Fund or, as the case may be, the 
Insurance Fund], damages recoverable under secti
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 16]
paya ble to 4[the Fund or, as the case may be, the 
Insurance Fund], damages recoverable under section 14B, accumulations required to be transferred 
under s ub-section ( 2) of section 15 5[or under sub -section ( 5) of section 17] or any charges payable by 
him under any other provision of this A ct or of any provision of the 3[Sche me or the Insurance 
Scheme]; or  
(b) from the employ er in relation to an exempted 6[establishment] in res pect of any damages 
recoverable under section 14B or any charges payable by him to the appropriate Government under 
any provision of this Act or under an y of the conditions specified 7[under section 17 o r in respect of 
the contribution payable by him towards the 8[Pension ] Scheme under the said sect ion 17],  
may,if the amount i s in arrear, 9[be recovered 10[in the manner specified in sections 8B to 8G ].] 
11[8A. Recovery of moneys  by employers and contractors .—(1) 12[The amount of contribution 
(that is to say the employer ’s contribution as well as the employee ’s contribution in pursuance of any 
Scheme and the employer ’s contribution in pursuance of the Insur ance Scheme)], and any charges 13*** 
for meeting the cost of administering the Fund paid or payable by an employer in respect of an employee 
employed by or through a contractor may be recovered by such employer from the contractor, either by 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 37 of 195 3, s. 6, for section 8 . 
2. Subs. by Act 94 of 1956, s. 3, for “a factory”.  
3. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 24, for “Scheme” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
4. Subs. by s. 24, ibid., for “the Fund” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
5. Ins. by Act 28 of 1963, s. 7 (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  
6. Subs. by Act 94 of 1956, s. 3, for “factory”.  
7. Subs. by Act 16 of 1971, s. 21, for “under section 17” (w.e.f. 23 -4-1971).  
8. Subs. by Act 25 of 1996, s. 4, for “Family Pension” (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  
9. Subs. by Act 40 of 1973, s. 2, for certain words (w.e.f. 1
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 16]
amily Pension” (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  
9. Subs. by Act 40 of 1973, s. 2, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -11-1973).  
10. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 12, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -7-1990).  
11. Ins. by Act  28 of 1963, s. 8 (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  
12. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 25, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
13. The words “on the basis of such contribution” omitted by Act 33 of 1988, s. 13. (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 17]
17 
 deduction from any amount payable to the contra ctor, under any contract or as a debt payable by the 
contract or. 
(2) A contractor from whom the amounts mentioned in sub -section ( 1) may be recovered in respect of 
any employee employed by or through him, may recover from such employee the employee ’s 
contr ibution 1[under any Scheme] by deduction from the basic wages, dearness allowance and retaining 
allowance (if  any) payable to such employee.  
(3) Notwithstanding any contract to the contrary, no contractor shall be entitled to deduct the 
employer ’s contribution or the charges referred to in sub -section ( 1) from the basic wages, dearness 
allowance, and retaining allowance (if any) payable to an employee employed by or through him or 
otherwise to recover such contribution  or charges from such employee.  
Explanation .—In this section, the expressions, “dearness allowance ” and “retaining allowance ” shall 
have the same meanings as in section 6.]  
2[8B. Issue of certi ficate to the Recovery Officer .—(1) Where any amount is in arrear under section 
8, the authorised officer may issue, to the Recovery Officer, a certificate under his signature specifying 
the amount of arrea rs and the Recovery Officer, on receipt of such certificate, shall proceed to recover the 
amount specified therein from the establishment  or, as the case may be, the employer by one or more of 
the modes mentioned below: — 
(a) attachment and sale of the movable or immovable property of the establishment or, as  the case 
may be, the employer;  
(b) arrest of the employ er and his detention in pris on; 
(c) appointing a receiver for the management of the movable or immovable properties of the 
establishment or, as  the case may be, the employer:  
Provided that the attachment and sale of any property under this section shall fir st be effected against 
the proportion of the establishment and where such attachment and sale is insufficient for recovering the 
whole of the amo
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 17]
stablishment and where such attachment and sale is insufficient for recovering the 
whole of the amount of arrears specified in the certificate, the Recovery Officer may take such 
proceedings against the property of the employer for recov ery of the whole or any  part of such arrears.  
(2) The authorised officer may  issue a certificate under sub -section ( 1), notwithstanding that 
proceedings for recovery of the arrears by any other mode have been taken.  
8C. Recovery Officer to whom  certificate  is to be forwarded .—(1) The authorised officer may 
forward the certificate referred to in section 8B to the Recovery Officer within wh ose jurisdiction the 
employer — 
(a) carries on his business or profession or within whose jurisdiction the principal place  of his 
establishment is situate; or  
(b) resides or any movable or immovable property of the establishment or the employer is situate.  
(2) Where an establishment or the employer has property within the jurisdiction of more than one 
Recovery Officers and t he Recovery Officer to whom a certificate is s ent by the authorised officer — 
(a) is not able to recover the entire amount by the sale of the property, movable or immovab le, 
within his jurisdiction; or  
(b) is of the opinion that, for the purpose of expediting or securing the recovery of the whole or 
any part of the am ount, it is necessary so to do,  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 25 (w.e.f. 1-8-1976).  
2. Ins. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 14 ( w.e.f. 1-7-1990).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 18]
18 
 he may send the certificate or, where only a part of the amount is to be recovered, a copy of the certificate 
certified in the prescribed manner and speci fying the amount to be recovered to the Recovery Officer 
within whose jurisdiction the establishment or the employer has property or the employer resides, and 
thereupon that Recovery Officer shall also proceed to recover the amount due under this section a s if the 
certificate or the copy thereof had been the certificate sent to him by the authorised officer.  
8D. Validity of cer tificate and amendment thereof .—(1) When the authorised  officer issues a 
certificate to a Recovery Officer under section 8B, it shall not be open to the employer to dispute before 
the Recovery Officer the correctness of the amount, and no objection to the certificate on any other 
ground shall also be enter tained by the Recovery Officer.  
(2) Notwithstanding the issue of a certificate to a Recovery Officer, the authorised officer shall have 
power to withdraw the certificate or correct any clerical or arithmetical mistake in the certificate by 
sending an inti matio n to the Recovery Officer.  
(3) The authorised officer shall intimate to the Recovery Officer any order withdrawing or cancelling 
a certificate or any correction made by him under sub -section ( 2) or any amendment made under  
sub-section ( 4) of sectio n 8E.  
8E. Stay of proceedings under certificate and am endment or withdrawal thereof .—(1) 
Notwithstanding that a certificate has been issued to the Recovery Officer for the recovery of any amount, 
the authorised  officer may grant time for the payment of the amount, and thereupon the Recovery Officer 
shall stay the proceedings until the  expiry of the time so granted.  
(2) Where a certificate for the recovery of amount has been issued, the authorised officer shall k eep 
the Recovery Officer informed of any amount paid or time granted for payment, subsequent to  the issue 
of such certificate.  
(3) Wh
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 18]
any amount paid or time granted for payment, subsequent to  the issue 
of such certificate.  
(3) Where the order giving rise to a demand of amount for which a certificate for recovery has been 
issued has been modified in a ppeal or other proceeding under this Act, and, as a consequence thereof, the 
demand is reduced but the order is the subject -matter of a further proceeding under this Act, the 
authorised officer shall stay the recovery of such part of the amount of the cert ificate as pertains to the 
said reduction for the period for which the appeal or ot her proceeding remains pending.  
(4) Where a certificate for the recovery of amount has been issued and subsequently the amount of the 
outstanding demand is reduced as a resu lt of an appeal or other proceeding under this Act, the authorised 
officer shall, when t he order which was the subject -matter of such appeal or other proceeding has become 
final and conclusive, amend the certificate or wit hdraw it, as the case may be.  
8F. Other modes of recovery .—(1) Notwithstanding the issue of a certificate to the Recovery 
Officer under section 8B, the Central Provident Fund Commissioner or any other officer authorised by the 
Central Board may recover the amount by any one or more of the modes provided in this section.  
(2) If any amount is due from any person to any employer who is in arrears, the Central Provident 
Fund Commissioner or any other officer authorised by the Central Board in this behalf may require such 
person to deduct from t he said amount the arrears due from such employer under this Act and such person 
shall comply with any such requisition and shall pay the sum so deducted to the credit of the Central 
Provident Fund Commissioner or the officer so authorised, as the case may  be: 
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall apply to any part of the amount exempt from 
attachment in execution of a decree of a civil court under section 60 of the Code of Civil Proc edure, 1908 
(5
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 18]
in execution of a decree of a civil court under section 60 of the Code of Civil Proc edure, 1908 
(5 of 1908).  
(3) (i) The Central Provident Fund Comm issioner or any other officer authorised by the Central Board 
in this behalf may, at any time or from time to time, by notice in writing, require any person from whom 
money is due or may become due to the employer or, as the case may be, the establishment or any person 
who holds or may subsequently hold money for or on account of the employer or as the case may be, the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 19]
19 
 establishment, to pay to the Central Provident Fund Commissioner either forthwith upon the money 
becoming due or being held or at or within the time specified in the notice (not being before the money 
becomes due or is held) so much of the money as is sufficient to pay the amount due from the employer in 
respect of arrears or the whole of the money when it is equ al to or less than that amount.  
(ii) A notice under this sub -section may be issued to any person who holds or may subsequently hold 
any money for or  an account of the employer jointly with any other person and for the purposes of this 
sub-section, the shares of the joint -holders in such  account shall be presumed, until the c ontrary is proved, 
to be equal.  
(iii) A copy of the notice shall be forwarded to the employer at his last address known to the Central 
Provident Fund Commissioner or, as the case may be, the officer so authorised and in the case of a joint 
account to all the joint -holders at their last addresses known to the Central Provident Fund Commissione r 
or the officer so authorised.  
(iv) Save as otherwise provided in this sub -section, every person to whom a notice is issued unde r this 
sub-section shall be bound to comply with such notice, and, in particular, where any such notice is issued 
to a post office, bank or an insurer, it shall not be necessary for any pass book, deposit receipt, policy or 
any other document to be produce d for the purpose of any entry, endorsement or the like being made 
before payment is made notwithstanding any rule, practice or requirement to the contrary.  
(v) Any claim respecting any property in relation to which a notice under this sub -section has been 
issued arising after the date of the notice shall be void as against any demand contained in the notice.  
(vi) Where a person to whom a notice under this sub -section is sent objects to it by a statement on 
oath that the sum demanded or any part thereof is not due to the employer o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 19]
to it by a statement on 
oath that the sum demanded or any part thereof is not due to the employer or that he does not hold any 
money for or on account of the employer, then, nothing contained in this sub -section shall be deemed to 
require such person to pay any such sum or part thereof, as the case may be, but if it is discovered that 
such statement was false in any material particular, such person shall be personally liable to the Central 
Provident Fund Commissioner or the officer so  authorised to the extent of his own liability to the 
employer on the date of the notice, or to the extent of the employer ’s liability for any sum due und er this 
Act, whichever is less.  
(vii) The Central Provident Fund Commissioner or the officer so author isedmay, at any time or from 
time to time, amend or revoke any notice issued under this sub -section or extend the time for making any 
payme nt in pursuance of such notice.  
(viii) The Central Provident Fund Commissioner or the officer so authorised  shall grant a receipt for 
any amount paid in compliance with a notice issued under this sub -section, and the person so paying shall 
be fully discharged from his liability to the employer to th e extent of the amount so paid.  
(ix) Any person discharging any  liability to the employer after the receipt of a notice under this  
sub-section shall be personally liable to the Central Provident Fund Commissioner or the officer so 
authorised to the extent of his own liability to the employer so discharged or to the e xtent of the 
employer ’s liability for any sum due und er this Act, whichever is less.  
(x) If the person to whom a notice under this sub -section is sent fails to make payment in pursuance 
thereof to the Central Provident Fund Commissioner or the officer so a uthorised he shall be deemed to be 
an employer in default in respect of the amount specified in the notice and further proceedings may be 
taken against him for the realisation of the amount as if it w
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 19]
otice and further proceedings may be 
taken against him for the realisation of the amount as if it were an arrear due from him, in the manner 
provided in se ctions 8B to 8E and the notice shall have the same effect as an attachment of a debt by the 
Recovery Officer in exercise of his powers under section 8B.  
(4) The Central Provident Fund Commissioner or the officer authorised by the Central Board in this 
beha lf may apply to the court in whose custody there is money belonging to the employer for payment to 
him of the entire amount of such money, or if it is more than the amount due, an amount sufficie nt to 
discharge the amount due.  
(5) The Central Provident Fun d Commissioner or any officer not below the rank of Assistant 
Provident Fund Commissioner may, if so authorised by the Central Government by general or special 
order, recover any arrears of amount due from an employer or, as the case may be, from the estab lishment 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 20]
20 
 by distraint and sale of his or its movable property in the manner laid down in the Third Schedule to the 
Income- tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961).  
8G. Application of certain  provisions of Income -tax Act .—The provisions of the Second and Third 
Schedules  to the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961) and the Income -tax (Certificate Proceedings) Rules, 
1962, as in force from time to time, shall apply with necessary modifications as if the said provisions and 
the rules referred to the arrears of the amount mentio ned i n section 8 of this Act instead of to the  
income -tax: 
Provided that any reference in the said provisions and the rules to the “assessee ” shall be construed as 
a reference to an em ployer as defined in this Act.]  
9. Fund to be r ecognised under Act 11 o f 1922 .—For the purposes of the Indian Income -tax Act, 
1922, the Fund shall be deemed to be a recognised provident fund within the meaning of Chapter IXA of 
that Act : 
1[Provided that nothing contained in the said Chapter shall operate to render ineffective  any provision 
of the Scheme (under which the Fund is established) which is repugnant to any of the provisions of that 
Chapter or  of the rules made thereunder.]  
10. Protection against attachment .—(1) The amount standing to the cre dit of any member in the 
Fund 2[or of any exempted employee in a provident fund] shall not in any way be capable of being 
assigned or charged and shall not be liable to attachment under any decree or order of any court in respect 
of any debt or lia bility i ncurred by the member 2[or the exempted employee], and neither the official 
assignee appointed under the Presidency -towns Insolvency Act, 1909 (3 of 1909), nor any receiver 
appointed under the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920 (5 of 1920), shall be entitled to, or have  any claim 
on, any such amount.  
3[(2) Any amount standing to the credit of a member in the Fund or of an exempted employee in a 
provident fund at the time of his death and paya
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 20]
member in the Fund or of an exempted employee in a 
provident fund at the time of his death and payable to his nominee under the Scheme or the rules of the 
provident fun d shall, subject to any deduction authorised by the said Scheme or rules, vest in the nominee 
and shall be free from any debt or other liability incurred by the deceased or the nominee before the death 
of the me mber of the exempted employee 4[and shall also not be liable to attachment under a ny decree or 
order of any court ]. 
5[(3) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) and sub -section ( 2) shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to 
the family pension or any other amount payable un der the 6[Pension ] Scheme 7[and also in relation to any 
amount payable under the Insurance Scheme] as they apply in relation to any a mount payable out of the 
Fund.]  
11. Priority of payment of c ontributions over other debts .—8[(1)] 9[Where any employer is 
adjudicated insolvent or, being a company, an order for windi ng up is made, the amount due — 
(a) from the employer in relation to 10[an establishment] to which any 11[Scheme or the Insurance 
Scheme] applies in respect of any cont ribution payable to the Fund 12[or, as the case may be, the 
Insurance Fund], damages recoverable under section 14B, accumulations required to be transferred 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 37 of 1953, s. 7.  
2. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. 
3. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for sub -section ( 2). 
4. Added by Act 33 of 1988, s. 15 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
5. Ins. by Act 16 of 1971, s. 22 (w.e.f. 23 -4-1971).  
6. Subs. by Act 25 of 1996, s. 4, for “Family Pension” (w.e.f.16 -11-1995).  
7. Ins. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 26 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
8. Section 11 re -numbered as sub -section ( 1) of that section by Act 40 of 1973, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1973).  
9. Subs. by Act 37 of 1953, s. 9, for certain words.  
10. Subs. by Act 94 of 1956, s. 3, for “a factory”.  
11. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 27, for “Sche
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 20]

10. Subs. by Act 94 of 1956, s. 3, for “a factory”.  
11. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 27, for “Scheme” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
12. Ins. by s. 27, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 21]
21 
 under sub -section ( 2) of section 15 or a ny charges payable by him under any other provision of this 
Act or of any provision of the  1[Sche me or the Insurance Scheme]; or  
(b) from the employ er in relation to an exempted 2[establishment] in r espect of any contribution 
to 3[the Provident Fund or any Insurance Fund] (in so far it relates to exempted e mployees), under the 
rules of 3[the Provident  Fund or any Insurance Fund], 4[any contribution payable by him towards the 
Family Pension Fund under sub -section ( 6) of section 17,] damages recoverable under section 14B or 
any charges payable by him to the appropriate Government under any provi sion of this Act or under 
any of the condit ions specified under section 17.  
shall, wh ere the liability thereof  has accrued before the order of adjudication or winding up is made, be 
deemed to be included] among the debts which under section 49 of the Presi dency -towns Insolvency Act, 
1909 (3 of 1909), or under section 61 of the Provincial In solvency Act, 1920 (5 of 1920), or under 
5[section 530 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956)] , are to be paid in priority to all other debts in the 
distribution of the property of the insolvent or the assets of the company bein g wound up, as the case may 
be. 
6[Explanation .—In this sub -section and in section 17, “insurance fund ” means any fund established 
by an employer under any scheme for providing benefits in the natur e of life insurance to employees, 
whether linked to their deposits in provident fund or not, without payment by the employees of any 
separate contribution or  premium in that behalf.]  
7[(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), if any amou nt is due from an employer 
8[whether in respect of the employee ’s contribution (deducted from the wages of the employee) or the 
employer ’s contribution], the amount so due shall be deemed to be the first charge on the assets of the 
establishment, and shall, notwithstanding anyt
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 21]
e deemed to be the first charge on the assets of the 
establishment, and shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, 
be paid i n priority to all other debts.]  
9[12. Empl oyer not to reduce wages, etc .—No employ er in relation to 10[an establishment] to which 
any 11[Scheme or the Insurance Scheme] applies shall, by reason only of his liability for the pa yment of 
any contribution to 12[the Fund or the Insurance Fund] or any c harges under this Act or the 11[Scheme or 
the Insurance Scheme], reduce, whether directly or indirectly, the wage s of an y employee to whom the 
11[Scheme or the Insurance Scheme] applies or the total quantum of benefits in the nature of  old age 
pension, gratuity 13[Provident Fund or Life Insurance] to which the employee is entitled under the terms 
of his employment, expres s or implied.]  
13. Inspectors .—(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
appoint such persons as it thinks fit to be Inspectors for the p urposes of this Act 14[, the Scheme] 15[, the 
16[Pension ] Scheme or the Insurance Scheme], and  may define their jurisdiction.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 27, for “Sch eme” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
2. Subs. by Act 94 of 1956, s. 3, for “Factory”  
3. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 27, for “the provident fund” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
4. Ins. by Act 16 of 1971, s. 23 (w.e.f. 23 -4-1971).  
5. Subs. by Act 40 of 1973, s. 3, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -11-1973).  
6. Ins. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 27 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
7. Ins. by Act 40 of 1973, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1973).  
8. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 16, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
9. Subs. by Act 37 of 1953, s. 10, for section 12.  
10. Subs.  by Act 94 of 1956, s. 3, for “a factory”.  
11. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 28, for “Scheme” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
12 Subs. by s. 28, ibid., for “the Fund” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
13. Subs. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 21]
eme” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
12 Subs. by s. 28, ibid., for “the Fund” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
13. Subs. by s. 28, ibid., “or provident Fund” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
14. Subs. by Act 16  of 1971, s. 24, for “or of any Scheme” (w.e.f. 23 -4-1971).  
15. Subs. by Act 90 of 1976, s. 29, for “or the Family Pension Scheme” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
16. Subs. by Act 25 of 1996, s. 4, for “Family Pension” (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 22]
22 
 (2) Any Inspector appointed under sub -section ( 1) may, for the purpose of inquiring into the 
correctness of any information furnished in connect ion with this Act or with any 1[Scheme or the 
Insurance Scheme] or for the purpose of ascertaining whether any of the pro visions of this Act or of any 
1[Scheme or the Insurance Sc heme] have been complied with 2[in respect of  3[an estab lishment] to which 
any 1[Scheme or the Insurance Scheme] appli es or for the purpose of ascertaining whether the provisions 
of this Act or any 1[Scheme or the Insurance  Scheme] are applicable to any 4[establishment] to which the 
1[Scheme or the Insurance Scheme] has not been applied or for the purpose of determining w hether the 
conditions subject to which exemption was granted under section 17 are being complied with by the 
employer in relation to a n exempted 4[establishment]] — 
(a) require  an employer 5[or any contractor from whom any amount is recoverable under section 
8A] to furnish such information as he may consider necessary 6***; 
(b) at any reasonable time 7[and with such assistance, if any, as he may think fit, enter and search] 
any 4[establishment] or any premises connected therewith and require any one found in charge thereof 
to produce before him for examination any accounts, books, registers and other documents relating to 
the employment of persons or the payment of wages in th e 4[establishment];  
(c) examine, with respect to any matter relevant to any of the pur poses aforesaid, the employer 
5[or any contractor from whom any amount is recoverable under section 8A], his agent or servant or 
any other person found in charge of the 4[establishment] of any premises connected therewith or 
whom the Inspector has reasonable cause to believe to be or to have been, an emp loyee in the 
4[establishment];  
8[(d) make copies of, or take extracts from, any book, register or other document maintained i n 
relation to the establishment and, where he has reason t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 22]
 register or other document maintained i n 
relation to the establishment and, where he has reason to believe that any offence under this Act has 
been committed by an employer, seize with such assistance as he may think fit, such book, register or 
other document or portions thereof as he may consi der releva nt in respect of that offence;]  
(e) exer cise such other powers as the 1[Scheme or the  Insurance Scheme] may provide.  
9[(2A) Any Inspector appointed under sub -section ( 1) may, for the purpose of inquiring into the 
correctness of any information furnished in connection with the 10[Pension ] Scheme or for the purpose of 
ascertaining whether any of the provisions of this Act or of the 10[Pension ] Scheme have been complied 
with in respect of an es tablishment to which the 10[Pension ] Scheme applies, exercise all or any of the 
powers conferred, on him under clause ( a), clause ( b), clause ( c) or clause ( d) of sub -section ( 2).] 
5[11[(2B)] The provisions of the Code of Crim inal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898 ) shall, so far as may be, 
apply to any search or seizure under sub -section ( 2), 12[or under sub -section (2A), as the case may be,] as 
they apply to any search or seizure made under the authority of a warrant issued under section 9 8 of the 
said Code (45 of 1960).]  
13*    *    *    *    * 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s . 29, for “Scheme” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
2. Ins. by Act 37 of 1953, s. 11.  
3. Subs b Act 94 of 1956, s. 3, for “a factory”.  
4. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “factory”  
5. Ins. by Act 28 of 1963, s. 9 (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  
6. The words “in relation to the Scheme” omitted by Act 37 of 1953, s. 11.  
7. Subs. by Act 28 of 1963, s. 9, for “enter” (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  
8. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for clause ( d) (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  
9. Ins. by Act 16 of 1971, s. 24.  
10. Subs. by Act 25 of 1996, s. 4, for “Family Pension” (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  
11. Sub -section ( 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 22]

10. Subs. by Act 25 of 1996, s. 4, for “Family Pension” (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  
11. Sub -section ( 2A) re-numbered as sub -section ( 2B) by s. 24, ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -4-1971).  
12. Ins. by s. 24, ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -4-1971).  
13. Omitted by Act 33 of 1988, s. 17 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 23]
23 
 14. Penalties .—(1) Whoever, for the purpose of avoiding any payment to be m ade by himself under 
this Act 1[, the  Scheme 2[, the  3[Pension ] Scheme or the Insurance Scheme]] or of enabling any other 
person to avoid such payment, knowingly makes or causes to be made any false statement or false 
representation shall be punishable with imprisonment fo r a term which may extend to 4[one year, or wi th 
fine of five thousand rupees, or with both.]  
5[(1A) An employer who contravenes, or makes default in complying with, the provisions of section 6 
or clause ( a) of sub -section ( 3) of section 17 in so far as it relates to the payment of inspection charges,  or 
paragraph 38 of the Scheme in so far as it relates to the payment of administrative charges, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 6[three years] but — 
(a)which shall not be less than 7[one year and a fine of ten thousand rupees] in case of default in 
payment of the employees ’ contribution which has been deducted by the employer from the 
employees ’ wages; 
8[(b) which shall not be less than six months and a fine of five thous and rupees, in any other 
case;]  
9*    *    *    *    * 
Provided that the court may, for any adequate and special reasons to be recorded in the judgment, 
impose a sentence of imprisonment for a  lesser term 10***.]  
11[(1B) An employer who contravenes, or makes default in complying with, the provisions of section 
6C, or clause ( a) of sub -section ( 3A) of section 17 in so far as it relates to the payment of inspection 
charges, shall be punishable with imprisonment f or a term which may extend to 12[one year] but  which 
shall not be less than 13[six months] and sh all also be liable to fine which may extend to 14[five thousand 
rupees] : 
Provided that the court may, for any adequate and special reasons to be recorded in the judgment, 
impose a sentence of impri sonment for a lesser term 15***. 
(2) 16[Subject to the provis ions of thi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 23]
mpose a sentence of impri sonment for a lesser term 15***. 
(2) 16[Subject to the provis ions of this Act, the Scheme] 17[, the 3[Pension Scheme or the Insurance 
Scheme] may provide that any person who contravenes, or makes default in complying with, any of the 
provisions thereof shall be punishable with imprisonmen t for a term which may extend 4[one year, or with 
fine which may extend to four thousand rupees, or with both].  
18[(2A) Whoever contravenes or makes default in complying with any provision of this Act or of any 
condition subject to which exemption was grant ed under section 17 shall, if no other penalty is elsewhere 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 16 of 1971, s. 25, for “or under any Scheme”.  
2. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 30, for “or the Family Pension Scheme” (w.e.f. 7 -9-1976).  
3. Subs. by Act 25 of 1996, s. 4, for “Family Pension” (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  
4. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 18, for “six months, or with fine which m ay extend to one thousand rupees, or with both”  
 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
5. Ins. by Act 40 of 1973, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1973).  
6. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 18, for “six months” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
7. Subs. by s. 18, ibid., for “three months” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
8. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988,s. 18 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
9. The words “and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to two thousand rupees” omitted by s. 18, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
10. The words “or of fine only in lieu of imprisonment” omitted by s. 18,  ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
11. Ins. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 30 (w.e.f. 7 -9-1976).  
12. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 18, for “six months” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
13. Subs. by s. 18, ibid., for “one month” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
14. Subs. by s. 18, ibid., for “two thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
15. The words “or of fine only in lieu of imprisonment” omitted by s. 18, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
16. Subs. by Act 40 of 1973, s. 4, for “the scheme” (w.
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 23]
mitted by s. 18, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
16. Subs. by Act 40 of 1973, s. 4, for “the scheme” (w.e.f. 1 -11-1973).  
17. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 30, “or the family pension” (w.e.f. 7 -9-1976).  
18. Ins. by Act 37 of 1953, s. 12.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 24]
24 
 provided by or under this Act  for such contravention or non -compliance, be punishable with 
imprisonment which may extend to 1[six months, but which shall not be less than one month, and shall 
also be liable to fine which may e xtend to five thousand rupees.]  
2*    *    *   *   * 
3[14A. Offences by companies .—(1) If the person committing an offence under this Act 4[, the 
Scheme or 5[the 6[Pension ] Scheme or the Insurance Scheme]] is a company, every person, who at the 
time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of 
the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guil ty of the offence and shall 
be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowl edge or that he exercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), wh ere an offence under this Act 4[, the 
Scheme  or 5[the 6[Pension ] Scheme or the Insurance Scheme]] has been c ommitted by a company and it is 
proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any 
neglect on the part of, any director or manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, 
manager, sec retary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—Forthe purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any  body corporate and includes a firm and other association of 
individuals; and  
(b) “director ” in relation to a fir m, means a partner in the firm.  
7[14AA. Enhanced punishment in certain c ases after previous conviction .—Whoever, having 
been convicted by a Court of an offence punishable under this Act, th e Schem
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 24]
ion .—Whoever, having 
been convicted by a Court of an offence punishable under this Act, th e Scheme or 5[the 6[Pension ] 
Scheme or the Insurance Scheme], commits the same offence shall be subject for every such subsequent 
offence to imprisonment for a term which may extend  to 8[five years, but which shall not be less than two 
years, and shall also be liable to a fine o f twenty -five thousand rupees].  
14AB. Cer tain offences to be cognizable .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898.) an offence relating to default in payment of contribution by the 
empl oyer punishable unde r this Act shall be cognizable.  
14AC. Co gnizance and trial of offences .—(1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence 
punishable under this Act, the Scheme  or 5[the 6[Pension ] Scheme or the Insurance Scheme] except on a 
report in writing  of the facts constituting such offence made with the previous sanction of the Central 
Provident Fund Commissioner or such other officer as may be authorised by the Central Government, by 
notifi cation in the Official Gazette, in this behalf, by an Inspector appo inted under section 13.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 18, for “six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both”  
 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
2. Omitted by Act 40 of 1973, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1973).  
3. Ins. by Act 37 of 1953, s. 13.  
4. Subs. by Act 16 of 1971, s. 26, for “or the scheme made thereunder”.  
5. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 31, for “the family pension scheme” (w.e.f. 7 -9-1976).  
6. Subs. by Act 25 of 1996, s. 4, for “Family Pension” (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  
7. Ins. by Act 40 of 1973, s. 5.  
8. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 19, for “one year but which shall not be less than three months and shall also be liable to fi ne 
which may extend to four thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 24]
d to four thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 25]
25 
 (2) No court inferior to that of a Presidency Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first class shall try any 
offence under this Act or the Sch eme or 1[the 2[Pension ] Scheme or the Insurance Scheme].  
14B. Power to recover damages .—Where an employer makes default in the payment of  any 
contribution to the Fund 3[, the 2[Pension ] Fund or the Insurance Fund] or in the transfer of accumulations 
required to be transferred by him under sub-section ( 2) of section 15 4[or sub -section ( 5) of section 17] or 
in the payment of any charges payable under any othe r provision of this Act or of 5[any Scheme or 
Insurance Scheme] or under any of the condition s specified under section 17, 6[the Central Provident 
Fund Commissioner or such other officer as may be authorised by the Central Government, by 
notification in the Official Gazette , in this be half] may recover 7[from the employer  by way of penalty 
such damages, not exceedingthe amount of arrears, as may be specified in the Scheme :] 
8[Provided that before levying and recovering such damages, the employer shall be given a reasonab le 
opportunity o f being heard]:  
9[Provided further that the Central Board may reduce or waive the damages levied under this section 
in relation to an establishment which is a sick industrial company and in respect of which a scheme for 
rehabilitation has been sanctioned b y the Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction established 
under section 4 of the Sick Industrial Companies (Special P rovisions) Act, 1985 ,subject to such terms and 
conditions as m ay be specified in the Scheme.]  
10[14C. Power of court to make orders .—(1) Where an employer is convicted of an offence of 
making default in the payment of any contribution to the Fund 11[,the 2[Pension ]Fund or the Insurance 
Fund] ] or in the transfer of accumulations required to be transferred by him under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 15 or sub -section ( 5) of section 17, the court may, in addition to awardi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 25]
section ( 2) of 
section 15 or sub -section ( 5) of section 17, the court may, in addition to awarding any punishment, by 
order in writing require him within a period specified in  the order (which the court may, if it thinks fit and 
on application in that behalf, from time to time, extend), to pay the amount of contribution or transfer the 
accumulations, as the case may be, in respect of w hich the offence was committed.  
(2) Where a n order is made under sub -section ( 1), the employer shall not be liable under this Act in 
respect of the continuation of the offence during the period or extended period, if any, allowed by the 
court, but if, on the expiry of such period or extended period , as the case may be, the order of the court 
has not been fully complied with, the employer shall be deemed to have committed a further offence and 
shall be punished with imprisonment in respect thereof under section 14 and shall also be liable to pay 
fine which may extend to one hundred rupees for every day after such expiry on which the ord er has not 
been complied with.]  
15. Special provisions relating to existing p rovident funds .—(1) 12[Subject to the provisions of 
section 17, every employee who is a subscr iber to any provident fund of 13[an establishment] to which this   
                                                           
1. Subs. by A ct 99 of 1976, s. 31, for “the family pension scheme” (w.e.f. 7 -9-1976).  
2. Subs. by Act 25 of 1996, s. 4, for “Family Pension” (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  
3. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 32, for “or the family pension fund” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
4. Ins. by Act 28 of  1963, s. 10 (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  
5. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 32, for “any scheme” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
6. Subs. by Act 40 of 1973, s. 6, for “the appropriate Government” (w.e.f. 1 -11-1973).  
7. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 20, for “from the employer such damages, not exceeding the amount of arrears as it may think fit to 
impose” (w.e.f. 1 -9-1991).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 25]
h damages, not exceeding the amount of arrears as it may think fit to 
impose” (w.e.f. 1 -9-1991).  
8. Ins. by Act 40 of 1973, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1973).  
9. Ins. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 20 (to be notified).  
10. Ins. by Act 40 of 1973, s. 7 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1973).  
11. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 33, for “or the Family Pension Fund” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
12. Subs. by Act 37 of 1953, s. 14, for certain words.  
13. Subs. by Act 94 of 1956, s. 3, for “a factory”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 26]
26 
 act applies shall, pending the application of a Scheme to] the 1[establishment] in which he is employed, 
continue to be entitled to the benefits accruing to him under the provident fund, and the provident fund 
shall continue to be maintained in the same manner and subject to the same conditions as it would have 
been i f this Act had not been passed.  
(2) 2[On the  application of any Scheme to 3[an establishment], the accumulations  in any provident 
fund of the 1[establishment] standing to the credit of the employees who become members of the Fund 
established under the Scheme] shall, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any law for the 
time being in force or in any d eed or other instrument establishing the provident fund but subject to the 
provisions, if any, contained in the Scheme, be transferred to the Fund established under the Scheme, and 
shall be credited to the accounts of the employee s entitled thereto in the Fund.  
16. Act not to ap ply to certain establishments .—4[(1) This Act shall not apply — 
(a) to any establishment registered under the Co -operative Societies Act, 1912 (2 of 1912), or 
under any other law for the time being in force in any State relating to co-operative societies, 
employing less than fifty persons and worki ng without the aid of power; or  
5[(b) to any other establishment belonging to or under the control of the Central Government or a 
State Government and whose employees are entitled to the be nefit of contributory provident fund or 
old age pension in accordance with any scheme or rule framed by the Central Government or the 
State Governm ent governing such benefits; or  
(c) to any other establishment set up under any Central, Provincial or State Act and whose 
employees are entitled to the benefits of contributory provident fund or old age pension in accordance 
with any scheme or rule framed under that Act governing such benefits; 6*** 
7*   *   *  *   * 
8[(2) If the Central Government is of
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 26]
der that Act governing such benefits; 6*** 
7*   *   *  *   * 
8[(2) If the Central Government is of opinion  that having regard to the finan cial position of any class 
of 9[establishments] or other circumstances of the case, it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, and subject to such conditions as may be specifie d in the notification, 
exempt 10[whether prospectively or r etrospectively] that class of 9[establishments] from the operation of 
this Act for such period as may be specified in the notification.]  
11[16A. Authorising certain employers to ma intain provident fund accounts .—(1) The Central 
Government may, on an application made to it in this behalf by the employer and the majority of 
employees in relation to an establishment employing one hundred or more persons, authorise  the 
employer, by an order in writing, to maintain a provident fund account in relation to the establishment, 
subject to such terms and conditions as may be specified in the Scheme:  
Provided that no authorisation  shall be made under this sub -section if the  employer of such 
establishment had committed any default in the payment of provident fund contribution or had committed 
any other offence under this Act during the three years immediately preceding the date of such 
authorisation.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 94 of 1956, s. 3, for “factory”.  
2. Subs. by Act 3 7 of 1953, s. 14, for certain words.  
3. Subs. by Act 94 of 1956, s. 3, for “a factory”.  
4. Subs. by Act 46 of 1960, s. 5, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 31 -12-1960).  
5. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 21, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
6. The word “or” omitted  by Act 10 of 1998, s. 5 (w.e.f. 22 -9-1997).  
7. Omitted by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 22 -9-1997).  
8. Ins. by Act 37 of 1953, s. 15.  
9. Subs. by Act 94 of 1956, s. 3, for “factories”.  
10. Ins. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 21 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
11.Section 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 26]
f 1956, s. 3, for “factories”.  
10. Ins. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 21 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
11.Section 16 A shall stand ins (date to be notified) by s. 22, ibid. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 27]
27 
 (2) Where an establishmen t is authorised to maintain a provident fund account under sub -section ( 1), 
the employer in relation to such establishment shall maintain such account, submit such return, deposit 
the contribution in such manner, provide for such facilities for inspection,  pay such administrative 
charges, and abide by such other terms and conditions, as may be specifi ed in the Scheme.  
(3) Any authorisation made under this section may be cancelled by the Central Government by order 
in writing if the employer fails to comply with any of the terms and conditions of the authorisation or 
where he commits any offence under a ny provision of this Act:  
Provided that before cancelling the authorisation, the Central Government shall give the employer a 
reasonable opportunity of being h eard. ] 
1[17. Power to exempt .—(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette and subject to such conditions as may be s pecified in the notification, 2[exempt, whether 
prospectively or retrospectively, from the operation] of all  or any of  the provisions of any Scheme — 
(a) any 3[establishment] to which this Act applies if, in the opinion of the appropriate 
Government, the rules of its provident fund with respect to the rates of contribution are not less 
favourable than those speci fied in section 6 and the employees are also in enjoyment of other 
provident fund benefits which on the whole are not less favourable to the employees than the benefits 
provided under this Act or any Scheme in relation to the employees in any other 3[estab lishm ent] of a 
similar character; or  
(b) and 3[establishm ent] if the employees of such 3[establishment] are in enjoyment of benefits in 
the nature of provident fund, pension or gratuity and the appropriate Government is of opinion that 
such benefits, separately or jointly, are on the whole not less favourable to such employees than the 
benefi ts provided under this Act or any Scheme in rela
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 27]
 less favourable to such employees than the 
benefi ts provided under this Act or any Scheme in relat ion to employees in any other 3[establi shment] 
of a similar character:  
4[Provided that no such exemption shall be made except after consultation with the Central Board 
which on such consultation shall forward its views on exemption to the appropriate Government within 
such time limit as may be specified in the Scheme.]  
5*    *    *    *    *  
6[(1A) Where an exemption has been granted to an establishment under c lause ( a) of sub -section 
(1),— 
(a) the provisions of sections 6, 7A, 8 and 14B shall, so far as may be, apply to the employer of 
the exempted establishment in addition to such other conditions as may be specified in the 
notification granting such exemption, and where such employer contravenes, or makes default in 
complying with any of the said provisions or conditions or any other provisions of this Act, he shall 
be puni shable under section 14 as if the said establishment had not been exem pted under the said 
clause ( a); 
(b) the employer shall establish a Board of Trustees for the administration of the provident fund 
consisting of such number of members as may be specified  in the Scheme;  
(c) the terms and conditions of service of members of the Board of Trustees shall be such as may 
be specified in the Sc heme;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 37 of 1953, s. 16, for section 17.  
2. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 23, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -10-1988).  
3. Subs. by Act 94 of 1956, s. 3, for “factory”.  
4. Added by Act 33 of 1988, s. 23 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1988).  
5. The Explanation omitted by Act 28 of 1963, s. 11 (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  
6. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 23, for sub -section ( IA) (w.e.f. 1 -10-1988).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 28]
28 
 (d) the Board of Trustees const ituted under clause ( b) shall — 
(i) maintain detailed accounts to show the contributions credited, withdrawals made and 
interest accrued in respect of each employee;  
(ii) submit such returns to the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner or any other officer as 
the Central Governmen t may dir ect from time to time;  
(iii) invest the provident fund monies in accordance with the directions issued by the Centra l 
Government from time to time;  
(iv) transfer, where necessary, the provident fu nd account of any employee; and  
(v) perform such other dutie s as may be specified in the Scheme.  
(1B) Where the Board of Trustees established under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1A) contravenes, or 
makes default in complying with, any provisions of clause ( d) of that sub -section, the Trustees of the said 
Board shall be deemed to have committed an offence under sub -section ( 2A) of section 14 and shall be 
punishable with the penaltie s provided in that sub -section.  
1[(1C)The appropriate Government  may, by notification in the Official Gazette, and subject to the 
condition  on the pattern of investment of pension fund and such other conditions as may be specified 
therein, exempt any establishment or class of establishments from the operation of the Pension Scheme if 
the employees of such establishment or class of establishme nts are either members of any other pension 
scheme  or propose  to be members of such pension scheme, where the pensionary benefits are at par or 
more favourable than the Pension Scheme under this Act. ]] 
(2) Any Scheme may make provision for exemption of any  person or cla ss of persons employed in 
any 2[establishment] to which the Scheme applies from the operation of all or any of the provisions of the 
Scheme, if such person or class of persons is entitled to benefits in the nature of provident fund, gratuity 
or old age pension and such benefits, separat ely or jointly, are on the whole not less 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 28]
, gratuity 
or old age pension and such benefits, separat ely or jointly, are on the whole not less favourable than the 
benefits provide d under this Act or the Scheme:  
Provided that no such exemption shall be granted in respect of a class of persons unless the 
appropriate Government is of opinion that the majorit y of persons constituting such class desire to 
continue t o be entitled to such benefits.  
3[(2A) 4[The Central Provident Fund Commissioner may, if requested so to do by the employer, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, and subject to such conditions as  may be specified in the notification, 
exempt, whether prospectively or retrospectively, any establishment from the operation of all or any of 
the provisions of the Insurance Scheme, if he is satisfied] that the employees of such establishment are, 
without  making any separate contribution or payment of premium, in enjoyment of benefits in the nature 
of life insurance, whether linked to their deposits in provident fund or not, and such benefits are more 
favourable to such employees than the benefits admissib le under the Insurance Scheme.  
(2B) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 2A), the Insurance Scheme may provide for 
the exemption of any person or class of persons employed in any establishment and covered by that 
Scheme from the operation of all or any of the provisions thereof, if the benefits in the nature of life 
insurance adm issible to such person or class of persons are more favourable than the benefits provided 
unde r the Insurance Scheme.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 1996, s. 7, for sub -section ( IC) (w.e.f. 16 -11-1996).  
2. Subs. by Act 94 of 1956, s. 3, for “factory”.  
3. Ins. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 34 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
4. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 23, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -10-1988).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 29]
29 
 1[(3) Where in respect of any person or class of persons employed in an establishment an exemption 
is granted under this section from the  operation of all or any of the provisions of any Scheme (whether 
such exemption has been granted to the establishment wherein such person or class of persons is 
employed or to the perso n or class of persons as such), the employer in relation to such estab lishment — 
(a) shall, in relation to the provident fund, pension and gratuity to which any such person or class 
of persons is entitled, maintain such accounts, submit such returns, make such investment, provide for 
such facilities for inspection and pay such inspection charges, as the Central Government may direct;  
(b) shall not, at any time after the exemption, without the leave of the Central Government, 
reduce the total quantum of benefits in the nature of pension, gratuity or provident fund to which a ny 
such person or class of persons was entitled at  the time of the exemption; and  
(c) shall, where any such person leaves his employment and obtains re -employment in another 
establishment to which this Act applies, transfer within such time as may be speci fied in this behalf 
by the Central Government, the amount of accumulations to the credit of that person in the provident 
fund of the establishment left by him to the credit of that person ’s account in the provident fund of the 
establishment in which he is re-employed or, as the case may be, in the Fund established under the 
Scheme a pplicable to the establishment.  
2[(3A) Where, in respect of any person or class of persons employed in any establishment, an 
exemption is granted under sub -section ( 2A) or sub-section ( 2B) from the operation of all or any of the 
provisions of the Insurance Scheme (whether such exemption is granted to the establishment wherein 
such person or class of persons is employed or to the person or class of persons as such), the emplo yer in 
relation to such establishment 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 29]
yed or to the person or class of persons as such), the emplo yer in 
relation to such establishment — 
(a) shall, in relation to the benefits in the nature of life insurance, to which any such person or 
class of persons is entitled, or any insurance fund, maintain such accounts, submit such returns, make 
such investmen ts, provide for such facilities for inspection and pay such inspection charges, as the 
Central Government may direct;  
(b) shall not, at any time after the exemption without the leave of the Central Government, reduce 
the total quantum of benefits in the na ture of life insurance to which any such person or class of 
persons was entitled immediately be fore the date of the exemption;3*** 
4*    *    *    *   * 
(4) Any exemption granted under this section may be cancelled by the authority which granted it, by 
order in writing, if  an employer fails to comply, — 
(a) in the case of an exemption granted under sub -section ( 1), with any of the conditions im posed 
under that sub -section 5[or sub-section ( 1A)] or with any of the provisions o f sub -section ( 3); 6*** 
7[(aa) in the case of an exempti on granted under sub -section 8[(IC)], with any of the conditions 
impos ed under that sub -section; and]  
(b) in the case of an exemption granted under sub -section ( 2), with any of the  provisions of  
sub-section ( 3); 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 28 of 1963, s. 11, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 30-11-1963).  
2. Ins. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 34 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
3. The word “and” omitted by Act 33 of 1988, s. 23 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1988).  
4. Omitted by s. 23, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1988).  
5. Ins. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 23 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1988).  
6. The word “and” om itted by Act 16 of 1971, s. 27 (w.e.f. 23 -4-1971).  
7. Ins. by s. 27, ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -4-1971).  
8. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 23, for “( IA)” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1985).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 29]
( IA)” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1985).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 30]
30 
 1[(c) in the case  of an exemption granted under sub -section ( 2A), with any of the conditions 
imposed under that sub -section or with any of the pro visions of sub -section ( 3A); 
(d) in the case of an exemption granted under sub -section ( 2B), with any of the p rovisions of  
sub-section ( 3A).] 
2[(5) Where any exemption gran ted under sub -section ( 1), sub -section 3[(IC)] 4[, sub -section ( 2),  
sub-section ( 2A) or sub -section ( 2B)] is cancelled, the amount of accumulations to the credit of every 
employee to whom such exemption applied, in the provide nt fund 4[the 5[pension ] fund or the insurance 
fund] of the establis hment in which he is employed 6[together with any amount forfeited from the 
employer ’s share of contribution to the credit of the employee who leaves the employment before the 
completion of the full period of service] shall be transferred within such time and in such manner as may 
be specified in the Scheme or the 5[Pension ] Scheme 4[or th e Insurance Scheme] to the credit of his 
account in the Fund or the 5[Pension ] Fund 4[or the Insur ance Fund], as the case may be.  
(6) Subject to the prov isions of sub -section 3[(IC)] the employer of an exempted establishment or of 
an exempted employee of an establishment to which the provisions of the 5[Pension ] Scheme apply, shall, 
notwithstanding any exemption granted under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), pay to the 5[Pension ] 
Fund such portion of the employer ’s contribution 7*** to its provident fund within such time and in such 
manner as may be specified i n the 5[Pension ] Scheme.]]]  
8[17A. Transfer of accounts .—(1) Where an employee employed in an establishment to which this 
Act applies leaves his employment and obtains re -employment in another establishment to which this Act 
does not apply, the amount of accumulations to the credit of such employee in the Fund, or as the case 
may be, in the provident fund of the establishment le ft by him shall be transf
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 30]
und, or as the case 
may be, in the provident fund of the establishment le ft by him shall be transferred, within such time as 
may be specified by the Central Government in this behalf, to the credit of his account in the provident 
fund of the establishment in which he is re -employed, if the employee so desires and the rules in r elation 
to that provi dent fund permit such transfer.  
(2) Where an employee employed in an establishment to which this Act does not apply leaves his 
employment and obtains re -employment in another establishment to which this Act applies, the amount of 
accum ulations to the credit of such employee in the provident fund of the establishment left by him may, 
if the employee so desires and the rules in relation to such provident fund permit, be transferred to the 
credit of his account in the Fund or as the case m ay be, in the provident fund of the establishme nt in 
which he is re -employed.]  
9[17AA. Act to have effect notwithstanding anythin g contained in Act 31 of 1956 .—The 
provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in the 
Life Insurance Corporatio n Act, 1956.]  
10[17B. Liability in case  of transfer of establishment .—Where an employer, in relation to an 
establishment, transfers that establishment in whole or in part, by sale, gift, lease or licence or in any o ther 
manner whatsoever, the employer and the person to whom the establishment is so transferred shall jointly 
and severally be liable to pay the contribution and other sums due from the employer under any provision 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 34 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
2. Subs. by Act 16 of 1971, s. 27, for sub -section ( 5) (w.e.f. 23 -4-1971).  
3. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 23, for “( IA)” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1985).  
4. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 27, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
5. Subs. by Act 25 of 1996, s. 4, for “Family Pension” (w.
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 30]
, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
5. Subs. by Act 25 of 1996, s. 4, for “Family Pension” (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  
6. Ins. by  Act 33 of 1988, s. 23 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1988).  
7. The words “as well as the employees’ Contribution” omitted by Act 25 of 1996, s. 7 (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  
8. Ins. by Act 28 of 1963, s. 12 (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  
9. Ins. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 35 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
10. Ins. by Act 40 of 1973, s. 8 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1973).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 31]
31 
 of this Act or the Scheme or 1[the 2[Pension ] Scheme or the Insurance Scheme], as the case may be, in 
respect of the period u p to the date of such transfer:  
Provided that the liability of the transferee shall be limited to the value of the assets obtained by him 
by such transfer .] 
3[18. Prote ction of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central Government, a State Government, the Presiding Officer of a Tribunal, any 
authority referred to in section 7A, an Inspector or any other person  for anything which is in good faith 
done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act, the Scheme, the  2[Pension ] Scheme or the Insurance 
Scheme.  
4[18A. Authorities and inspector to be public servant .—The authorities referred to in section 7A 
and every  inspector shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian 
Penal Code. ]]  
5[19. Delegation of powers .—The appropriate Government may direct that any power or authority or 
jurisdiction exe rcisable by it under this Act 6[, the Scheme 7[, the 2[Pension ] Scheme or the Insurance 
Scheme]] shall, in relation to such matters and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in 
the d irection, be exercisable also — 
(a) where the appropriate Government is the Central Gove rnment, by such officer or authority 
subordinate to the Central Government or by the State Government or by such officer or authority 
subordinate to the State Government, as may be spe cified in the notification; and  
(b) where the appropriate Government is a State Government, by such officer or authority 
subordinate to the State Government as may be  specified in the notification. ] 
8[20. Power of Central Government to give d irections .—The Central Government may, from time 
to time, give such directions to the Central Board as it may think fit for the efficient administration of this 
Act and when any such direction is given, t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 31]
 may think fit for the efficient administration of this 
Act and when any such direction is given, the Central Board sh all comply with such direction.  
21. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Officia l Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any 
of the following matters, namely: — 
9[*   *   *  *   *]; 
(b) the form and the manner in which, and the time within which, an appeal shall be filed before a 
Tribunal and the fees payable for filing such appeal;  
(c) the manner of certifying the copy of the certificate, to be forwarded to the Recovery Officer 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 8C;  and 
(d) any other matter, which has to be, or may be, pres cribed by rules under this Act.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 31, for “the Family Pension Scheme” (w.e.f. 7 -9-1976).  
2. Subs. by Act 25 of 1996, s. 4, for “Family Pension” (w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  
3. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 24, for se ction 18 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
4. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 159, for section 18A (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
5. Subs. by Act 37 of 1953, s. 17, for section 19.  
6. Subs. by Act 16 of 1971, s. 29, for “or any scheme”.  
7. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 37, for “or the fam ily scheme”.  
8. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 25, for section 19A (w.e.f. 1 -7-1997).  
9. Clause ( a) omitted by Act 7 of 2017, s. 159 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 32]
32 
 session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effe ct only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
22. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, as amended by the Employees ’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions (Amendment) 
Act, 1988 (33 of 1988), the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make 
such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or 
expedient for  the removal of the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of three years from the date on 
which the said amendment Act receiv es the assent of the President.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid be fore each 
House of Parliament.]]  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 33]
33 
 SCHEDULE I  
[See sections 2( i) and 4]  
Any indus try engaged in the manufacture 1*** of any of the following, namely: — 
Cement.  
Cigarettes.  
Electrical, mechanical or gen eral engineering products.  
Iron and steel.  
Paper.  
Textiles (made wholly or in part of cotton or wool or jute or silk, whether natural or artificial).  
2[1. Matches.  
2. Edible oils and fats.  
3. Sugar.  
4. Rubber and rubber products.  
5. Electricity including the generation, transmi ssion and distribution thereof.  
6. Tea.  
7. Printing [other than printing industry relating to newspaper establishments as defined in the 
Working Journalists (Conditions of Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955 (45 of 1955), 
including the process of composing types for printing, printing by letter press, lithography, 
photogravure or other si milar process or book -binding.]  
8. Glass.  
9. Stone -ware pipes.  
10. Sanitary wares.  
11. Electrical porcelain insulators of high and low te nsion.  
12. Refractories.  
13. Tiles.]  
3[1. Heavy and fine chemicals, including — 
(i) Fertilizers,  
(ii) Turpentine,  
(iii) Rosin,  
(iv) Medical a nd pharmaceutical preparations,  
(v) Toilet preparations,  
(vi) Soaps,  
(vii) Inks,  
                                                           
1. The words “or production” omitted by Act 37 of 1953, s. 18.  
2. Added by Notification No. S.R.O. 1566, d ated the 4th July, 1956, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3 (w.e.f. 31 -7-1956).  
3. Added by Notification No. S.R.O. 2026, dated the 3rd September, 1956, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3 (w.e.f. 30 -9-1956).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 34]
34 
 (viii) Intermediates  dyes, colour lakhs and toners,  
(ix) Fatty acids, and  
1[(x) Oxygen, acetylene, and carbon -dioxide gases ind ustry.]  
2. Indigo.  
3. Lac including shellac.  
4. Non -edible veget able and animal oils and fats.]  
2[Mineral oil refining industry.]  
3[(i) Industrial and Power Alcohol industry; and  
(ii) Asbestos Cement Sheets industry.]  
4[Biscuit making industry including composite units making biscuits and products such as bread, 
confectio nery and milk and milk powder.]  
5[Mica industry.]  
6[Plywood industry.]  
7[Automobile rep airing and servicing industry.]  
8[1. Rice milling.  
2. Flour milling.  
3. Dal milling.]  
9[Starch  industry.]  
10[1. Petroleum or  natural gas exploration, prosp ecting, drilling or production.  
2. Petr oleum or natural gas refining.]  
11[Leather and leather products industry.]  
12[1. Stone -ware jars.  
2. Crocker y.] 
13[The fruit and vegetable preservation industry, that is to say, any industry which is engaged in the 
preparation or production of any of th e following articles, namely: — 
                                                           
1. Added by Notification No. S.R.O. 1976, dated the 8th June, 1957, seeGazette of India, Part II, sec. 3 (w.e.f. 31 -7-1957).  
2. Added by Notification No. S.R.O. 218, dated the 12th January, 1957, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3 (w.e.f. 31 -1-1957).  
3. Added by Notification No. S.R.O. 3067, dated the 19th September, 1957, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3  
(w.e.f. 30 -11-1957).  
4. Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 170, dated the 12th March, 1958, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3 (w.e.f. 30 -4-1958) . 
5. Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 312, dated the 5th March, 1960, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i) (w.e.f. 31 -5-1960).  
6. Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 632, dated the 30th May, 1960, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i) (w.e.f. 30 -6-1960 ). 
7. Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 683, dated the 9th May, 1960, se
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 34]
ec. 3(i) (w.e.f. 30 -6-1960 ). 
7. Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 683, dated the 9th May, 1960, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i) (w.e.f. 30 -6-1960).  
8.Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 1443, dated the 24th November, 1960, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i)  
(w.e.f. 31-12-1960).  
9. Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 535, dated the 10th April, 1961, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i) (w.e.f. 31 -5-1961).  
10. Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 705, dated the 30th May, 1961, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i) (w.e .f. 30 -6-1961).  
11. Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 993, dated the 29th July, 1961, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i) (w.e.f. 31 -8-1961).  
12. Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 1382, dated the 4th November, 1961, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3 (i)  
(w.e.f. 30 -11-1961).  
13. Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 786, dated the 6th June, 1962, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i) (w.e.f. 30 -6-1962)  as 
amended by Notification No. G.S.R. 1461, dated the 29th August, 1963.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 35]
35 
 (i) canned and bo ttled fruits, juices and pulps,  
(ii) canned and bottled vegeta bles, 
(iii) frozen fruits and vegetables,  
(iv) jams, jellies and marmalades , 
(v) tomato  products, ketchups and sauces,  
(vi) squashes, crushes, cordials and ready -to-serve beverages or any other beverages contain ing 
fruits juice or fruit pulp,  
(vii) preserved, candied and crystallised fruits and peals,  
(viii) chutneys,  
(ix) any other unspecified item relating to the preservation or canning of fruits and vegetables.]  
1[Cashewnut Industry.]  
2[Confectionery Industry.]  
3[1. Buttons.  
2. Brushes.  
3. Plastic and  Plastic products.  
4. Stationery products.]  
4[The aerated water industry, that is to say, any industry engaged in the manufacture of aerated water, 
soft drinks or carbonated water.]  
5[The distilling and rectifying of spirits (not falling under industrial and power alcohol) and  blending 
of spirits industry.]  
6[The Paint and Varni sh Industry.]  
7[Bone Cru shing Industry.]  
8[Pickers Industry.]  
9[Milk and milk products Industry.]  
10[Non -ferrous metals and alloys i n the form of ingots industry.]  
11[Bread Industry.]  
  
                                                           
1. Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 1125, dated the 18th August, 1962, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i) (w.e.f 30 -9-1962).  
2. Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 424, dated the 28th February, 1963, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i) (w.e.f. 31 -3-1963).  
3. Added by Notificat ion No. G.S.R. 591, dated the 27th March, 1963, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i) (w.e.f. 30 -4-1963).  
4. Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 1432, dated the 3rd August, 1963, see Gazette of India,  Extraordinary  Part II, sec. 3(i) 
(w.e.f. 31 -8-1963).  
5. Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 1605, dated the 26th September, 1963, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i)  
 (w.e.f. 31 -10-1963).  
6. Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 1983, dated the 21st December, 1963, s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 35]

 (w.e.f. 31 -10-1963).  
6. Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 1983, dated the 21st December, 1963, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i)  
(w.e.f . 31-1-1964).  
7. Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 67, dated the 31st December, 1963, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i)  
(w.e.f. 31 -1-1964).  
8. Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 822, dated the 22nd May, 1964, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i)  
(w.e.f. 30 -6-1964).  
9. Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 1723, dated the 27th November, 1964, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i)  
(w.e.f. 31 -12-1964).  
10. Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 1795, dated the 9th December, 1964, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i)  
(w.e.f. 30 -1-1965).  
11. Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 402, dated the 2nd March, 1965, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i) (w.e.f. 31 -3-1965).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 36]
36 
 1[Stemming or redrying  of tobacco leaf industry, that is to say, any industry engaged in the stemming, 
redrying, handling, sorting, gradi ng or packing of tobacco leaf].  
2[Agarbatee (including d hoop and dhoopbatee) industry.]  
3[Coir (excluding the spinning sector) Industry.]  
4[Tobacco industry, that is to say, any industry engaged in the manufacture of Cigars, Zarda, snuff, 
qivam and guraku from tobacco.]  
5[Paper products Industry.]  
6[Any industry engaged in manufacture of salt for which a licence is necessary a nd which has land not 
less than7[4.05 hectares].  
8[Linoleum I ndustry and Indoleum Industry.]  
9[Explosive In dustry.]  
10[Jute  bailing or pressing Industry.]  
11[Fire works and percussion cap works Industry.]  
12[Tent making Industry.]  
13[Ferro -manganese Industry.]  
14[Ice of ice -cream Industry.]  
15[Winding of thr ead and yarn reeling Industry.]  
16[Cotton Ginning, Ba iling and Pressing Industry.]  
17[Katha making Industry.]  
                                                           
1. Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 768, dated the 18th May, 1965, see Gazette of India, Pa rt II, sec. 3(i) (w.e.f. 30 -6-1965).  
2. Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 910, dated the 23rd June, 1965, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i) (w.e.f. 31 -7-1965).  
3. Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 952, dated the 3rd July, 1965, see Gazette of India, P art II, sec. 3(i) (w.e.f. 30 -9-1965).  
4. Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 895, dated the 1st June, 1966, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i) (w.e.f. 30 -6-1966).  
5. Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 1119, dated the 11th July, 1966, see Gazette of India,  Part II, sec. 3(i) (w.e.f. 31 -7-1966).  
6. Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 1362, dated the 30th August, 1966, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i) (w.e.f. 30 -9-1966).  
7. Subs. by Notification No. G.S.R. 1945, dated the 16th December, 1966, see Gazette  of India, 1967, Part II, sec. 3(i) for  
“ten acres”.  
8. Added by Noti
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 36]
ecember, 1966, see Gazette  of India, 1967, Part II, sec. 3(i) for  
“ten acres”.  
8. Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 437, dated the 27th March, 1967, see Gazette of India, 1966, Part II, sec. 3(i)  
(w.e.f. 30 -4-1967).  
9. Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 1019, dated the 1st July, 196 7, see Gazette of India, 1967, Part II, sec. 3(i)  
(w.e.f. 31 -7-1967).  
10. Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 1226, dated the 5th August, 1967, see Gazette of India, 1967, Part II, sec. 3(i)  
(w.e.f. 31 -8-1967).  
11. Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 1530, dated the 5th October, 1967, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i)  
(w.e.f. 31 -10-1967).  
12.Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 1716, dated the 3rd November, 1967, see Gazette of India, 1967, Part II, sec. 3(i)  
(w.e.f. 30 -11-1967).  
13. Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 1018, dated the 22nd April, 1969, see Gazette of India, 1969, Part II, sec. 3(i)  
(w.e.f. 30 -4-1969).  
14. Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 1506, dated the 11th June, 1969, see Gazette of India, 1969,  Part II, sec. 3(i)  
(w.e.f. 30 -6-1969).  
15. Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 1988, dated the 22nd November, 1971, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i)  
(w.e.f. 30 -11-1971).  
16. Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 1251, dated the 23rd September, 1972, see Gazette of India, 1972 Part II, sec. 3(i)  
(w.e.f. 30 -9-1972).  
17. Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 503, dated the 12th May, 1973, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i)  
(w.e.f. 31 -5-1973).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 37]
37 
 1[Beer manufacturing Industry, that is to say, any industry engaged in the manufacture of the product 
of alcoholic fermentation of a mash in potable water of malted barley and hops, or of hops concentrate d 
with or without the addition on other malted or unmalted cereals or oth er carbohyd rate preparations.]  
2[Beedi industry.]  
3[Ferro Chrome Industry.]  
4[Diamond Cutting Industry.]  
5[Industries engaged in the manufacture of Myrobalan Extract Power, Myrobalan Extracts Solid and 
Vegetable Tanin Blended Extract.]  
6[Brick Industry.]  
7[Industries  based on asbestos as principal raw material.  
8[Exaplanation .—In this Schedule, without prejudice to the ordinary meaning of the experssions used 
therein, — 
(a) the expression “Electrical, mechanical or general engineering products ” includes — 
(1) machinery and equipment for the generation, transmission, distribution or measurement of 
electrical energy and mot ors including cables and wires,  
(2) telephones, telegraph and wi reless communication apparatus,  
(3) electric lam ps (not including glass bulbs).  
(4) electric fans and electrical domestic appliances,  
(5) Storage and  dry batteries,  
(6) radio receivers and  sound reproducing instruments,  
(7) machinery used in industry (including textile machinery) other than electric al machinery 
and machine tools,  
(8) boilers and prime movers, including internal combustion engines, marine engines and 
locomotives,  
(9) machine tools, that is to say, me tal and wood working machinery,  
(10) grinding wheels,  
  
                                                           
1. Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 428, dated the 15th April,  1974, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i) (w.e.f. 30 -4-1974).  
2. Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 660, dated the 17th May, 1977, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i) (w.e.f. 31 -5-1977).  
3. Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 938, dated the 25th June, 1979, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i) (w.e.f. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 37]
ication No. G.S.R. 938, dated the 25th June, 1979, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i) (w.e.f. 31 -7-1979).  
4. Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 564, dated the 5th May, 1980, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3(i) (w.e.f. 31 -5-1980).  
5. Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 613(E), dated the 30th October, 1980, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 1980, Part II,  
sec. 3(i) (w.e.f. 31 -10-1980).  
6. Added by Notification No. G.S.R. 662(E), dated the 27th November, 1980, see Gazette of India, 19 80, Part II, sec. 3(i)  
(w.e.f. 30 -11-1980).  
7. Added by Notification No. S.O. 2459, dated the 29th May, 1983, see Gazette of I ndia, 1980, Part II, sec. 3(ii)  
(w.e.f. 1 -6-1983).  
8. Ins. by Act 37 of 1953, s. 18.  
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 38]
38 
 (11) ships,  
(12) automobiles and tractors,  
(13) bolts, nuts and rivet s, 
(14) power dr iven pumps,  
(15) bicycles,  
(16) hurricane lanterns,  
(17) sewing and knitting machine s, 
(18) mathemati cal and scientific instruments,  
(19) products o f metal rolling and re -rolling.  
(20) wi res, pipes, tub es and fittings,  
(21) ferrous and non -ferrous castings,  
(22) safes, vaults and furniture made of  iron or steel or steel alloys.  
(23) cu tlery and surgical instruments,  
(24) drums and containers,  
(25) parts and accessories of produ cts specified in items 1 to 24;  
(b) the expression “Iron and Steel ” includes pig iron, ingots, blooms, billets and rolled o r re-rolled 
products into basic forms and toll and alloy s teel; 
(c) the expression “paper ” includes p ulp, paperboard and strawboard ; 
(d) the expression “textiles ” includes the products of carding, spin ning, weaving, finishing and 
dyeing yarn and fabrics, printing, knitting and embroidering.]  
_____________  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 39]
39 
  
SCHEDULE I I 
1[[See section 5( 1B)]] 
MATTERS FOR WHICH PROVISION MAY BE MADE IN A SCHEME  
1. The employees or class of employees who shall  join the Fund, and the conditions under which 
employees may be exempted from joining the Fund o r from making any contribution.  
2. The time and manner in which contributions shall be made to the Fund by employers and by,  or on 
behalf of, employees 2[(whether employed by him directly or by or through a contractor)], the 
contributions which an employee may, if he so desires, make under 3*** section 6, and the manner in 
which such contributions may be recovered.  
2[2A. The manner in which employees ’ contributions may be r ecovered by contractors from 
employees employed b y or through such contractors.]  
3. The payment by the employer of such sums of money as may be necessary to meet the cost of 
administering the Fund and the rate at which and the manner in which the payment shall be made.  
4[4. The constitution of any committee for a ssisting any Board of Trustees.  
5. The opening of regional and other off ices of any Board of Trustees.]  
6. The manner in which accounts shall be kept, the investment of moneys bel onging to the Fund in 
accordance with any directions issued or conditions specified by the Central Government, the preparation 
of the budget, the audit of accounts and the submission of reports to the Central Government or to any 
specified State Government . 
7. The conditions under which withdrawals from the Fund may be permitted and any deduction or 
forfeiture may be made and the maximum amount o f such deduction or forfeiture.  
8. The fixation by the Central Government in consultation with the boards of trus tees concerned of 
the rate of interest payable to members.  
9. The form in which an employee shall furnish particulars about himself an d his family whenever 
required.  
10. The nomination of a person to receive the amount standing to the credit of a member af ter his 
death and the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 39]
tion of a person to receive the amount standing to the credit of a member af ter his 
death and the cancellation o r variation of such nomination.  
11. The registers and records to be maintained with respect to employees and the returns to be 
furnished b y employers 5[or contractors].  
12. The form or design of any identity card, token or disc for the purpose of identifying any 
employee, and for the issue, c ustody and replacement thereof.  
13. The fees to be levied for any of the purpo ses specified in this Schedule.  
14. The contraventions of defaults which shall be punishable under sub -section ( 2) of section 14.  
15. The further powers, if any, which may be exercised by Inspectors.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 28 of 1963, s. 13, for “[ see section 6( 2)]” (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  
2. Ins. by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  
3. The words, brackets and figure “sub -section ( 1) of” omitted by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  
4. Subs. by s. 13,  ibid., for items 4 and 5 (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  
5. Ins.  by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 30 -11-1963).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 40]
40 
 16. The manner in which accumulations in any existing provident fund shall be transferred to the 
Fund under section 15, and the mode of valuation of any assets w hich may be transferred b y the 
employers in this behalf.  
17. The conditions under which a member may be permitted to pay premia on  life insurance, from the 
Fund.  
18. Any other matter 2[which is to be provided for in the Scheme or] which may be necessary or  
proper for the purpose  of implementing the Scheme.  
________________  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 41]
41 
 1[SCHEDULE III  
[See section 6A( 5)] 
MATTERS FOR WHICH PRO VISION MAY BE MADE IN THE PENSION  SCHEME  
1. The employees or class of employees to whom the Pension Scheme shall apply.  
2. The time within which the employees who are not members of the Family Pension Scheme under 
section 6A as it stood before the commencement of the Employees ’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous 
Provisions (Amendment) Act, 1996 (hereafter  in this Schedule referred to as the amending Act) shall opt 
for the Pension Scheme.  
3. The portion of employers' contribution to the Provident Fund which shall be credited to the Pension 
Fund and the manner in which it is credited.  
4. The minimum qualifyi ng service for being eligible for pension and the manner in which the 
employees may be granted the benefits of their past service under section 6A as it stood before the 
commencement of the amending Act.  
5. The regulation of the manner in which and the per iod of service for whi ch no contribution is 
received.  
6. The manner in which employees' interest will be protected against default in payment of 
contribution by the employer.  
7. The manner in which the accounts of the Pension Fund shall be kept and investm ent of moneys 
belonging to Pension Fund to be made subject to such pattern of investment as may be determined by the 
Central Government.  
8. The form in which an employee shall furnish particulars about himself and the members of his 
family whenever require d. 
9. The forms, registers and records to be maintained in respect of employees, required for the 
administration of the Pension Scheme.  
10. The scale of pension and pensionary benefits and the conditions relating to grant of such benefits 
to the employees.  
11. The manner in which the exempted establishments have to pay contribution towards the Pension 
Scheme and the submission of returns relating thereto.  
12. The mode of disbursement of pension and arrangements to be entered into with such disbursing 
ag
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 41]
12. The mode of disbursement of pension and arrangements to be entered into with such disbursing 
agenci es as may be specified for the purpose.  
13. The manner in which the expenses for administering the Pension Scheme will be met from the 
income of the Pension Fund.  
14. Any other matter which is to be provided for in the Pension Scheme or which may be necessary or 
proper for the purpose of implementation of the Pension Scheme.]  
____________  
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 1996, s. 8, for the Third Schedule(w.e.f. 16 -11-1995).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 42]
42 
 1[SCHEDULE IV  
(See section 6C)  
MATTERS TO BE PROVIDED FOR IN THE EMPLOYEES ’ DEPOSIT -LINKED INSURANCE  SCHEME  
1.The employees or class of employees who shall be c overed by the Insurance Scheme.  
2. The manner in which the accounts of the Insurance Fund shall be kept and the investment of 
moneys belonging to the Insurance Fund subje ct to such pattern of investment as may be determined, by 
order, by the Centr al Government.  
3. The form in which an employee shall furnish particulars about himself and the members o f his 
family whenever required.  
4. The nomination of a person to receive t he insurance amount due to the employee after his death 
and the cancellation o r variation of such nomination.  
5. The registers and records to be maintained in respect of employees; the form or design of any 
identity card, token or disc for the purpose of i dentifying any employee or his nominee or member of his 
family entitled to re ceive the insurance amount.  
2[6. The scales of insurance benefits and conditions relating to the grant of s uch benefits to the 
employees.]  
8. The manner in which the amount due to  the nominee or the member of the family of the employee 
under the scheme is to be paid including a provision that the amount shall not be paid otherwise than in 
the form of a deposit in a savings bank account, in the name of such nominee or member of fami ly, in any 
corresponding new bank specified in the First Schedule to the Banking Companies (Acquisition and 
Transfer of Under takings) Act, 1970 (5 of 1970).  
9. Any other matter which is to be provided for in the Employees ’ Deposit -linked Insurance Scheme 
or which may be necessary or proper for the purpose of implementing that Scheme.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 38 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
2. Subs. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 26, for items 6 and 7 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS AND MISCELLANEOUS.pdf - page 42]
 items 6 and 7 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1988).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE EMPLOYEES ’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application . 
2. Definitions.  
2A. Registration of factories and establishments.  
CHAPTER II  
CORPORATION , STANDING  COMMITTEE AND MEDICAL  BENEFIT  COUNCIL  
3. Establishment of Employees ’ State Insurance Corporation.  
4. Constitution of Corporation.  
5. Term of office of members of the Corporation.  
6. Eligibility for re -appointment or re -election.  
7. Authentication of orders, decisions, etc.  
8. Constitution of Standing Committee.  
9. Term of office of members of Standing Committee . 
10. Medical Benefit Council.  
11. Resignation of membership.  
12. Cessation of membership . 
13. Disqualification . 
14. Filling of vacancies.  
15. Fees and allowances.  
16. Principal Officer s. 
17. Staff.  
18. Powers of the Standing Committee.  
19. Corporation ’s power to promote measures for health, etc., of insured persons.  
20. Meetings of Corporation, Standing Committee and Medical Benefit Council.  
21. Supersession of the Corporation  and Standing Committee.  
22. Duties of Medical Benefit Council.  
23. Duties of Principal Officers.  
24. Acts of Corporation, etc., not invalid by reason of defect in constitution, etc.  
25. Regional Boards, Local Committees, Regional and Local Medical Benefit Councils.  
CHAPTER III  
FINANCE AND AUDIT  
26. Employees ’ State Insurance Fund.  
27. [Omitted .] 
28. Purposes for which the Fund may be expended.  
28A. Administrative expenses.  
29. Holding of property, etc.  
30. Vesting of the property in the Corporation.  
31. [Omitted .] 
32. Budget estimates.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 2]
2 
 SECTIONS  
33. Accounts.  
34. Audit.  
35. Annual report.  
36. Budget , audited accounts and the annual report to be placed before Parliament.  
37. Valuation of assets and liabilities.  
CHAPTER IV  
CONTRIBUTIONS  
38. All employees to be insured.  
39. Contributions.  
40. Principal employer to pay contributions in the first instance.  
41. Recovery of contribution from immediate employees.  
42. General provisions as  to payment of contribution s. 
43. Method of payment of contribution.  
44. Employers to furnish returns and maintain registers in certain cases.  
45. Social Security Officers, their functions and duties.  
45A. Determination of contributions in certain cases.  
45AA. Appellate authority.  
45B. Recovery of contributions.  
45C. Issue of certificate to the Recovery Officer.  
45D.  Recovery officer to whom certificate is to be forwarded.  
45E. Validity of certificate and amendment thereof.  
45F. Stay of proceedings under certificate and amendment or withdrawal thereof.  
45G. Other modes of recovery.  
45H. Application of certain provisions  of the Income -tax Act.  
45-I. Definitions.  
CHAPTER V  
BENEFITS  
46. Benefits.  
47. [Omitted .] 
48. [Omitted .] 
49. Sickness benefit . 
50. Maternity benefit.  
51. Disablement benefit.  
51A. Presumption as to accident arising in course of employment.  
51B. Accidents happening while acting in breach of regulations, etc.  
51C. Accidents happening while travelling i n employer ’s transport.  
51D. Accidents happening while meeting emergency . 
51E. Accidents happening while commuting to the place of work and vice versa . 
52. Dependant ’s benefit.  
52A. Occupational disease . 
53. Bar against receiving or recovery of compensation or damages under any other law.  
54. Determination of question of disablement.  
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 3]
3 
 SECTIONS  
54A. References to medical boards and appeals to medical appeal tribunals and Employees ’ Insurance 
Courts.  
55. Review of decisions by medical board or medical appeal tribunal.  
55A. Review of dependant ’s benefit.  
56. Medical benefit.  
57. Scale of medical benefit;  
58. Provision of medical treatment by State Government.  
59. Establishment and maintenance of hospitals, etc., by Corporation.  
59A. Provision of medical benefit by the Corporation in lieu  of State Government.  
59B. Medical and para -medical education.  
General  
60. Benefit not assignable or attachable.  
61. Bar of benefits under other enactments.  
62. Persons not to commute cash benefits.  
63. Persons not entitled to receive benefit in certain cases.  
64. Recipients of sickness or disablement benefit to observe conditions.  
65. Benefits not to be combined.  
66. [Omitted .] 
67.  [Omitted .] 
68. Corporation ’s rights where a principal employer fails or neglects to pay any                 
contribution.  
69. Liability of owner or occupier of factories, etc., for excessive sickness benefit.  
70. Repayment of benefit improperly received.  
71. Benefit payable up to and including day of death . 
72. Employer not to reduce wages, etc.  
73. Employer not to dismiss or punish employee during period of sickness, etc.  
CHAPT ER VA  
SCHEME FOR OTHER BENEFICIARIES  
73A. Definitions . 
73B. Power to frame Scheme . 
73C. Collection of user charges . 
73D. Scheme for other beneficiaries . 
73E. Power to amend Scheme . 
73F. Laying of Scheme framed under this Chapter . 
CHAPTER VI  
ADJUDICATION OF DISPUTE AND  CLAIMS  
74. Constitution of Employees ’ Insurance Court.  
75. Matters to be decided by Employees ’ Insurance Court.  
76. Institution of proceedings, etc.  
77. Commencement of proceedings.  
78. Powers of Employees ’ Insurance Court.  
79. Appearance by legal practitioners, etc . 
80. [Omitted .] 
81. Reference to High Court.  
82. Appear.  
83. Stay of payment pendin
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 3]
ers, etc . 
80. [Omitted .] 
81. Reference to High Court.  
82. Appear.  
83. Stay of payment pending appeal.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 4]
4 
 CHAPTER VII  
PENALTIES  
SECTIONS  
84. Punishment for false statement.  
85. Punishment for failure to pay contributions, etc.  
85A. Enhanced punishment in certain cases after  previous conviction.  
85B. Power to recover damages . 
85C. Power of Court to make orders.  
86. Prosecutions.  
86A. Offences by companies.  
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
87. Exemption of a factory or establishment or class of factories or establishments.  
88. Exemption of pers ons or class of persons.  
89. Corporation to make representation.  
90. Exemption of factories or establishments belonging to Government or any local  authority.  
91. Exemption from one or more provisions of the Act.  
91A. Exemptions to be either prospective or retrospecti ve. 
91AA. Central Government to be appropriate Government . 
91B. Misuse of benefits.  
91C. Writing off of losses.  
92. Power of Central Government to give directions.  
93. Corporation officers and servants to be public servants.  
93A. Liability in case of transfer of e stablishment . 
94. Contributions, etc., due to Corporation to have priority over other debts.  
94A. Delegation of powers.  
95. Power of Central Government to make rules . 
96. Power of State Government to make rules.  
97. Power of Corporation to make regulations.  
98. [Omitted .] 
99. Medical care for the families of insured persons.  
99A. Power to remove difficulties.  
100. Repeals and savings.  
[THE FIRST SCHEDULE ] OMITTED . 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.  
THE THIRD SCHEDULE.   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 5]
5 
 THE EMPLO YEES ’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948  
ACT NO. 34 OF 19481 
[19th April , 1948.]  
An Act to provide for certain benefits to employees in case of sickness, maternity and 
employment injury and to make provision for certain other matters in relation thereto.  
WHEREAS  it is expedient to provide for certain benefits to employees in case of sickness, maternity 
and employment injury and to make provision for certain oth er matters in relation thereto;  
It is hereby enacted as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application .—(1) This Act may be called the Employ ees’ 
State Insurance Act, 1948.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India 2***. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date or dates3  as the Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette,  appoint, and different dates  may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and 
4[for different States o r for different parts thereof].  
(4) It shall apply, in the first instance, to all factories (including factories belonging to the 
Government)  other than seasonal factories:  
5[Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall apply to a factory or establishment 
belonging to or under the control of the Government whose employees are otherwise in receipt of benefits 
substant ially similar or superior to the ben efits provided under this Act.]  
(5) The appropriate Government may, in consultation with the Corporation and 6[where the 
appropriate Government is a State Government, with the approval of the Central Government], after 
giving 7[one month ’s] notice of its intention of so doing by notification in the Official Gazette, extend the 
provisions of this Act or any of them, to any other establishment or class of establishments, industrial, 
commercial, agricultural or otherwise:  
8[Provided that where the provisions of this Act have been brought into force in any part of a State, 
the said provisions shall stand extended to 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 5]
t have been brought into force in any part of a State, 
the said provisions shall stand extended to any such establishment or class of establishments within that 
part if the provisions have already been extended  to similar establishment or class of establishment s in 
another part of that State ].  
5[(6) A factory or an establishment to which this Act applies shall continue to be governed by this Act 
notwithstanding that the number of persons employed therein at any  time falls below the limit specified 
by or under this Act or the manufacturing process therein ceases to be car ried on with the aid of power.]  
                                                           
1. This Act has been extended to Jaunsar Bawar Parganas in the Dehra Dun District and the areas of South of Kaimpur range in 
the Mirzapur District of the State of Uttar Pradesh by Schedule IV of Act 20 of 1954; to Pondicherry by Reg. 7 of  1963, s. 3 
and Schedule and to Goa, Daman and Diu by Reg. 11 of 1963, s.3 and the Schedule  (w.e.f. 1 -8-1965) . 
2. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 51 of 1970, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 1 -9-1971).  
3. For dates see Annexur e. 
4. Subs. by Act 53 of 1951, s . 2, for “for different States ” (w.e.f. 6 -10-1951).  
5. Ins. by Act 29 of 1989, s. 2  (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
6. Subs. by Act 53 of 1951, s. 2, for “with the approval of the Central Government”  (w.e.f. 6 -10-1951).  
7. Subs. by Act  18 of 2010,  s. 2, for “six month ’s ” (w.e.f. 1-6-2010).  
8. Ins. by Act 29 of 1989, s. 2  (w.e.f. 16 -5-1990).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 6]
6 
 2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in  the subject or context, — 
(1) “appropriate Government ” means, in respect of establishments under the control of the 
Central Government or 1[a railway administration] or a major port or a mine or oilfield, the Central 
Government, and in all other cases, t he State Government;  
2*   *    *             *    * 
(3) “confinement ” means labour resulting  in the issue of a living child  or labour after twenty -six 
weeks of pregnancy resulting in the issue of  a child whether alive or dead;  
(4) “contribution ” means the sum of money payable to the Corporation by the principal employer 
in respect of an employee and includes any amount payable by or on behalf of the employee in 
accordance with the pro visions of this Act;  
3*   *   *   *  * 
(6) “Corporation ” means the Employees ’ State Insurance Corporation set up under this Act;  
4[(6A) “dependant ” means any of the following relatives of a de ceased insured person, namely: — 
5[(i) a widow, a legitimate or adopted son who has not attained the age of twenty -five 
years, an unmarried legitimate or adopted daughter,]  
6[(ia) a widowed , mother;]  
(ii) if wholly dependent on the earnings of the insured person at the time of his death, a 
legitimate or adopted son or daughter who has attained the age o f 7[twenty -five years ] and 
is infirm;  
(iii) if wholly or in part dependent on the earnings of the insured per son at the time of 
his death, — 
(a) a pare nt other than a widowed mother,  
(b) a minor illegitimate son, an unmarried illegitimate daughter or a daughter 
legitimate or ad opted or illegitimate if married and a m inor or if widowed and a 
minor,  
(c) a minor brother or an unmarried sister or a widowed sister if a minor,  
(d) a widowed daughter -in-law, 
(e) a min or child of a pre -deceased son,  
(f) a minor child of a pre -deceased daughter where no pa rent of the child is 
alive, or  
(g) a paternal grand -parent if no 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 6]
-deceased daughter where no pa rent of the child is 
alive, or  
(g) a paternal grand -parent if no parent o f the insured person is alive;]  
(7) “duly appointed ” means appointed in accordance with the provisions of this Act or with the 
rules or regulations made thereunder;  
8[(8) “employment injury ” means a personal injury to an employee caused by accident or an 
occupational disease arising out of and in the cours e of his employment, being an insurable 
                                                           
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “a federal railway”.  
2. Omitted by Act 29 of 1989, s. 3 (w.e.f. 16 -5-1990).  
3. Omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 16-5-1990). 
4. Ins. by Act 44 of 1966, s. 2 (w.e.f. 28 -1-1968).  
5. Subs. by Act 18 of 2010, s. 3, for sub -clause ( i) ((w.e.f. 1-6-2010).   
6. Ins. by Act 29 of 1989, s. 3  (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
7. Subs. by Act 18 of 2010, s. 3, for “eighteen years” (w.e.f. 1 -6-2010). 
8. Subs. by Act 44 of 1966, s. 2, for clause ( 8) (w.e.f. 28 -1-1968).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 7]
7 
 employment, whether the accident occurs or the occupational disease is contracted within or outside 
the territorial limits of India;]  
(9) “employee ” means any person employed for wages in or in connection with the wo rk of a 
factory or establishment to which this Act applies and — 
(i) who is directly employed by the principal employer on any work of, or incidental or 
preliminary to or connected with the work of, the factory or establishment, whether such work is 
done by  the employee in the factory or establishment or elsewhere; or  
(ii) who is employed by or through an immediate employer on the premises of t he factory or 
establishment or under the supervision of the principal employer or his agent on work which is 
ordina rily part of the work of the factory or establishment or which is preliminary to the work 
carried on in or incidental to the purpose of the factory or establishment; or  
(iii) whose services are temporarily lent or let on hire to the principal employer by t he person 
with whom the person whose services are so lent or let on hire has entered into a contract of 
service;  
1[and includes any person employed for wages on any work connected with the administration of the 
factory or establishment or any part, department or branch thereof or with the purchase of raw materials 
for, or the distribution or sale of the products of, the factory or establishment  2[or any person engaged as 
an apprentice, not being an apprentice engaged under the Apprentices Act, 1961 ( 52 of 1961), or 3[and 
includes such person  engaged as apprentice whose training period is extended to any length of time ] but 
does not include] — 
(a) any member of 4[the Indian] naval, military or air forces; or  
5[(b) any person so employed whose wages (excluding remuneration for overtime work) 
exceed 6[such wages as may be prescri bed by the Central Government]:  
Provided that an employee whose wages (excluding remuneration for overtime work) exceed 6[such 
wages 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 7]
ovided that an employee whose wages (excluding remuneration for overtime work) exceed 6[such 
wages as may  be prescribed by the Central Government] at any time after (and not before) the beginning 
of the contribution period, shall continue to be an employee  until the end of that period;]  
(10) “exempted employee ” means an employee who is not liable under this A ct to pay the 
employee ’s contribution;  
7[(11) “family ” means all or any of the following relatives of an insured person, namely: — 
(i) a spouse;  
(ii) a minor legitimate or adopted child dependent upon the insured person;  
(iii) a child who is wholly dependent on the earnings of the insured person and who is — 
(a) receiving education, till he or she attai ns the age of twenty -one years,  
(b) an unmarried daughter;  
(iv) a child who is infirm by reason of any physical or mental abnormality or injury and is 
wholly dependent on the earnings of the insured person, so long as the infirmity continues;  
8[(v) dependant parents, whose income from all sources does not exceed such income as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 44 of 1966, s. 2, for “but does not include” (w.e.f. 28 -1-1968).  
2. Subs. by Act 29 of 1989, s. 3 , for “but does not include ” (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
3. Subs. by Act 18 of 2010, s. 3, for “or under the standing orders of the establishment;” (w.e.f. 1 -6-2010).  
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “His Majesty ’s”. 
5. Subs. by Act 44 of 1966, s . 2, for sub -clause ( b) (w.e.f. 28 -1-1968).  
6. Subs. by Act 29 of 1989, s. 3 , for “one thousand and six hundred rupees a month ” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1991).  
7. Subs. by s. 3 , ibid., for clauses ( 11) and ( 12) (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
8. Subs. by Act 18 of 2010, s. 3, for sub -clause ( v) (w.e.f. 1 -6-2010).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 8]
8 
 (vi) in case the insured person is unmarried and his or her parents are not alive, a minor 
brother or sister wholly dependant upon the earnings of the insured person;]  
1[(12) “factory ” means any premises including the precincts thereof whereon ten or more persons 
are employed or were employed on any day of the preceding twelve months, and in any part of which 
a manufacturing process is being carried on or is ordinarily so carried on, bu t does not include a mine 
subject to the operation of the Mines Act, 1952  (35 of 1952) or a railway running shed; ] 
(13) “immediate employer ”, in relation to employees employed by or through him, means a 
person who has undertaken the execution, on the premi ses of a factory or an establishment to which 
this Act applies or under the supervision of the principal employer or his agent, of the whole , or any 
part of any work which is ordinarily part of the work of the factory or establishment of the principal 
employer or is preliminary to the work carried on in, or incidental to the purpose of, any such factory 
or establishment, and includes a person b y whom the services of an employee who has entered into a 
contract of service with him are temporarily lent or let on hire to the principal employer;  2[and 
includes a contractor];  
3[(13A) “insurable employment ” means an employment in a factory or establis hment to which 
this Act applies;]  
(14) “insured person ” means a person who is or was an employee in respect of whom 
contributions are or were pa yable under this Act and who is  by reason thereof, entitled to any of the 
benefits provided by this Act;  
3[(14A) “managing agent ” means any person appointed or acting as the representative of another 
person for the purpose of carrying on such other person ’s trade or business, but does not include an 
individual manager subordinate to an employer;  
4[(14AA ) “manufacturing process ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in the Fac tories Act, 
1948 (63 of 1948
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 8]
nufacturing process ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in the Fac tories Act, 
1948 (63 of 1948);]  
(14B) “mis-carriage ” means expulsion of the contents of a pregnant uterus at any perio d prior to 
or during the twenty -sixth week of pregnancy but does no t include any miscarriage, the causing of 
which is punishable under the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860);]  
(15) “occupier ” of the factory shall have the meaning assigned to it in the Factories Act, 5[1948          
(63 of 1948)];  
3[(15A) “permanent partial disablement ” means such disablement of a permanent nature, as 
reduces the earning capacity of an employee in every employment which he was capable of 
undertaking at the time of the accident resulting in the disablement:  
Provided that every injury specified in Part II of the Second Schedule shall be deemed to result in 
permanent partial disablement;  
(15B) “permanent total disablement ” means such disablement of a permanent nature as 
incapacitates an employee for all work w hich he was capable of performing at the time of the accident 
resulting in such disablement:  
Provided that permanent total disablement shall be deemed to result from every injury specified 
in Part I of the Second Schedule or from any combination of injuri es specified in Part II thereof where 
the aggregate percentage of the loss of earning capacity, as specified in the said Part II against those 
injuries, amounts to one hundred per cent. or more;]  
4[(15C) “power ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in th e Factories Act, 1948  (53 of 1948);]  
(16) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act ; 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 2010, s. 3, for clause ( 12) (w.e.f. 1 -6-2010).  
2. Ins. by Act 29 of 1989 s. 3  (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
3. Ins. by Act 44 of 1966, s . 2 (w.e.f. 28 -1-1968) . 
4. Ins. by Act 29 of 1989, s. 3 (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
5. Subs. by Act 53 of 1951, s. 3, for “1934 ” (w.e.f. 6 -10
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 8]
29 of 1989, s. 3 (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
5. Subs. by Act 53 of 1951, s. 3, for “1934 ” (w.e.f. 6 -10-1951).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 9]
9 
 (17) “principal employer ” means — 
(i) in a factory, the owner or occupier of the factory and includes the managing agent of such 
owner or occupier, the legal representative of a deceased owner or occupier, and where a person 
has been named as the manager of the factory under 1[the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948)], the 
person so named;  
(ii) in any establishment under the control of any department of any Government in India, the 
authority appointed by such Government in this behalf or where no authority is so appoint ed, the 
head of the departm ent; 
(iii) in any other establishment, any person responsible for the supervision and control of th e 
establishment;  
(18) “regulation ” means a regu lation made by the Corporation;  
(19) “Schedule ” means a Schedule to this Act;  
2[(19A) “seasonal factory ” means a factory which is exclusively engaged in one or more of the 
following manufacturing processes, namely, cotton ginning, cotton or jute pressing, decortication of 
groundnuts, the manufacture of coffee, indigo, lac, rubber, sugar (including gur) or te a or any 
manufacturing process which is incidental to or connected with any of the aforesaid processes and 
includes a factory which is engaged for a period not exc eeding seven months in a year — 
(a) in any process of blending, packing or repacking of tea or  coffee; or  
(b) in such other manufacturing process as the Central Government may, by notification in t he 
Official Gazette, specify;]  
(20) “sickness ” means a condition which requires medical treatment and attendance and necessitates 
abstentio n from work o n medical grounds;  
(21) “temporary disablement ” means a condition resulting from an employment injury which requires 
medical treatment and renders an employee, as a result of such injury, temporarily incapable of 3[doing 
the work which he was doing prior to or at the time of the injury];  
(22) “wages ” means all remuneration paid or payable, in cash to an employee, if the terms o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 9]
ury];  
(22) “wages ” means all remuneration paid or payable, in cash to an employee, if the terms of the 
contract of employment, express or implied, were fulfilled and includes 4[any payment to an employee in 
respect of any period  of authorised leave, lock -out, strike which is not illegal or lay -off and] other 
additional remuneration, if any, 5[paid at intervals not exceeding two months], but does not include — 
(a) any contribution paid by the employer to any pension fund or provident fund, or under 
this Act;  
(b) any travelling allowance or the valu e of any travelling concession;  
(c) any sum paid to the person employed to defray special expenses entailed on him by  the 
nature of his employment; or  
(d) any gratuity payable on discharge;  
6[(23) “wage period ” in relation to an employee means the period in respect of which wages are 
ordinarily payable to him whether in terms of the contract of employment, express or implied or 
otherwise;]  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act  53 of 1951, s . 3, for “clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) of section 9 of the Factories Act, 1934 ” (w.e.f. 6 -10-1951).  
2. Ins. by Act 29 of 1989, s. 3 (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
3. Subs. by Act 44 of 1966, s. 2, for “work” (w.e.f. 28 -1-1968).  
4. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -1-1968).  
5. Subs. by Act 53 of 1951, s. 3, for “paid at regular intervals after the last day of the wage period” (w.e.f. 6 -10-1951).  
6. Subs. by Act 45 of 1984, s . 2, for clause ( 23) (w.e.f. 27 -1-1985).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 10]
10 
 1[(24) all other words and expressions used but not defined in this Ac t and defined in the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), shall have the meanings  respectively assigned to them in 
that Act.]  
2[2A. Registration of factories and establishments. —Every factory or establishment to which this 
Act applies shall be registered within such time and in such manner as may be specified in the regulations 
made in this behalf.]  
CHAPTER II  
CORPORATION , STANDING  COMMITTEE AND MEDICAL  BENEFIT  COUNCIL  
3. Establi shment of Employees ’ State Insurance Corporation .—(1) With effect from such date as 
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be 
established for the administration of the scheme of Employees ’ State Insurance in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act a Corporation to be known as the Employee s’ State Insurance Corporation.  
(2) The Corporation shall be a body corporate by the name of Employees ’ State Insurance 
Corporation having perpetual succession and a common seal and shall by the said name sue and be sued.  
4. Constitution of Corporation. —The Corporation shall consist of  the following members, 
namely: — 
3[(a) a Chairman to be 4[appoin ted] by the Central Government;  
(b) a Vice -Chairman to be 4[appoint ed] by the Central Government;]  
(c) not more than five persons to be 4[appointed] by the Central Government  5***; 
(d) one person each representing each of the 6[ 7[States] in which this Act is in force] to be 
4[appointed] by the State Government  concerned;  
(e) one person to be 4[appointed] by the Central Government to represent the 8[Union territorie s]; 
(f) 9[ten] persons representing employers to be 4[appointed] by  the Central Government in 
consultation with such organisations of employers as may be recognised for the pur pose by the 
Central Government;  
(g) 9[ten] persons representing employees to be 4[appointed] by the Central Government in 

<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 10]
nment;  
(g) 9[ten] persons representing employees to be 4[appointed] by the Central Government in 
consultation with such or ganisations of employees as may be recognised for the pur pose by the 
Central Government;  
(h) two persons representing the medical profession to be 4[appointed] by the Central 
Government in consultation with such organisations of medical practitioners as ma y be recognised for 
the purpose by the Central Government; 10***  
11[(i) three members of Parliament of whom two shall be members of the House of the People 
(Lok Sabha) and one shall be a member of the Council of States (Rajya Sabha) elected respectively 
by the members of the House of the People and the member s of the Council of States; and  
(j) the Director General of the Corporation, ex officio .]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 44 of 1966, s. 2, for clause (24) (w.e.f. 28 -1-1968).  
2. Ins. by  s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -1-1968).  
3. Subs. by s . 4, ibid., for clauses ( a) and ( b) (w.e.f. 17 -6-1967).  
4. Subs. by Act 29 of 1989, s . 4, for “nominated ” (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
5. The words “of whom at least three shall be  officials of the Central Government ” omitted by Act 44 of 1966, s . 4               
(w.e.f. 17 -6-1967).  
6. Subs. by Act 53 of 1951, s. 4, for “Part A States” (w.e.f. 6 -10-1951).  
7. Subs. by the A.O. (No. 3) 1956, for “Part A States and B States ”. 
8. Subs., ibid.,  for “Part C States ”. 
9. Subs. by Act 29 of 1989, s . 5, for “five” (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
10. The word “and” omitted by Act 44 of 1966, s . 4 (w.e.f. 17 -6-1967).  
11. Subs. by s . 4, ibid., for clause ( i) (w.e.f. 17 -6-1967).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 11]
11 
 5. Term of office of members of the Corporation. —(1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in 
this Act, the term of office of members of the Corporation, other than 1[the members referred to in clauses 
(a), (b), (c), (d) and ( e) of section 4 and the ex officio member,] shall be four years commencing from th e 
date on which their 2[appoin tment] or election is notified:  
Provided that a member of the Corporation shall, notwithstanding the expiry of the said period of four 
years, continue to hold office until the 2[appointment] or election of his successor is notified.  
(2) The members of the Corporation referred to in clauses 3[(a), (b), (c), (d) and ( e)] of section 4 shall 
hold office during the pleasure of the Government 4[appointing] them . 
6. Eligibility for  re-appointment or re -election. —An outgoing member of the Corporation, the 
Standing Committee, or the Medical Benefit Council shall be eligible for 5[re-appointment] or re -election 
as the case may be.  
6[7. Authentica tion of orders, decisions, etc. —All orders and decisions of the Corporation shall be 
authenticated by the signature of the Director General of the Corporation and all other instruments issued 
by the Corporation shall be authenticated by the signature of the Director General or such other  officer of 
the Corporation as may be authorised by him.]  
8. Constitution of Standing Committee .—A Standing Committee of the Corporation shall be 
constituted from am ong its members, consisting of — 
(a) a Chairman, 7[appoin ted] by the Central Government;  
(b) three members of the Corporation, 8[ 7[appointed] by the Central Government];  
9[(bb) three members of the Corporation representing such three State Governments thereon as 
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazet te, specify from time to time;]  
(c) 10[eight] members elected b y the Corporation as follows: — 
11*    *   *    *    * 
(ii) 12[three] members from among the members of the Corp oration 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 11]
llows: — 
11*    *   *    *    * 
(ii) 12[three] members from among the members of the Corp oration representing employers;  
(iii) 12[three] members from among the members of the Corp oration representing employees;  
(iv) one member from among the members of the Corporation represent ing the medical 
profession; and  
(v) one member from among the members of the Corporation elected by 13[Parliament];  
14[(d) the Director General of the Corporation, ex officio .]  
9. Term of office of members of Standing Committee .—(1) Save as otherwise expressly provided 
in this Act, the term of office of a member of the Standing Committee, other than a member referred to in 
clause ( a) or 15[clause ( b) or clause ( bb)] of  section 8, shall be two years from the date on which his 
election is notified:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 44 of 1966, s. 5, for certain words (w.e.f. 17 -6-1967).  
2. Subs. by Act 29 of 1989, s. 4, for “nomination” (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
3. Subs. by Act 44 of 1966, s. 5, for “( c), (d) and ( e)” (w.e.f. 17 -6-1967).  
4. Subs. by Act 29 of 1989, s. 4, for “nominating” (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
5. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “renomination” (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
6. Subs. by Act 44 of 1966, s. 6, for section 7 (w.e.f. 17 -6-1967).  
7. Subs. by Act 29 of 1989, s. 4, for “nominated” (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
8. Subs. by Act 44 of 1966, s. 7, for certain words (w.e.f. 17 -6-1967).  
9. Ins. by Act 53 of 1951, s. 5 (w.e.f. 6 -10-1951).  
10. Subs. by Act 44 of 1966, s. 7, for “six” (w.e.f. 17 -6-1967).  
11. Omitted by Act 53 of 1951, s. 5 (w.e.f. 6 -10-1951)  
12. Subs. by Act 44 of 1966, s. 7, for “two ”  (w.e.f. 17 -6-1967).  
13. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “the Central Legislature”.  
14. Ins. by Act 44 of 1966, s. 7 (w.e.f. 17 -6-1967).  
15. Subs. by Act 53 of 1951, s. 6, for “clause ( b)” (w.e.f. 6 -10-1951).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 11]
1).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 12]
12 
 Provided that a member of the Standing Committee shall, notwithstanding the expiry of the said 
period of two years, continue to hold office until the election of his successor is notified:  
Provided further that a member of the Standing Committee shall cease to hold office when he ceases 
to be a member of the Corporation.  
(2) A member of the Standing Committee referred to in clause ( a) or 1[clause ( b) or clause ( bb)] of 
section 8 shall hold office during the pleasure of the Central Government.  
10. Medical Benefit Council .—(1) The Central Government shall constitute a Medical  Benefit 
Council consisting of — 
2[(a) the Director General, the Employees ’ State Insurance C orporation, ex officio  as Chairman ;  
(b) a Director  General, Health Services,  ex officio , as Co-Chairman ;]  
(c) the Medical Commissioner of the Corporation, ex officio ;  
(d) one member each representing each of the 3[ 4[States (other than Union territories)] in which 
this Act is in force] to be 5[appointed] by the State Government concerned;  
(e) three members representing employers to be 5[appointed] by the Central Government in 
consultation with such organisations of e mployers as may be recognised for the purpose by the 
Central Government;  
(f) three members representing employees to be 5[appointed] by the Central Government in 
consultation with such organisations of employees as may be recognised for the purpose by the  
Central Government; and  
(g) three members, of whom not less than one shall be a woman, representing the medical 
profession, to be 5[appointed] by the Central Government in consultation with such organisations  of 
medical practitioners as may be recognise d for the purpose by the Central Government.  
(2) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the term of office of a member of the Medical 
Benefit Council, other than a member referred to in any of the clauses ( a) to ( d) of sub-section ( 1), shall 
be four years from the date on whi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 12]
to in any of the clauses ( a) to ( d) of sub-section ( 1), shall 
be four years from the date on which his 6[appointment] is notified:  
7[Provided that a member of the Medical Benefit Council shall, notwithstanding the expiry of the said 
period of four years continue to hold office until the  6[appointment] of hi s successor is notified.]  
(3) A member of the Medical Benefit Council referred to in clauses ( b) and ( d) of sub -section ( 1) 
shall hold office during the pleasure of the Government 8[appointing] him.  
11. Resignation of membership .—A member of the Corporation, the Standing Committee or the 
Medical Benefit Council may resign his office by notice in writing to the Central Government and his seat 
shall fall vacant on the acceptance of the resignation by that Government.  
12. Cessation o f membership. —9[(1)] A member of the Corporation, the Standing Committee or the 
Medical Benefit Council shall cease to be a member of that body if he fails to attend thre e consecutive 
meetings thereof:  
Provided that the Corporation, the Standing Committee or the Medical Benefit Council, as the case 
may be, may, subject to rules made by the Central Government in this behalf, restore him to membership.  
10[(2) Where in the opinion of the Central Government any person 5[appointed] or elected to represent 
employe rs, employees or the medical profession on the Corporation, the Standing Committee or the 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 53 of 1951, s. 6, for “clause ( b)” (w.e.f. 6 -10-1951).  
2. Subs. by Act 18 of 2010, s. 4, for sub -clause s (a) and ( b) (w.e.f. 1 -6-2010).  
3. Subs. by Act 53 of 1951, s. 7, for “Part A States” (w.e.f. 6 -10-1951).  
4. Subs. by the A.O. (No. 3) 1956, for “Part A States or Part B States”.  
5. Subs. by Act 29 of 1989, s. 4, for “nominated” (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
6. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “nomination” (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
7. Added by Act 44 of 1966, s . 8 (w.e.f. 17 -6-1967).
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 12]
id., for “nomination” (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
7. Added by Act 44 of 1966, s . 8 (w.e.f. 17 -6-1967).  
8. Subs. by Act 29 of 1989, s. 4, for “nominating” (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
9. Section 12 re -numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 53 of 1951, s . 8 (w.e.f. 6 -10-1951).  
10. Ins. by s . 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 6 -10-1951).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 13]
13 
 Medical Benefit Council, as the case may be, has ceased to represent such employers, employees or the 
medical profession, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that with 
effect from such date as may be specified therein such person shall cease to be a member of the 
Corporation, the Standing Committee or the Medical Benefit Council, as the case may be.]  
1[(3) A person referred to in clause ( i) of section 4 shall cease to be a member on becoming a Minister 
or Speaker or Deputy Speaker of the House of the People or Deputy Chairman of the Council of States or 
when he ceases to be a member of Parliament.]  
13. Disqualification .—A person  shall be disqualified for being chosen as or for being a member of 
the Corporation, the Standing Committee or the Medical Benefit Council — 
(a) if he is declared to be of unsound mind by a competent Court; or  
(b) if he is an undischarged insolvent; or  
(c) if he has directly or indirectly by himself or by his partner any interest in a subsisting contract 
with, or any work being done for, the Corporation except as a medical practitioner or as a shareholder 
(not being a Director) of a company; or  
(d) if bef ore or after the commencement of this Act, he has been convicted of an offence 
involving moral turpitude.  
14. Filling of vacancies. —(1) Vacancies in the office of 2[appointed] or elected members of the 
Corporation, the Standing Committee and the Medical Benefit Council shall be filled by 3[appointment] 
or election, as the case may be.  
(2) A member of the Corporation, the Standing Committee or the Medical Benefit Coun cil 
2[appointed] or elected to fill a casual vacancy shall hold office only so long as the member in whose 
place he is 2[appointed] or elected would have been entitled to hold office if the vacancy had not 
occurred.  
15. Fees and allowances .—Members of the Corporation, the Standing Committee and the Medical 
Benefit Council shall receive such fees a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 13]
f the Corporation, the Standing Committee and the Medical 
Benefit Council shall receive such fees and allowances as may from time to time be prescribed by the 
Central Government.  
16. Principal Officers .—4[(1) The Central Government may, in  consul tation with the Corporation, 
appoint a Director General  and a Financial Commissioner.]  
(2) The Director General shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the Corporation.  
(3) 5[The Director General and the Financial Commissioner] shall be whole -time officers  of the 
Corporation and shall not undertake any work unconnected with their office without the sanction of the 
Central Government  6[and of the Corporation].  
(4) 5[The Director General or the Financial Commissioner] shall hold office for such period, not 
exceeding five years, as may be specified in the order appointing him. An outgoing  5[the Director General 
or Financial Commissioner] shall be eligible for reappointment if he is otherwise qualified.  
(5) 5[The Director General or the Financial Commissioner] shall receive such salary and allowances 
as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(6) A person shall be disqualified from being appointed as or for being  5[the Director General or the 
Financial Commissioner] if he is subject to any of the disqualifications specified in section 13.  
(7) The Central Government may at any time remove  5[the Director General or the Financial 
Commissioner] from office and shall do so if such removal is recommended by a resolution of the 
Corporation passed at a special meeting called for the purpose and supported by the votes of not le ss than 
two-thirds of the total strength of the Corporation.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 2010, s. 5, for “sub -section ( 3)” (w.e.f. 1 -6-2010).  
2. Subs. by Act 29 of 1989, s. 4, for “nominated” (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “nomination” (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
4. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for sub 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 13]

3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “nomination” (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
4. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
5. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “The Principal Officers” (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
6. Ins. by Act 44 of 1966, s. 10 (w.e.f. 17 -6-1967).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 14]
14 
 17. Staff. —(1) The Corporation may employ such other staff of officers and servants as may be 
necessary for the efficient transaction of its business provided that the sanction of the Central Government 
shall be obtained for the creation of any post 1[the maximum month ly salary of which 2[exceeds such 
salary as may be prescribed by the Central Government ].]  
3[(2) (a) The method of recruitment, salary and allowances, discipline and other conditions of service 
of the members of the staff of the Corporation shall be such as may be specified in the regulations made 
by the Corporation in accordance with the rules and orders applicable to the officers and employees of the 
Central Government drawi ng corresponding scales of pay:  
Provided that where the Corporation is of the opi nion that it is necessary to make a departure from the 
said rules or orders in respect of any of the matters aforesaid, it shall obtain the prior appr oval of the 
Central Government:  
4[Provided further that this sub -section shall not apply to appointment of  consultants and specialists in 
various fie lds appointed on contract basis .] 
(b) In determining the corresponding scales of pay of the members of the staff under clause ( a), the 
Corporation shall have regard to the educational qualifications, method of recruitment, duties and 
responsibilities of such officers and employees under the Central Government and in case of any doubt, 
the Corporation shall refer the matter to the C entral Government whose decision thereon shall be final.]  
(3) Every appointment to 5[posts 6[(other than medical posts)] corresponding to 7[Group A and Group 
B] posts under the Central Government] shall be made in consultation with the 8[Union] Public Service 
Commission:  
Provided that this sub -section shall not apply to an officiating or temporary appointment for 9[a 
period] not exceeding one year:  
10[Provided further that any such officiating or temporary appointment shall not confer a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 14]
ne year:  
10[Provided further that any such officiating or temporary appointment shall not confer any claim for 
regular appointment and the services rendered in that capacity shall not count towards seniority or 
minimum qualifying service specified in the regulations for promotion to next higher grade.]  
11[(4) If any question arises whether a post corresponds to a 7[Group A and Group B] post under the 
Central Government, the question shall be referred to that Government whose decision thereon shall be 
final.]  
18. Powers of the Standing Committee. —(1) Subject to the general superintendence and control of 
the Corporation,  the Standing Committee shall administer the affairs of the Corporation and may exercise 
any of the powers and perform any of th e functions of the Corporation.  
(2) The Standing Committee shall submit for the consideration and decision of the Corporation all 
such cases and matters as may be specified in the regulations made in this behalf.  
(3) The Standing Committee may, in its discretion, submit any other case or matter for the decision of 
the Corporation.  
19. Corporation ’s power to promote measures for health, etc., of insured persons .—The 
Corporation may, in addition to the scheme of benefits specified in this Act, promote measures for the 
improvement of the hea lth and welfare of insured persons and for the rehabilitation and re -employment of 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 1975, s . 3, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -9-1975).  
2. Subs . by Act 29 of 1989, s. 7, for “exceeds two thousand and two hundred fifty rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1991).  
3. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for sub -section (2) (w.e.f. 8 -11-1989).  
4.  Ins. by Act 18 of 2010, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1 -6-2010).  
5. Subs. by Act 44 of 1966, s. 11, for certain words (w.e.f. 17 -6-1967).  
6. Ins. by Act 29 of 1989, s. 7 (w.e.f. 16 -5-1990).  
7. Subs. by Act 45 of 1984, s. 3, for “ Class I or Class  II” (w.e.f. 27 -1-1985).  
8
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 14]
6 -5-1990).  
7. Subs. by Act 45 of 1984, s. 3, for “ Class I or Class  II” (w.e.f. 27 -1-1985).  
8. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “Federal”.  
9. Subs. by Act 29 of 1989, s. 7, for “an aggregate period” (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
10. Ins. by  s. 7, ibid. ( (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989)  
11. Ins. by Act 44 of 1966, s. 11 (w.e.f. 17 -6-1967).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 15]
15 
 insured persons who have been disabled or injured and may incur in respect of such measures expenditure 
from the funds of the Corporation within such limits as may be prescr ibed by the Central Government.  
20. Meetings of Corporation, Standing Committee and Medical Benefit Council .—Subject to any 
rules made under this Act, the Corporation, the Standing Committee and the Medical Benefit Council 
shall meet at such times and pla ces and shall observe such rules or procedure in regard to transaction of 
business at their meetings as may be specified in the r egulations made in this behalf.  
21. Supersession of the Corporation, and Standing Committee .—(1) If in the opinion of the 
Centr al Government, the Corporation or the Standing Committee persistently makes default in performing 
the duties imposed on it by or under this Act or abuses its powers, that Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, supersede the Corporation, o r in the case of the Standing Committee, supersede, in 
consultation with the Corpo ration, the Standing Committee:  
Provided that before issuing a notification under thi s sub -section the Central Government shall give a 
reasonable opportunity to the Corporati on or the Standing Committee, as the case may be, to show cause 
why it should not be superseded and shall consider the explanations and objections, if any, of the 
Corporation or the Standing  Committee, as the case may be.  
(2) Upon the publication of a noti fication under sub -section ( 1) superseding the Corporation or the 
Standing Committee, all the members of the Corporation or the Standing Committee, as the case may be, 
shall, as from the date of such publication, be deemed  to have vacated their offices.  
(3) When the Standing Committee has been superseded, a new Standing Committee shall be 
immediately constitute d in accordance with section 8.  
(4) When the Corporation has been supersede d, the Central Government may — 
(a) immediately 1[appoint] o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 15]
hen the Corporation has been supersede d, the Central Government may — 
(a) immediately 1[appoint] or cause to be 2[appointed] new members to the Corporation in 
accordance with section 4 and may constitute a new Stan ding Committee under section 8;  
(b) in its discretion, appoint such agency, for such period as it may think fit, to exercise the 
powers and perform the fun ctions of the Corporation and such agency shall be competent to exercise 
all the powers and perform all the  functions of the Corporation.  
(5) The Central Government shall cause a full report of any action taken under this section and the 
circumstances lead ing to such action to be laid before 3[Parliament] at the earliest opportunity and in any 
case not later than three months from the date of the notification superseding the Corporation or the 
Standing Committee, as the case may be.  
22. Duties of Medical B enefit Council .—The Medical Benefit Council shall — 
(a) advise 4[the Corporation and the Standing Committee] on matters relating to the 
administration of medical benefit, the certification for purposes of the grant of benefits and other 
connected matters;  
(b) have such powers and duties of investigation as may be prescribed in relation to complaints 
against medical practitioners in connection with medical treatment and attendance; and  
(c) perform such other duties in connection with medical treatment and a ttendance as may be 
specified in the regulations.  
23. Duties of Principal Officers. —The 5[Director General and the Financial Commissioner] shall 
exercise such powers and discharge such duties as may be prescribed. They shall also perform such other 
functi ons as may be specified in the regulations.  
                                                           
1. Subs . by Act 29 of 1989, s. 4, “nominate” (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., “nominated” (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
3. Subs. by A.O. 1950, for “the Central Legislature ”. 
4. Subs. by Act 53 of 195
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 15]
f. 20 -10-1989).  
3. Subs. by A.O. 1950, for “the Central Legislature ”. 
4. Subs. by Act 53 of 1951, s . 9, for “the Corporation, the Standing Committee and the Medical Commissioner ”                     
(w.e.f. 6 -10-1951 ). 
5. Subs. by Act 29 of 1989, s . 8, for “Principal Officers ” (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 16]
16 
 24. Acts of Corporation, etc., not invalid by reason of defect in constitution, etc. —No act of the 
Corporation, the Standing Committee or the Medical Benefit Council shall be deemed to be invalid by 
reason of any defect in the constitution of the Corporation, the Standing Committee or the Medical 
Benefit Council, or on the ground that any member thereof was not entitled to hold or continue in office 
by reason of any disqualification or of any irregularity in his 1[appointment] or election, or by reason of 
such act having been done during the period of any vacancy in the office of any member  of the 
Corporation, the Standing Committee or the Medical Benefit Council.  
25. Regional Boards, Local Committees, Regional and Local Medical Benefit Councils .—The 
Corporation may appoint Regional Boards, Local Committees and Regional and Local Medical Ben efit 
Councils in such areas and in such manner, and delegate to them such powers and functions, as may be 
provided b y the regulations.  
CHAPTER III  
FINANCE AND AUDIT  
26. E mployees ’ State Insurance Fund. —(1) All contributions paid under this Act and all other 
moneys received on behalf of the Corporation shall be paid into a fund called the Employees ’ State 
Insurance Fund which shall be held and administered by the Corporatio n for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) The Corporation may accept grants, donations a nd gifts from the Central or any State 
Government, 2*** local authority, or any individual or body whether incorporated or not, for all or any of 
the purposes of this Act.  
3[(3) Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act and to any rules or reg ulations made in this 
behalf, all moneys accruing or payable to the said Fund shall be paid into the Reserve Bank of India or 
such other bank as may be approved by the Central Government to the credit of an account styled the 
account of the Employees ’ State Insurance Fund.]  
(4) Such account shall be operated on by such officers as may
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 16]
e Employees ’ State Insurance Fund.]  
(4) Such account shall be operated on by such officers as may be authori sed by the Standing 
Committee with the approval of the Corporation.  
27. [Grant by the Central Government .] Omitted  by the Employees ’ State Insurance  (Amendment ) 
Act, 1966 (44 of 1966) s. 12 ( w.e.f . 17-6-1967).  
28. Purposes for which the Fund may be expended .—Subject to the provisions of this Act and of 
any rules made by the Central Government in that behalf, the Employees ’ State Insurance Fund shall be 
expended o nly for th e following purposes, namely: — 
(i) payment of benefits and provision of medical treatment and attendance to insured persons and, 
where the medical benefit is extended to their families, the provision of such medical benefit to their 
families, in accordance with the provisions of this Act and defraying the charges and  costs in 
connection therewith;  
(ii) payment of fees and allowances to members of the Corporation, the Standing Committee and 
the Medical Benefit Council, the Regional Boards, Local Co mmittees and Regional and Local 
Medical Benefit Councils;  
(iii) payment of salaries, leave and joining time allowances, travelling and compensatory 
allowances, gratuities and compassionate allowances, pensions, contributions to provident or other 
benefit f und of officers and servants of the Corporation and meeting the expenditure in respect of 
offices and other services set up for the purpose of giving effect  to the provisions of this Act;  
(iv) establishment and maintenance of hospitals, dispensaries and other institutions and the 
provision of medical and other ancillary services for the benefit of insured persons and, where the 
medical benefit is extended to their families, their families;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 39 of 1989, s. 4, for “nomination” (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
2. The words and letter “Part B State, ” omitted by Act 53 of 1951, s . 10 (w.e.f.
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 16]
. 20 -10-1989).  
2. The words and letter “Part B State, ” omitted by Act 53 of 1951, s . 10 (w.e.f. 6 -10-1951).  
3. Subs. by s . 10, ibid., for sub -section ( 3) (w.e .f. 6-10-1951). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 17]
17 
 (v) payment of contribu tions to any State Government, 1*** local authority or any private body or 
individual, towards the cost of medical treatment and attendance provided to insured persons and, 
where the medical benefit is extended to their families, their families , including the cost of any 
building and equipment, in accordance with any agreement entered into by the  Corporation;  
(vi) defraying the cost (including all expenses) of auditing the accounts of the Corporation and of 
the valuation  of its assets an d liabilities;  
(vii) defraying the cost (including all expenses) of the Employees ’ Insurance Courts set up under  
this Act;  
(viii) payment of any sums under any contract entered into for the purposes of this Act by the 
Corporation or the Standing Committee or by any officer duly authorized by the Corporation or the 
Standing Committee in that behalf;  
(ix) payment of sums under any decree, order or award of any Court or Tribunal against the 
Corporation or any of its officers or servants for any act done in the  execution of his duty or under a 
compromise or settlement of any suit or other legal proceeding or claim instituted or made against the 
Corporation;  
(x) defraying the cost and other charges of instituting or defending any civil or criminal 
proceedings ari sing out of a ny action taken under this Act;  
(xi) defraying expenditure, within the limits prescribed, on measures for the improvement of the 
health welfare of insured persons and  for the rehabilitation and re -employment of insured persons 
who hav e been disabled or injured; and  
(xii) such other purposes as may be authorized by the Corporation with the previous appr oval of 
the Central Government.  
2[28A. Administrative expenses .—The types of expenses which may be termed as administrative 
expenses and the pe rcentage of the income of the Corporation which may be spent for such expenses shall 
be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government and the Corpor
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 17]
spent for such expenses shall 
be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government and the Corporation shall keep its administrative 
expenses within the limit so prescribed by the Central Government. ]  
29. Holding of property, etc .—(1) The Corporation may, subject to such conditions as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government, acquire and hold property both movable and immovable, sell or 
otherwise transfer any movable or immovable property which may have become vested in or have been 
acquired by it and do all things necessary for the purposes for which t he Corporation is established.  
(2) Subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Central Government, the Corporation may 
from time to tim e invest any moneys which are not immediately required for expenses properly 
defrayable under this Act and may, subject as aforesaid, from time to time re -invest or realise such 
investments.  
(3) The Corporation may, with the previous sanction of the Centra l Government and on such terms as 
may be prescribed by it , raise loans and take measures for discharging such loans.  
(4) The Corporation may constitute for the benefit of its staff or any class of them, such provident or 
other benefit fund as it may think  fit.  
30. Vesting of the property in the Corporation. —All property acquired before the establishment of 
the Corporation shall vest in the Corporation and all income derived and expenditure incurred in this 
behalf shall be brought into the books of the Cor poration.  
31. [Expenditure by Central Government to be treated as a loan .] Omitted  by the Employees ’ State 
Insurance  (Amendment ) Act, 1966 (44  of 1966) , s. 12 ( w.e.f . 17-6-1967).  
32. Budget estimates .—The Corporation shall in each year frame a budget showing the probable 
receipts and the expenditure which it proposes to incur during the following year and shall submit a copy 
                                                           
1. The words and letter “Part B State
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 17]
y 
                                                           
1. The words and letter “Part B State” omitted by Act 53 of 1951, s . 11 (w.e.f. 6 -10-1951).  
2. Ins. by Act 29 of 1989, s . 9 (w.e.f. 1-5-1997).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 18]
18 
 of the budget for the approval of the Central Government before such date as ma y be fixed by it in that 
behalf. The budget shall contain provisions adequate in the opinion of the Central Government for the 
discharge of the liabilities incurred by the Corporation and for the maintenance of a working balance.  
33. Accounts .—The Corpora tion shall maintain correct accounts of its income and expenditure in 
such form and in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
1[34. Audit .—(1) The accounts of the Corporation shall be audited annually by the Comptroller and 
Auditor -General of India and any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be 
payable by the Corporation to the Comptrolle r and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him in connec tion 
with the audit of the accounts of the Corporation shall have the same rights and privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General has, in connection with the audit of 
Government accounts and, in particular,  shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, 
connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the Corporation.  
(3) The accounts of the Corporation as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -Gene ral of India or 
any other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
to the Corporation which shall forward the same to the Central Government along with its comments on 
the report of the Comptroller an d Auditor -General .] 
35. Annual report .—The Corporation shall submit to the Central Government an annual report of its 
work and activities.  
36. Budget , audited accounts and the annual report to be placed before Parliament .—The 
annual report, the audited ac counts of the Corporation 2[together with the 3[the report of the Comptroller 
and 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 18]
, the audited ac counts of the Corporation 2[together with the 3[the report of the Comptroller 
and Auditor -General of India thereon and the comments of the Corporation on  such report] under               
section 34]  and the budget as finally adopted by the Corporation shall be placed before 4[Parliament] 
5***.  
37. Valuation of assets and liabilities .—The Corporation shall, at intervals of 6[three  years ], have a 
valuation of its assets and liabilities made by a value r appointed with the appr oval of the Central 
Government:  
Provided that it shall be open to the Central Government to direct a valuation to be made at such other 
times as it may consider necessary.  
CHAPTER IV  
CONTRIBUTIONS  
38. All employees to be insured .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, all employees in factories or 
establishments to which this Act applies shall be insured in the manner provided by this Act.  
39. Contributions .—(1) The contribution payable under this Act in respect of an employee sha ll 
comprise contribution payable by the employer (hereinafter referred to as the employer ’s contribution) 
and contribution payable by the employee (hereinafter referred to as the employee ’s contribution) and 
shall be paid to the Corporation.  
7[(2) The con tributions shall be paid at such rates as may be prescribed by the Central Government:  
Provided that the rates so prescribed shall not be more than the rates which were in force immediately 
before the commencement of the Employees ’ State Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1989 (29 of 1989).]  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 1989, s . 10, for section 34 (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
2. Ins. by Act 44 of 19 66, s. 13 (w.e.f. 17 -6-1967).  
3. Subs. by Act 29 of 1989, s . 11, for “auditor's report thereon ” (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “the Central Legislature ”. 
5. The words “and published in the Gazette of India ” omitted by Act 29 of 1989, s . 11 (
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 18]
lature ”. 
5. The words “and published in the Gazette of India ” omitted by Act 29 of 1989, s . 11 (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
6. Subs. by Act 18 of 2010, s. 7, for “five years” (w.e.f. 1 -6-2010).  
7. Subs. by Act 29 of 1989, s. 12, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1991).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 19]
19 
 1[(3) The wage period in relation to an employee shall be the unit in respect of which all contributions 
shall be payable under this Act.]  
(4) The contributions payable in respect of each 2[wage period] shall ordinarily f or due on the last day 
of the 2[wage period] , and where an employee is employed for part of the 2[wage period] , or is employed 
under two or m ore employers during the same 2[wage period] , the contribution  shall fall due on such days 
as may be specified in the regulations.  
3[(5) (a) If any contribution payable under this Act is not paid by the principal employer on the date 
on which such contribution has become due , he shall be liable to pay simple interes t at the rate of twelve 
per cent. per annum or at such higher rate as may  be specified in the regulation s till the date of its actual 
payment:  
Provided that higher interest specified in the regulations shall not exceed the lending rate of interest 
charged by any scheduled bank.  
(b) Any interest recoverable under clause ( a) may be recovered as an arrear of land revenue or under 
section 45C to section 45 -I.  
Explanation. —In this sub -section, “scheduled bank ” means a bank for the time being included in the 
Second Schedule to the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934).]  
40. Principal employer to pay contributions in the first instance. —(1) The principal employer 
shall pay in respect of every employee, whe ther directly employed by him or by or through an immediate 
employer, both the employer ’s contribution a nd the employee ’s contribution.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other enactment but subject to the provisions of this 
Act and the regulati ons, if any, made thereunder, the principal employer shall, in the case of an employee 
directly employed by him (not being an exempted employee), be entitled to recover from the employee 
the employee ’s contribution by deduction from his  wages and not other wise:  
Provided that no such deducti
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 19]
yee ’s contribution by deduction from his  wages and not other wise:  
Provided that no such deduction shall be made from any wages other than such as relate to the period 
or part of the period in respect of which the contribution is payable, or in excess of the sum representing 
the employee ’s contribution for the perio d. 
(3) Notwithstanding any contract to the contrary, neither the principal employer nor the immediate 
employer shall be entitled to deduct the employer ’s contribution from any wages payable to an employee 
or otherwise to recover it from him.  
(4) Any sum deducted by the principal employer from wages under this Act shall be deemed to have 
been entrusted to him by the employee for the purpose of paying the contribution in re spect of which it 
was deducted.  
(5) The principal employer shall bear the expenses of  remitting the contributions to the Corporation.  
41. Recovery of contribution from immediate employe r.—(1) A principal employer, who has paid 
contribution in respect of an employee employed by or through an immediate employer, shall be entitled 
to recover  the amount of the contribution so paid (that is to say the employer ’s contribution as well as the 
employee ’s contribution, if any) from the immediate employer, either by deduction from any amount 
payable  to him by the principal employer under any contract , or as a debt payable by the immediate 
employer.  
4[(1A) The immediate employer shall maintain a register of employees employed by or through him 
as provided in the regulations and submit the same to the principal employer before the settlement of any 
amount payable under sub -section ( 1).] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 1984, s. 4, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 27 -1-1985).  
2. Subs. by s . 4, ibid., for “week ” (w.e.f. 27 -1-1985).  
3. Ins. by Act 29 of 1989, s. 12  (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
4. Ins. by s . 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1991).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 19]
2  (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
4. Ins. by s . 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1991).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 20]
20 
 (2) In the case referred to in sub -section ( 1), the immediate employee shall be entitled to recover the 
employee ’s contribution from the employee employed by or through him by deduction from wages and 
not otherwise, subject to the conditions specified in the proviso to sub -section ( 2) of section 40.  
1*   *   *   *   *  
42. General provisions as to  payment of contributions .—(1) No employee ’s contribution shall be 
payable by or on behalf of an employee whose average daily wages 2[during a wage period are below  
3[such wages as may be prescri bed by the Central Government ]]. 
Explanation .—The average daily wages of an employee shall be calculated  4[in such manner as may 
be prescri bed by the Central Government.]  
(2) Contribution (both the employer ’s contribution and the employee ’s contribution) shall be payable 
by the principal employer for each 5[wage period] 6[in respect of the whole or part of which wages are 
payable to the employee and not otherwise].  
7*   *   *   *   *  
8*    *   *   *   *  
43. Method of payment of contribution .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Corporation 
may make regulations for any matter relating or incidental to  the payment and collection of contributions 
payable under this Act and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power su ch regulations 
may provide for — 
(a) the manner and ti me of payment of contributions;  
(b) the payment of contributions by means of adhesive or other stamps affixed to or impressed 
upon books, cards or otherwise and regulating the manner, times and conditions in, at and under 
which, such stamps are to be affixed or impressed;  
9[(bb) the date by which evidence of contributions having been paid is to be received by the 
Corpor ation;]  
(c) the entry in or upon books or cards of particulars of contributions paid and benefits distributed 
in the case of the insured persons to whom such books  or cards relate; and  
(d) the issue, sale, custody, product
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 20]
the insured persons to whom such books  or cards relate; and  
(d) the issue, sale, custody, production, inspection and delivery of books or cards and the 
replacement of books or cards which have been lost, destroyed or defaced.  
10[44. Employers to furnish returns and maintain registers in certain cases .—(1) Every principal 
and immediate employer shall submit to the Corporation or to such officer of the Corporation as it may 
direct such returns in such form and containing such particulars relating to persons employed by him or to 
any factory or establishmen t in respect of which he is the principal or immediate employer as may be 
specified in r egulations made in this behalf.  
(2) Where in respect of any factory or establishment the Corporation has reason to believe that a 
return should have been submitted unde r sub -section ( 1) but has not been so submitted, the Corporation 
may require any person in charge of the factory or establishment to furnish such particulars as it may 
consider necessary for the purpose of enabling the Corporation to decide whether the fac tory or 
establishment is a factory or establish ment to which this Act applies.  
                                                           
1. The Explanation  omitted by Act 44 of 1966, s . 14 (w.e.f. 28 -1-1968).  
2. Subs. by Act 45 of 1984, s . 5, for “are below one rupee and fifty paise ” (w.e.f. 27 -1-1985).  
3. Subs. by Act 29 of 1989, s . 14, for “six rupees ” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1991).  
4. Subs. by s . 14, ibid., for “in such manner specified in the First Schedule”  (w.e.f. 1 -2-1991).  
5. Subs. by Act 45 of 1984, s. 5, for “week” (w.e.f. 27 -1-1985).  
6. Subs. by Act 44 of 1966, s. 15, for “during the whole or part of which an employee is employed” (w.e.f. 28 -1-1968 ). 
7. Omitted by Act 45 of 1984, s . 5 (w.e.f. 27 -1-1985).  
8. Omitted by Act 44 of 1966, s . 15 (w.e.f. 28 -1-1968).  
9. Ins. by s . 16, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -1-1968).  
10. Subs. by Act 53 of 1951, s . 12, for section 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 20]
  
9. Ins. by s . 16, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -1-1968).  
10. Subs. by Act 53 of 1951, s . 12, for section 44 (w.e.f. 6 -10-1951).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 21]
21 
 (3) Every principal and immediate employer shall maintain such registers or records in respect of his 
factory or establishment as may be required by regulations made in this behalf.]  
45. 1[Social Security Officers] , their functions and duties .—(1) The Corpo ration may appoint such 
persons as 1[Social Security Officers] , as it thinks fit, for the purposes of this Act, within such local limits 
as it may assign to them.  
(2) Any 2[Social Security Officer]  appointed by the Corporation under sub -section ( 1) (hereinafter 
referred to as 2[Social Security Officer] ), or other official of the Corporation authori sed in this behalf by it 
may, for the purposes of enquiring into the correctness of any of the particulars stated in any return 
referred to in section 44  or for the purpose of ascertaining whether any of the provisions of t his Act has 
been complied with — 
(a) require any principal or immediate employer to furnish to him such information as he may 
consider necessary f or the purposes of this Act; or  
(b) at an y reasonable time enter any office, establishment, factory or other premises occupied by 
such principal or immediate employer and require any person found in charge thereof to produce to 
such 2[Social Security Officer]  or other official and allow him to ex amine such accounts, books and 
other documents relating to the employment of persons and payment of wages or to furnish to him 
such information a s he may consider necessary; or  
(c) examine, with respect to any matter relevant to the purposes aforesaid, the  principal or 
immediate employer, his agent or servant, or any person found in such factory, establishment, office 
or other premises, or any person whom the said 2[Social Security Officer]  or other official has 
reasonable cause to believe to be or to have been an employee;  
3[(d) make copies of, or take extracts from, any register, account book or other document 
maintained in such factory, establish ment, office or oth
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 21]
 register, account book or other document 
maintained in such factory, establish ment, office or other premises;  
(e) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed.]  
(3) An 2[Social Security Officer]  shall exercise such functions and perform such duties as may be 
authori sed by the Corporation or as may be specified in the regulations.  
4[(4) Any officer of the Corporation authorised in this behalf by it may, carry out re -inspection or  test 
inspection of the records and returns submitted under section 44 for the purpose of verifying the 
correctness and quality of the inspection carried out by a Social Security Officer .] 
5[45A. Determination of contributions in certain cases .—(1) Where in respect of a factory or 
establishment no returns, particulars, registers or records are submitted, furnished or maintained in 
accordance with the provisions of section 44 or any 2[Social Security Officer]  or other official of the 
Corporation ref erred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 45 is 6[prevented in any manner] by the principal or 
immediate employer or any other person, in exercising his functions or discharging his duties under 
section 45, the Corporation may, on the basis of information ava ilable to it, by order, determine the 
amount of contributions payable in respect of the employees of  that factory or establishment:  
7[Provided that no such order shall be passed by the Corporation unless the principal or immediate 
employer or the person in  charge of the factory or establishment has been given a reasonab le opportunity 
of being heard.]  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 2010,  s. 8, for “Inspectors” (w.e.f. 1 -6-2010).  
2. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for “Inspector” (w.e.f. 1 -6-2010).  
3. Ins. by Act 53 of 19 51, s. 13 (w.e.f. 6-10-1951).  
4. Ins. by Act 18 of 2010, s. 8 (w.e.f. 1 -6-2010).  
5. Ins. by Act 44 of 1966, s . 17 (w.e.f. 17-6-1967).  
6. Subs. by Act 29 of 1989, s . 15, for “obstruc
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 21]
ns. by Act 44 of 1966, s . 17 (w.e.f. 17-6-1967).  
6. Subs. by Act 29 of 1989, s . 15, for “obstructed ” (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
7. Added . by s . 15, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 22]
22 
 1[Provided further that no such order shall be passed by the Corporation in respect of the period 
beyond five years from the date on which the contribution shall become payable.]  
(2) An order made by the Corporation under sub -section ( 1) shall be sufficient proof of the claim of 
the Corporation under section 75 or for recovery of the amount determined by such order as an arrear of 
land revenue under section 4 5B 2[or the recovery under section 45C to section 45 -I].  
3[45AA. Appellate authority .—1[If an employer is not satisfied with the order referred to in section 
45A, he may prefer an appeal to an appellate authority as may be provided by regulation, within sixty 
days of the date of such order after depositing twenty -five per cent. of the contribution so ordered or the 
contribution as per his own calculation, which ever is higher, with the Corporation:  
Provided that if the employer finally succeeds in the appeal, the Corporation shall refund such deposit 
to the employer together with such interest as may be specified in the regulation.]  
 45B. Recovery of contribution s.—Any contribution payable under this Act may be recovered as an 
arrear of land revenue.]  
4[45C. Issue of certificate to the Recovery Officer .—(1) Where any amount is in arrear under this 
Act, the authorised  officer may issue, to the Recovery Officer, a certificate under his signature specifying 
the amount of arrears and the Recovery Officer, on receipt of such certificate, shall proceed to recover the 
amount specified therein from the factory or establishmen t or, as the case may be, the principal or 
immediate employer by one or more  of the modes mentioned below: — 
(a) attachment and sale of the movable or immovable property of the factory or establishment or, 
as the case may be, the principal or immediate empl oyer;  
(b) arrest of the employ er and his detention in prison;  
(c) appointing a receiver for the management of the movable or immovable properties of t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 22]
n prison;  
(c) appointing a receiver for the management of the movable or immovable properties of the 
factory or establishment or, as  the case may be, the employer:  
Provided that the attachment and sale o f any property under this section shall first be effected against 
the properties of the factory or establishment and where such attachment and sale is insufficient for 
recovering the whole of the amount of arrears specified in the certificate, the Recovery  Officer may take 
such proceedings against the property of the employer for recovery of the whole or any part of such 
arrears.  
(2) The authorised officer may  issue a certificate under sub -section ( 1) notwithstanding that 
proceedings for recovery of the arr ears by any other mode have been taken.  
45D. Recovery officer to whom certificate is to be forwarded .—(1) The authorised officer may 
forward the certificate referred to in section 45C to the Recovery Officer within wh ose jurisdiction the 
employer — 
(a) carries on his business or profession or within whose jurisdiction the principal place of his 
factory or establishment is situate; or  
(b) resides or any movable or immovable property of the factory or establishment or the principal 
or immediate employer is situate.  
(2) Where a factory or an establishment or the principal or immediate employer has property within 
the jurisdiction of more than one Recovery Officers and the Recovery Officer to whom a certificate is 
sent by the authorised officer — 
(a) is not able to recover the entire amount by the sale of the property, movable or immovab le, 
within his jurisdiction; or  
(b) is of the opinion that, for the purpose of expediting or securing the recovery of the whole or 
any part of the amount, it is necessary so t o do,  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act  18 of  2010 , s. 9  (w.e.f. 1 -6-2010 ).  
2. Added by Act 29 of 1989, s . 15 (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
3. Ins. by Act  18 of 2010 , s. 10  (w
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 22]
  
2. Added by Act 29 of 1989, s . 15 (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
3. Ins. by Act  18 of 2010 , s. 10  (w.e.f.  1-6-2010 ).  
4. Ins. by Act 29 of 1989, s . 16 (w.e.f. 1 -9-1991).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 23]
23 
 he may send the certificate or, where only a part of the amount is to be recovered, a copy of the certificate 
certified in the manner prescribed by the Central Government and specifying the amount to be recovered 
to the Recovery Officer within whose  jurisdiction the factory or establishment or the principal or 
immediate employer has property or the employer resides, and thereupon that Recovery Officer shall also 
proceed to recover the amount due under this section as if the certificate or the copy th ereof had been the 
certificate sent to him by the authorised officer.  
45E. Validity of certificate and amendment thereof .—(1) When the authorised officer issues a 
certificate to a Recovery Officer under section 45C, it shall not be open to the factory or establishment or 
the principal or immediate employer to dispute before the Recovery Officer the correctness of the amount, 
and no objection to the certificate on any other ground shall also be entertained by the Recovery Officer.  
(2) Notwithstanding the issue of a certificate to a Recovery Officer, the authorised officer shall have 
power to withdraw the certificate or correct any clerical or arithmetical mistake in the certificate by 
sending an inti mation to the Recovery Officer.  
(3) The authorised officer shall intimate to the Recovery Officer any orders withdrawing or cancelling 
a certificate or any correction made by him under sub -section ( 2) or any amendment made under                       
sub- section ( 4) of section 45F.  
45F. S tay of proceedings under certificate and amendment or withdrawal thereof .—(1) 
Notwithstanding that a certificate has been issued to the Recovery Officer for the recovery of any amount, 
the authorised officer may grant time for the payment of the amount, an d thereupon the Recovery Officer 
shall stay the proceedings until the  expiry of the time so granted.  
(2) Where a certificate for the recovery of amount has been issued, the authorised officer shall ke
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 23]

(2) Where a certificate for the recovery of amount has been issued, the authorised officer shall keep 
the Recovery Officer informed of any amount paid or t ime granted for payment, subsequent to  the issue 
of such certificate.  
(3) Where the order giving rise to a demand of amount for which a certificate for recovery has been 
issued has been modified in appeal or other proceedings under this Act, and, as a cons equence thereof, the 
demand is reduced but the order is the subject -matter of a further proceeding under this Act, the 
authorised officer shall stay the recovery of such part of the amount of the certificate as pertains to the 
said reduction for the period  for which the appeal or ot her proceeding remains pending.  
(4) Where a certificate for the recovery of amount has been issued and subsequently the amount of the 
outstanding demand is reduced as a result of an appeal or other proceeding under this Act, the authorised 
officer shall, when the order which was the subject - matter of such appeal or other proceeding has become 
final and conclusive, amend the certificate or withdraw it, as the case may be.  
45G. Other modes of recovery .—(1) Notwithstanding the issu e of a certificate to the Recovery 
Officer under section 45C, the Director General or any other officer authorised by the Corporation may 
recover the amount by any one or more of the modes prov ided in this section.  
(2) If any amount is due from any person to any factory or establishment or, as the case may be, the 
principal or immediate employer who is in arrears, the Director General or any other officer authorised by 
the Corporation in this behalf may required such p erson to deduct from the said amount the arrears due 
from such factory or establishment or, as the case may be, the principal or immediate employer under this 
Act and such person shall comply with any such requisition and shall pay the sum so deducted to  the 
credit of the Corporation:  
Provided that nothing in
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 23]
ion and shall pay the sum so deducted to  the 
credit of the Corporation:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall apply to any part of the amount exempt from 
attachment in execution of a decree of a civil court under section 60 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 
(5 of 1908).  
(3) (i) The Di rector General or any other officer authorised by the Corporation in this behalf may, at 
any time or from time to time, by notice in writing, require any person from whom money is due or may 
become due to the factory or establishment or, as the case may be , the principal or immediate employer or 
any person who holds or may subsequently hold money for or on account of the factory or establishment 
or, as the case may be, the principal or immediate employer, to pay to the Director General either 
forthwith upon  the money becoming due or being held or at or within the time specified in the notice (not 
being before the money becomes due or is held) so much of the money as is sufficient to pay the amount 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 24]
24 
 due from the factory or establishment or, as the case may be,  the principal or immediate employer in 
respect of arrears or the whole of the money when it is equ al to or less than that amount.  
(ii) A notice under this sub -section may be issued to any person who holds or may subsequently hold 
any money for or on accou nt of the principal or immediate employer jointly with any other person and for 
the purposes of this sub -section, the shares of the joint -holders in such account shall be presumed, until 
the c ontrary is proved, to be equal.  
(iii) A copy of the notice shall  be forwarded to the principal or immediate employer at his last address 
known to the Director General or, as the case may be, the officer so authorised and in the case of a joint 
account to all the joint -holders at their last addresses known to the Direct or Genera l or the officer so 
authorised.  
(iv) Save as otherwise provided in this sub -section, every person to whom a notice is issued under this 
sub-section shall be bound to comply with such notice, and, in particular, where any such notice is issued 
to a post office, bank or an insurer, it shall not be necessary for any pass book, deposit receipt, policy or 
any other document to be produced for the purpose of any entry, endorsement or the like being made 
before payment is made notwithstanding any rule, pr actice or requirement to the contrary.  
(v) Any claim respecting any property in relation to which a notice under this sub -section has been 
issued arising after the date of the notice shall be void as against any demand contained in the notice.  
(vi) Where a  person to whom a notice under this sub -section is sent objects to it by a statement on 
oath that the sum demanded or any part thereof is not due to the principal or immediate employer or that 
he does not hold any money for or on account of the principal o r immediate employer, then, nothing 
contained in this sub -section shall be deemed to require such p
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 24]
 immediate employer, then, nothing 
contained in this sub -section shall be deemed to require such person to pay any such sum or part thereof, 
as the case may be, but if it is discovered that such statement was false in any material particular, such 
person shall be personally liable to the Director General or the officer so authorised to the extent of his 
own liability to the principal or immediate employer on the date of the notice, or to the extent of the 
principal or immediate employer ’s liability for any  sum due und er this Act, whichever is less.  
(vii) The Director General or the officer so authorised may, at any time or from time to time, amend 
or revoke any notice issued under this sub -section or extend the time for making any payme nt in 
pursuance of su ch notice.  
(viii) The Director General or the officer so authorised  shall grant a receipt for any amount paid in 
compliance with a notice issued under this sub -section and the person so paying shall be fully discharged 
from his liability to the principal or immediate employer to th e extent of the amount so paid.  
(ix) Any person discharging any liability to the principal or immediate employer after the rece ipt of a 
notice under this sub -section shall be personally liable to the Director General or the officer so authorised 
to the extent of his own liability to the principal  or immediate employer so discharged or to the extent of 
the principal or immediate employer ’s liability for any sum due und er this Act, whichever is less.  
(x) If the person to whom a notice under this sub -section is sent fails to make payment in pursuance  
thereof to the Director General or the officer so authorised, he shall be deemed to be a principal or 
immediate employer in default in respect of the amount specified in the notice and further proceedings 
may be taken against him for the realisation of th e amount as if it were an arrear due from him in the 
manner provided in sections 45C to 45F and the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 24]
 amount as if it were an arrear due from him in the 
manner provided in sections 45C to 45F and the notice shall have the same effect as an attachment of a 
debt by the Recovery Officer in exercise of his powers under section 45C . 
 (4) The Director General or the officer authorised by the Corporation in this behalf may apply to the 
court in whose custody there is money belonging to the principal or immediate employer for payment to 
him of the entire amount of such money, or if it is mo re than the amount due, an amount sufficie nt to 
discharge the amount due.  
(5) The Director General or any officer of the Corporation may, if so authorised by the Central 
Government by general or special order, recover any arrears of amount due from a facto ry or an 
establishment or, as the case may be, from the principal or immediate employer by distraint and sale of its 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 25]
25 
 or his movable property in the manner laid down in the Third Schedule to the Income -tax Act, 1961             
(43 of 1961).  
45H. Applicati on of certain provisions of the Income -tax Act .—The provisions of the Second and 
Third Schedules to the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961) and the Income -tax (Certificate Proceedings) 
Rules, 1962, as in force from time to time, shall apply with necessary mo difications as if the said 
provisions and the rules referred to the arrears of the amount of contributions, interests or damages under 
this Ac t instead of to the income -tax: 
Provided that any reference in the said provisions and the rules to the “assesse ” shall be construed as 
a reference to a factory or an establishment or the principal or immediate employer under this Act.  
45-I. Definitions .—For the pu rposes of sections 45C to 45H, — 
(a) “authorised officer ” means the Director General, Insurance Commissioner, Joint Insurance 
Commissioner, Regional Director or such other officer as may be authorised by the Central 
Government, by notifi cation in the Official Gazette;  
(b) “Recovery Officer ” means any officer of the Central Government, State Government or the 
Corporation, who may be authorised by the Central Government, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, to exercise the powers of a Re covery Officer under this Act.]  
CHAPTER V  
BENEFITS  
46. Benefits .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the insured persons 1[their dependants or the 
persons hereinafter mentioned, as the case may be,] shall be entitled to the  following benefits,           
namely: — 
(a) periodical payments to any insured person in case  of his sickness certified by a duly appointed 
medical practitioner 2[or by any other person possessing such qualifications and experience as the 
Corporation may, by regulations, specify in this behalf] (hereinafter r eferred to as sickness benefit) ;  
3[(b) periodical payments to an insured woma n in case of confinement or m
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 25]
 as sickness benefit) ;  
3[(b) periodical payments to an insured woma n in case of confinement or mis -carriage or sickness 
arising out of pregnancy, confinement, premature birth of child or mis -carriage, such woman being 
certified to be eligible for such payments by an authority specifi ed in this behalf by the regulations 
(hereinafter refe rred to as maternity benefit;)]  
(c) periodical payments to an insured person suffering from disablement as a result of an 
employment injury sustained as an employee under this Act and certified to be el igible for such 
payments by an authority specified in this behalf by the regulations (hereinafter referr ed to as 
disablement benefit);  
(d) periodical payments to such dependants  of an insured person who dies as a result of an 
employment injury sustained as an employee under this Act, as are entitled to compensation under 
this Act (hereinafter referred to a s dependants  benefit) ; 4*** 
(e) medical treatment for and attendance on ins ured persons (hereinafter referred to as medical 
benefit); 2[and]  
2[(f) payment to the eldest surviving member of the family of an insured person who has died, 
towards the expenditure on the funeral of the deceased insured person, or, where the insured person 
did not have a family or was not living with his family at the time of his death, to the person who 
actually incurs the expenditure on the funeral of the deceased insured person (to be  known as 
5[funeral expenses]) : 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 44 of 1966, s . 18, for “or, as the case may be, their dependants ” (w.e.f. 28 -1-1968).  
2. Ins. by s . 18, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -1-1968).  
3. Subs. by s . 18, ibid., for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 28 -1-1968).  
4. The word “and” omitted by  s. 18, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -1-1968).  
5. Subs. by Act 29 of 1989, s . 17, for “funeral benefit ” (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 25]
 20 -10-1989).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 26]
26 
  Provided that the amount of such  payment shall not exceed 1[such amount as may be prescribed by 
the Central Government] and the claim for such payment shall be made within three months of the death 
of the insured person  or within such extended period as the Corporation or any officer or authority 
authorised b y it in this behalf may allow.]  
(2) The Corporation may, at the request of the appropriate Government, and subject to such 
conditions as may be laid down in the regulations, extend the medical benefits to the family of an insured 
person.  
47. [When person eligible for sickness benefit .] Omitted by the Employees ’ State Insurance  
(Amendment ) Act, 1989  (29 of 1989), s. 18 (w.e.f . 1-2-1991).  
48. [When person deemed available for employment .] Omitted  by the Employees ’ State Insurance  
(Amendment ) Act, 1966 ( 44 of 1966 ) s. 20, ibid. (w.e.f . 28-1-1968).  
2[49. Sickness benefit .—The qualification of a person to claim sickness benefit, the conditions 
subject to which such benefit may be given, the rates and period thereof shall be such as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government.  
 50. Mater nity benefit .—The qualification of an insured woman to claim maternity benefit, the 
conditions subject to which such benefit may be given, the rates and period thereof shall be such as may 
be prescribed by the Central Government .] 
3[51. Disablement Benefit .—Subject to the  provisions of this Act 4***,— 
(a) a person who sustains temporary disablement for not less than three days (excluding the day 
of accident) shall be entitled to periodical payment 5[at such rates and for such periods and subject to 
such con ditions as may be prescr ibed by the Central Government];  
(b) a person who sustains permanent disablement, whether total of partial, shall be entitled to 
periodical payment 5[at such rates and for such period and subject to such conditions as may be 
prescr ibed by the Central Government] :  
6*   *   *   *  *  
51A. Presumpti
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 26]
 conditions as may be 
prescr ibed by the Central Government] :  
6*   *   *   *  *  
51A. Presumption as to accident arising in course of employment .—For the purposes of this Act, 
an accident arising in the course of 7[an employee ’s] employment shall be presumed, in the absence of 
eviden ce to the contrary, also to have arisen out of that employment.  
 51B. Accidents happening while acting  in breach of regulations, etc. —An accident shall be 
deemed to arise out of and in the course of 7[an employee ’s] employment notwithstanding that he is at the 
time of the accident acting in contravention of the provisions of any law applicable to him, or of any 
orders given by or on behalf of his employer or that he is acting without ins tructions from his employer, 
if— 
(a) the accident would have been deemed so to have arisen had the act not been done in 
contravention as aforesaid or without instructions from his em ployer, as the case may be; and  
(b) the act is done for the purpose of and in connection with the employ er’s trade or business.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 1989, s . 17, for “one hundred rupees ” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1991).  
2. Subs. by s . 19, ibid., for sections 49 and 50 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1991).  
3. Subs. by A ct 44 of 1966, s. 23, for section 51 (w.e.f. 28 -1-1968).  
4. The words “and the regulations, if any ” omitted by Act 29 of 1989, s . 20 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1991).  
5. Subs. by s . 20, ibid., for “for the period of such disablement in accordance with the provisions of the First Schedule ” (w.e.f. 1 -
2-1991).  
6. Provis o omitted by s . 20, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1991).  
7. Subs. by Act 18 of 2010, s. 1 1, for “an insured person’s” (w.e.f. 1 -6-2010).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 27]
27 
 51C. Accidents happening while travelling in employer ’s transport .—(1) An accident happening 
while an 1[employee]  is, with the express or implied permission of his employer, travelling as a passenger 
by any vehicle to or from his place of work shall, notwithstanding that he is under no obligation to his 
employer to travel by that vehicle, be deemed to arise out of an d in th e course of his employment, if —  
(a) the accident would have been deemed so to have arisen had he been under such obligation; 
and  
(b) at the tim e of the accident, the vehicle — 
 (i) is being operated by or on behalf of his employer or some other person by whom it is 
provided in pursuance of arrangements made with his employer, and  
(ii) is not being operated in the ordinary course of public transport service.  
(2) In this section “vehicle ” includes a vessel and an aircraft.  
51D. Accidents happening while meeting emergency .—An accident happening to an 1[employee]  
in or about any premises at which he is for the time being employed for the purpose of his employer ’s 
trade or business shall be deemed to arise out of and in the course of his employment, if it happens while 
he is taking steps, on an actual or supposed emergency at those premises, to rescue, succour or protect 
persons who are, or are thought to be or po ssibly to be, injured or imperilled, or to avert or minimise 
serious damage to property.]  
2[51E. Accidents happening while commuting to the place of work and vice versa .—An accident 
occurring to an employee while commuting from his residence to the place of employment for duty or 
from the place of employment to his residence after performing duty, shall be deemed to have arisen out 
of and in the course of employment if nexus between the circumstances, time and place in which the 
accident occurred and the e mployment is established.]  
3[52. Dependant ’s benefit .—(1) If an insured person dies as a result of an employment injury 
sustained as an empl
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 27]
’s benefit .—(1) If an insured person dies as a result of an employment injury 
sustained as an employee under this Act (whether or not he was in receipt of any periodical payment for 
temporary disablement in respect of the injury) dependant ’s benefit shall be payable 4[at such rates and 
for such periods and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Central Government] to his 
dependants specified in 5[sub-clause ( i), sub -clause ( ia) and] sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( 6A) of section 2.  
(2) In case the insured per son dies without leaving behind him the dependants as aforesaid, the 
dependants ’ benefit shall be paid to the other dependants of the deceased 4[at such rates and for such 
period and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Central Government ]. 
52A. Occupational disease .—(1) If an employee employed in any employment specified in Part A of 
the Third Schedule contracts any disease specified therein as an occupational disease peculiar to that 
employment, or if an employee employed in the employment specified in Part B of that S chedule for a 
continuous period of not less than six months contracts any disease specified therein as an occupational 
disease peculiar to that employment or if an employee employed in any employment specified in Part C 
of that Schedule for such continuous  period as the Corporation may specify in respect of each such 
employment, contracts any disease specified therein as an occupational disease peculiar to that 
employment, the contracting of the disease shall, unless the contrary is proved, be deemed to be an 
“employment injury ” arising out of a nd in the course of employment.  
(2) (i) Where the Central Government or a State Government, as the case may be, adds any 
description of employment to the employments specified in Schedule III to the Workmen ’s Compensa tion 
Act, 1923 (8 of 1923), by virtue of the powers vested in it under sub -section ( 3) of section 3 of the said 
Act, the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 27]
3), by virtue of the powers vested in it under sub -section ( 3) of section 3 of the said 
Act, the said description of employment and the occupational diseases specified under that sub -section as 
peculiar to that description of employ ment shall be deemed to f orm part of the Third Schedule.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 2010, s. 12, for “insured person” (w.e.f. 1 -6-2010).  
2. Ins. by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -6-2010).  
3. Subs. by Act 44 of 1966, s. 24, for  section 52 (w.e.f. 28 -1-1968).  
4. Subs. by Act 29 of 1989, s . 21, for “in accordance with the provisions of the First Schedule ” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1991).  
5. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for “sub-clause ( i) and”  (w.e.f. 1 -2-1991).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 28]
28 
 (ii) Without prejudice to the provisions of clause ( i), the Corporation after giving, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, not less than three months ’ notice of its intention so to do, may, by a like 
notification, add any description of employment to the employments specified in the Third Schedule and 
shall specify in the case of employments so added the diseases which shall be deemed for the purposes of 
this section to be occupational diseases pe culiar to those employments respectively and thereupon the 
provisions of this Act shall apply, as if such diseases had been declared by this Act to be occupational 
diseases  peculiar to those employments.  
(3) Save as provided by sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), no benefit shall be payable to an employee in respect 
of any disease unless the disease is directly attributable to a specific injury by accident arising out of and 
in the course of his employment.  
(4) The provisions of section 51A shall not apply to the ca ses to which this section applies.]  
1[53. Bar against receiving or recovery of compensation or damages under any other law .—An 
insured person or his dependants  shall not be entitled to receive or recover, whether from the employer of 
the insured person or from any other person, any compensation or damages under the Workmen ’s 
Compensation Act, 1923 (8 of 1923), or any other law for the time being in force or othe rwise, in respect 
of an employment injury sustained by the insured person as an employee under this Act.]  
2[54. Determination of question of disablement .—Any question — 
(a) whether the relevant accident has resulted in permanent disablement; or  
(b) whether the extent of loss of earning capacity can be assessed provisionall y or finally; or  
(c) whether the assessment of the proportion of the loss of earning capacity is provisional or final; 
or  
(d) in the case of provisional assessment, as to the period for which s uch assessment shall hold 
good,  
shall be determined
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 28]
onal assessment, as to the period for which s uch assessment shall hold 
good,  
shall be determined by a medical board constituted in accordance with the provisions of the regulations 
and any such question shall hereafter be referred to as the “disablement question ”.  
54A. References t o medical boards and appeals to medical appeal tribunals and Employees ’ 
Insurance Courts .—(1) The case of any insured person for permanent disablement benefit shall be 
referred by the Corporation to a medical board for determination of the disablement ques tion and if, on 
that or any subsequent reference, the extent of loss of earning capacity of the insured person is 
provisionally assessed, it shall again be so referred to the medical board not later than the end of the 
period taken into account  by the prov isional assessment.  
(2) If the insured person or the Corporation is not satisfied with the decision of the medical board, the 
insured person or the Corporation may appeal in the prescribed manner and within the prescribed time 
to— 
(i) the medical appeal tr ibunal constituted in accordance with the provisions of the regulations 
with a further right of appeal in the prescribed manner and within the prescribed time to the  
Employees ’ Insurance Court, or  
(ii) the Employees ’ Insurance Court directly:]  
3[Provided that no appeal by an insured person shall lie under this sub -section if such person has 
applied for commutation of disablement benefit on the basis of the decision of the medical board and 
received the commuted value of such benefit:  
Provided fur ther that no appeal by the Corporation shall lie under this sub -section if the Corporation 
paid the commuted value of the disablement benefit on the basis of the decision of the medical board.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 44 of 1966, s . 25, for section 53 (w.e.f. 28 -1-1968).  
2. Subs. by s . 26, ibid., for section 54 ( w.e.f 28-1-1968).  
3. Ins. by Ac
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 28]
(w.e.f. 28 -1-1968).  
2. Subs. by s . 26, ibid., for section 54 ( w.e.f 28-1-1968).  
3. Ins. by Act 29 of 1989, s . 22 (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 29]
29 
 1[55. Review of decisions by medical bo ard or medical appeal tribunal. —(1) Any decision under 
this Act of a medical board or a medical appeal tribunal may be reviewed at any time by the medical 
board or the medical appeal tribunal, as the case may be, if it is satisfied by fresh evidence that the 
decision was given in consequence of the non -disclosure or misrepresentation by the employee or any 
other person of a material fact (whether the non -disclosure or misrepresentation was or wa s not 
fraudulent).  
(2) Any assessment of the extent of the disablement resulting from  the relevant employment injury 
may also be reviewed by a medical board, if it is satisified that since the making of the assessment there 
has been a substantial and unforeseen aggravation of the results of the relevant injury:  
Provided that an assessment shall no t be reviewed under this sub -section unless the medical board is 
of opinion that having regard to the period taken into account by the assessment and the probable duration 
of the aggravation aforesaid, substantial injustice will be done by not reviewing it.  
(3) Except with the leave of a medical appeal tribunal, an assessment shall not be reviewed under  
sub-section ( 2) on any application made less than five years, or in the case of a provisional assessment, 
six months, from the date thereof and  on such a review the period to be taken into account by any revised 
assessment shall not include any period befo re the date of the application.  
(4) Subject to the foregoing provisions of this section, a medical board may deal with a case of review 
in any manner in which it could deal with it on an original reference to it, and in particular may make a 
provisional assessment notwithstanding that the assessment under review was final; and the provisions of 
section 54A shall apply to an application for review  under this section and to a decision of a medical 
board in connection with such application as they apply to 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 29]
 section and to a decision of a medical 
board in connection with such application as they apply to a case for disablement benefit under that 
section and to a decision of the medical boar d in connection with such case.  
55A. Review of dependants ’ benefit .—(1) Any decision awarding dependants ’ benefit under this 
Act may be reviewed at any time by the Corporation if it is satisfied by fresh evidence that the decision 
was given in consequence of non -disclosure or misrepresentation by the claimant or a ny other person of a 
material fact (whether the non -disclosure or misrepresentation was or was not fraudulent) or that the 
decision is no longer in accordance with this Act due to any birth or death or due to the marriage,                 
re-marriage or cesser of infirmity of, or attainment of the age of  eighteen years by  a claimant.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Corporation may, on such review as afores aid, direct that 
the dependants  benefit be continued, increased, reduced or discontinu ed.] 
56. Medical benefit .—(1) An insured person or (where such medical benefit is extended to his 
family) a member of his family whose condition requires medical treatment and attendance shall be 
entitled to recei ve medical benefit.  
(2) Such medical benefit may be given either in the form of out -patient treatment and attendance in a 
hospital or dispensary, clinic or other institution or by visits to the home of the insured person or 
treatment as in -patient in a hosp ital or other institution.  
(3) A per son shall be entitled to medical benefit during any 2[period] for which contributions are 
payable in respect of him or in which he is qualified to claim sickness benefit or maternity benefit 3[or is 
in receipt of such disablement  benefit as does not disent itle him to medical benefit under the regulations]:  
Provided that a person in respect of whom contribution ceases to be payable under this Act may be 
allowed medical benefit for suc
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 29]
ect of whom contribution ceases to be payable under this Act may be 
allowed medical benefit for such period and of such nature as may be provided under  the regulations:  
4[Provided further that an insured person who ceases to be in insurable employment on account of 
permanent disablement shall continue, subject to payment of contribution and such other conditions as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government, to receive me dical benefit till the date on which he would 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 44 of 1966, s. 27, for section 55 (w.e.f. 28 -1-1968).  
2. Subs. by Act 45 of 1984, s . 8, for “week ” (w.e.f. 27 -1-1985).  
3. Subs. by Act 53 of 1951, s . 17, for “or, as provided under the regulations, is in receipt of disablement benefit ”                   
(w.e.f. 6 -10-1951).  
4. Ins. by Act 29 of 1989, s . 23 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1991).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 30]
30 
 have vacated the employment on attaining the age of superannuation had he not sustai ned such permanent 
disablement:  
1[Provided also that an insured person who has attained the age of superannuation, a person wh o 
retires under a Voluntary Retirement Scheme or takes premature retirement, and his spouse shall be 
eligible to receive medical benefit subject to payment of contribution and such other conditions as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government. ]  
Explanat ion.—In this section, “superannuation ”, in relation to an insured person, means the 
attainment by that person of such age as is fixed in the contract or conditions of service as the age on the 
attainment of which he shall vacate the insurable employment or  the age of sixty years where no such age 
is fixed and the person is no more in the insurable employment.]  
57. Scale of medical benefit .—(1) An insured person and (where such medical benefit is extended to 
his family) his family shall be entitled to receive medical benefit only of such kind and on such scale as 
may be provided by the State Government or by the Corporation, and an insured pers on or, where such 
medical benefit is extended to his family, his family shall not have a right to claim any medical treatment 
except such as is provided by the dispensary, hospital, clinic or other institution to which he or his family 
is allotted, or as m ay be provided by the regulations.  
(2) Nothing in this Act shall entitle an insured person and (where such medical benefit is extended to 
his family) his family to claim reimbursement from the Corporation of any expenses incurred in respect of 
any medical treatment, except as may be provided by the regulations.  
58. Provision of medical treatment by State Government .—(1) The State Government shall 
provide for insured persons and (where such  benefit is extended to their families) their families in the 
State,  reasonable medical, su rgical and obstetric treatment:  
Provided that th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 30]
r families in the 
State,  reasonable medical, su rgical and obstetric treatment:  
Provided that the State Government may, with the approval of the Corporation, arrange for medical 
treatment at clinics of medical practitioners on such scale and subject to such terms and co nditions as  may 
be agreed upon.  
(2) Where the incidence of sickness benefit payment to insured persons in any State is found to 
exceed the all -India average, the amount of such excess shall be shared between the Corporation and the 
State Government in such proportion  as may be f ixed by agreement between them:  
Provided that the Corporation may in any case waive the recovery of the whole or any part of the 
share which is to be  borne by the State Government.  
(3) The Corporation may enter into an agreement with a State Go vernment in regard to the nature and 
scale of the medical treatment that should be provided to insured persons and (where such medical benefit 
is extended to the families) their families (including provision of buildings, equipment, medicines and 
staff) an d for the sharing of the cost thereof and of any excess in the incidence of sickness benefit to 
insured persons between the Corporation and the State Government . 
(4) In default of agreement between the Corporation and any State Government as aforesaid the 
nature and extent of the medical treatment to be provided by the State Government and the proportion in 
which the cost thereof and of the excess in the incidence of  sickness benefit shall be shared between the 
Corporation and that Government, shall be determined by an arbitrator (who shall be or shall have been a 
Judge of the 2[High Court 3[of a State]]) appointed by the Chief Justice of India and the award of the 
arbitrator shall be binding on the Corpor ation and the State Government.  
4[(5) The State Government may, in addition to the Corporation under this Act, with the previous 
approval of the Central Government, establish such organisation (by 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 30]
er this Act, with the previous 
approval of the Central Government, establish such organisation (by whatever name called ) to provide for 
certain benefits to employees in case of sickness, maternity and employment injury:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 2010, s. 14 , for the proviso  (w.e.f. 1 -6-2010).  
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1950,  for “High Court of a Province”.  
3. Subs. by Act 53 of 1951, s. 18, for “ of a Part A State” (w.e.f. 6 -10-1951).  
4. Ins. by Act 18 of 2010, s. 15 (w.e.f. 1 -6-2010).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 31]
31 
 Provided that any reference to the State Government in the Act shall also include reference to the 
organisation as and when such organisation is establishe d by the State Government.  
(6) The organisation referred to in sub -section ( 5) shall have such structure and discharge functions, 
exercise powers and undertake such activities as may be prescribed.]  
59. Establishment and maintenance of hospitals, etc., by Corporation .—(1) The Corporation 
may, with the approval of the State Government, establish and maintain in a State such hospitals, 
dispensaries and other medical and surgical services as it may think fit for the benefit of insured persons 
and (where such medical benefit is extended to their families) their families.  
(2) The Corporation may enter into agreement with any 1*** local authority, private body or 
individual in regard to the provision of medical treatment and attendance for insured persons and (where 
such medical  benefit is extended to their families) their families, in any area and sharing the cost thereof.  
2[(3) The Corporation may also enter into agreement with any local authority, local body or private 
body for commissioning and running Employees ’ State Insurance hospitals through third party 
participation for providing medical treatment and attendance to insured persons and where such medical 
benefit has been extended to their families, to their families.]   
3[59A. Provision of medical benefit by t he Corporation in lieu of State Government. —(1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of this Act, the Corporation may, in 
consultation with the State Government, undertake the responsibility for providing medical benefit to 
insured per sons and where such medical benefit is extended to their families, to the families of such 
insured persons in the State subject to the condition that the State Government shall share the cost of such 
medical benefit in such proportion as may be agreed upon  between th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 31]
t shall share the cost of such 
medical benefit in such proportion as may be agreed upon  between the State Government and the 
Corporation.  
(2) In the event of the Corporation exercising its power under sub -section ( 1), the provisions relating 
to medical benefit under this Act shall apply, so far as may be, as if a reference therein to the State 
Government were a  reference to the Corporation.]  
4[59B. Medical a nd para -medical education .—The Corporation may establish medical colleges, 
nursing colleges and t raining institutes for its para -medical staff and other employees with a view to 
improve  the quality of servic es provided under the Employees ’ State Insurance Scheme.]  
General  
60. Benefit not assignable or attachable .—(1) The right to receive any payment of any benefit 
under this Act shall not  be transferable or assignable.  
(2) No cash benefit payable under this Act shall be liable to attachment or sale in execution of an y 
decree or order of any Court.  
61. Bar of b enefits under other enactments. —When a person is entitled to any of the benefits 
provided by this Act, he shall not be entitl ed to receive any similar benefit admissible under the 
provisions of any other enactment.  
62. Persons not to commute cash benefits .—Save as may be provided in the regulations no person 
shall be entitled to commute for a lump sum any 5[disablement benefit]  admissible under this Act.  
6[63. Persons not entitled to receive benefit in certain cases. —Save as may be provided in the 
regulations, no person shall be entitled to sickness benefit or disablement benefit for temporary 
disablement on any day on which he  works or remains on leave or on a holiday in respect of which he 
receives wages or on any day on which he remains on strike.]  
                                                           
1. The words and letter “Part B State”  omitted by the A.O. (No. 4) 1957 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1956).  
2. Ins. by Act 18 of 2010, s. 16 (w.e.f. 1 -6-2010)
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 31]
 by the A.O. (No. 4) 1957 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1956).  
2. Ins. by Act 18 of 2010, s. 16 (w.e.f. 1 -6-2010).  
3. Ins. by Act 44 of 1966, s . 28 (w.e.f. 17 -6-1967).  
4. Ins. by Act 18 of 2010, s. 17 (w.e.f. 1 -6-2010).  
5. Subs. by Act 29 of 1989, s . 24, for “periodical payment ” (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
6. Subs. by s. 25, ibid., for section 63 (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 32]
32 
 64. Recipients of sickness or disablement  benefit to observe conditions. —A person who is in 
receipt of sickness benefit or disab lement benefit (other than benefit granted on p ermanent             
disablement) — 
(a) shall remain under medical treatment at a dispensary, hospital, clinic or other institution 
provided under this Act and shall carry out the instructions given by the medi cal officer or medical 
attendant in charge thereof;  
(b) shall not while under treatment do anything which might retard or prejudice his chances of 
recovery;  
(c) shall not leave the area in which medical treatment provided by this Act is being given, 
without the permission of the medical officer, medical attendant or such other authority as may be 
specified in this behalf by the regulations; and  
(d) shall allow himself to be examined by any duly appointed medical officer 1*** or other person 
authori sed by the Corporation in this behalf.  
65. Benefits not to be combined .—(1) An insured person shall not be entitled to receive for the same 
period — 
(a) both sickness b enefit and maternity benefit; or  
(b) both sickness benefit and disablement benefi t for temporary disablement; or  
(c) both maternity benefit and disablement benefit for temporary disablement . 
(2) Where a person is entitled to more than one of the benefits m entioned in sub -section ( 1), he shall 
be entitled to choose which benefit he shall receive.  
66. [Corporation ’s right to re cover damages from employer in certain cases .] Omitted  by the 
Employees ’ State Insurance  (Amendment ) Act, 1966 (44 of 1966), s. 29 ( w.e.f.  17-6-1967).  
67. [Corporation ’s right to be indemnified in certain cases .] Omitted  by s. 29, ibid. (w.e.f . 17-6-1967).  
68. Corporation ’s rights where a principal employer fails or neglects to pay any                  
contribution .—(1) If any principal employer fails or neglects to pay any contribution which under this 
Act he is liable to pay in respect of any
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 32]
ails or neglects to pay any contribution which under this 
Act he is liable to pay in respect of any employee and by reason thereof such person becomes disentitled 
to any benefit or entitled to a benefit on a lower scale, the Co rporation may, on being satisfied that the 
contribution should have been paid by the principal employer, pay to the person the benefit at the rate to 
which he would have been entitled if the failure or neglect had not occurred and the Corporation shall be 
entitled to recover from the principal employer either — 
2[(i) the difference between the amount of benefit which is paid by the Corporation to the said 
person and the amount of the benefit which would have been payable on the basis of the contributions 
which were in  fact paid by the employer; or]  
(ii) twice the amount of the contribution which the employer failed or neglecte d to pay, 
whichever is greater.  
(2) The amount recoverable under this section may be recovered as if it were an arrear of                         
land-revenue  3[or under section 45C to section 45 -I.]  
69. Liability of owner or occupier of factories, etc., for excessive sickness benefit .—(1) Where the 
Corporation considers that the incidence of sickness among insured pe rsons is excessiv e by reason of —  
(i) insanitary working conditions in a factory or establishment or the neglect of the owner or 
occupier of the factory or establishment to observe any health regulations enjoined on hi m by or 
under any enactment, or  
                                                           
1. The words “or sick visitor ” omitted by Act 29 of 1989, s . 26 (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
2. Subs. by Act 53 of 1951, s. 19, for clause ( i) (w.e.f. 6 -10-1951).  
3. Added  by Act 29 of 1989, s . 27 (w.e.f. 20-10-1989).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 33]
33 
 (ii) insanitary conditions of any tenements or lodgings occupied by insured persons and such 
insanitary conditions are attributable to the neglect of the owner of the tenements or lodgings to 
observe any health regulations enjoined on him by or under any enac tment,  
the Corporation may send to the owner or occupier of the factory or establishment or to the owner of the 
tenements or lodgings, as the case may be, a claim for the payment of the amount of the extra expenditure 
incurred by the Corporation as sickne ss benefit; and if the claim is not settled by agreement, the 
Corporation may refer the matter, with a statement in support of its claim,  to the appropriate Government.  
(2) If the appropriate Government is of opinion that a prima facie  case for inquiry is disclosed, it may 
appoint a competent person or persons to h old an inquiry into the matter.  
(3) if upon such inquiry it is proved to the satisfaction of the person or persons holding the inquiry 
that the excess in incidence of sickness among the insured pe rsons is due to the default or neglect of the 
owner or occupier of the factory or establishment or the owner of the tenements or lodgings, as the case 
may be, the said person or persons shall determine the amount of the extra expenditure incurred as 
sickne ss benefit, and the person or persons by whom the whole or any part of such amount sh all be paid 
to the Corporation.  
(4) A determination under sub -section ( 3) may be enforced as if it were a decree for payment of 
money pas sed in a suit by a Civil Court.  
(5) For the purposes of this section, “owner ” of tenements or lodgings shall include any agent of the 
owner and any person who is entitled to collect the rent of the tenements or lodgings as a lessee of the 
owner.  
70. Repayment of benefit improperly received .—(1) Where any person has received any benefit or 
payment under this Act when he is not lawfully entitled thereto, he shall be liable to repay to the 
Corporati
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 33]
der this Act when he is not lawfully entitled thereto, he shall be liable to repay to the 
Corporation the value of the benefit or the amount of such payment, or in the case of his death his 
represent ative shall be liable to repay the same from the assets of the deceased, if any, in his hands.  
(2) The value of any benefits received other than cash payments shall be determined by such authority 
as may be specified in the regulations made in this behalf and the decision of such authority shall be final.  
(3) The amount recoverable under this section may be recovered as if it were an arrear of                    
land-revenue  1[or under section 45 C to section 45 -I].  
71. Benefit payable up to and including  day of death .—2[If a person dies ] during any period for 
which he is entitled to a cash benefit under this Act, the amount of such benefit up to and including the 
day of his death shall be paid to any person nominated by the deceased person in writing in such form as 
may be specified in t he regulations or if there is no such nomination, to the heir or legal representative of 
the deceased person.  
72. Employer not to reduce wages, etc .—No employer by reason only of his liability for any 
contributions payable under this Act shall, directly o r indirectly reduce the wages of any employee, or 
except as provided by the regulations, discontinue or reduce benefits payable to him under the conditions 
of his service which are similar to the benefits conferred by this Act.  
73. Employer not to dismiss  or punish employee during period of sickness, etc .—(1) No 
employer shall dismiss, discharge, or reduce or otherwise punish an employee during the period the 
employee is in receipt of sickness benefit or maternity benefit, nor shall he, except as provided under the 
regulations, dismiss, discharge or reduce or otherwise punish an employee during the period he is in 
receipt disablement benefit for temporary disablement or is under medical treatment for s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 33]
 he is in 
receipt disablement benefit for temporary disablement or is under medical treatment for sickness or is 
absent from work as a result of illness du ly certified in accordance with the regulations to arise out of the 
pregnancy or confinement renderi ng the employee unfit for work.  
(2) No notice of dismissal or discharge or reduction given to an employee during the period specified 
in sub -section ( 1) sha ll be valid or operative.  
                                                           
1. Added by Act 29 of 1989, s . 27 (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
2. Subs. by s. 28, ibid., for certain words  (w.e.f. 01-02-1991). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 34]
34 
 1[CHAPTER VA  
SCHEME FOR OTHER BENEFICIARIES  
73A. Definitions .—In this Chapter,  — 
(a) “other beneficiaries ” means persons other than the person insured under this Act;  
(b) “Scheme ” means any Scheme framed by the Central Government from time to time under 
section 73B for the medical facility for other beneficiaries;  
(c) “underutilised hospital ” means any hospital not fully utilised by the persons insured under this 
Act; 
(d) “user cha rges” means the amount which is to be charged from the other beneficiaries for 
medical facilities as may be notified by the Corporation in consultation with the Central Government 
from time to time.]  
73B. Power to frame Scheme .—Notwithstanding anything con tained in this Act, the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, frame Scheme for other beneficiaries and the 
members of their families for providing medical facility in any hospital established by the Corporation in 
any area which is underutili sed on payment of user charges.  
73C. Collection of user charges .—The user charges collected from the other beneficiaries shall be 
deemed to be the contribution and shall form part of the E mployees ’ State Insurance Fund.  
73D. Scheme for other beneficiaries .—The Scheme may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely: — 
(i) the other beneficiaries who may be covered under this Scheme;  
(ii) the time and manner in which the medical facilities may be availed by the other beneficiaries;  
(iii) the form in which the other beneficiary shall furnish particulars about himself and his family 
whenever required as may be specified by the Corporation;  
(iv) any other matter which is to be provided for in the Scheme or which may be necessary or 
prope r for the purp ose of implementing the Scheme.  
 73E. Power to amend Scheme .—The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, add to, ame nd, vary or rescind the Scheme.  
73F. Laying of Scheme framed under thi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 34]
icial 
Gazette, add to, ame nd, vary or rescind the Scheme.  
73F. Laying of Scheme framed under this Chapter .—Every Scheme framed under this Chapter 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session, for 
a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, 
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the Scheme or both Houses agree that the 
Scheme should not be made, the Scheme shall thereafter have effect only i n such modified form or to be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that Scheme.]  
CHAPTER VI  
ADJUDICATION OF  DISPUTE AND CLAIMS  
74. Constitution of Employees ’ Insurance Court .—(1) The State Government shall, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, constitute an Employees ’ Insurance Court for such local area as may be  specified 
in the notification.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 2010, s. 18, for Chapter VA (w.e.f. 03-07-2008). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 35]
35 
 (2) The Court shall consist of such number of Judges as the State Government may think fit.  
(3) Any person who is or has been a judicial officer or is a legal practitioner of five years ’ standing 
shall be qualified to be a Judge of the Employees ’ Insurance C ourt.  
(4) The State Government may appoint the same Court for two or more local areas or two or more 
Courts for the same local area.  
(5) Where more than one Court has been appointed for the same local area, the State Government 
may by general or special order regulate the distribution of business between them.  
75. Matters to be decided by Employees ’ Insurance Court .—(1) If any qu estion or dispute arises 
as to— 
(a) whether any person is an employee within the meaning of this Act or whether he is liable to  
pay the employee ’s contribution, or  
(b) the rate of wages or average daily wages of an employee f or the purposes of this Act, or  
(c) the rate of contribution payable by a principal employer  in respect of any employee, or  
(d) the person who is or was the principal employer  in respect of any employee, or  
(e) the right of any person to any benefit and as to the amount and duration thereof, or  
1[(ee) any direction issued by the Corporation under section 55A on a review of any payment of 
dependant ’s benefits,  or]  
2*   *   *   *  *  
(g) any other matter which is in dispute between a principal employer and the Corporation, or 
between a principal employer and an immediate employer, or between a person and the Corporation 
or between an employee and a principal or immediate employer in resp ect of any contribution or 
benefit or other dues payable or recoverable under this Act 3[or any other matter required to be or 
which may be decided by the Employees ’ Insurance Court under this Act],  
such question or dispute 4[subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 2A)] shall be decided by the 
Employees ’ Insurance Court in accordance wi th the provisions of this Act.  
(2) 4[Subj
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 35]
ded by the 
Employees ’ Insurance Court in accordance wi th the provisions of this Act.  
(2) 4[Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2A), the following claims] shall be decided by the 
Employee s’ Insurance Court, namely: — 
(a) claim for the recovery of contributions from the principal employer;  
(b) claim by a principal employer to recover contributions from any immediate employer;  
2*   *   *  *    * 
(d) claim against a principal employer under section 68;  
(e) claim under section 70 for the recovery of the value or amount of the benefits received by a 
person when he is not lawfully entitled thereto; and  
(f) any claim for the recovery of any benefit admissible under this Act.  
3[(2A) If in any proceedings befo re the Employees ’ Insurance Court a disablement question arises and 
the decision of a medical board or a medical appeal tribunal has not been obtained on the same and the 
decision of such question is necessary for the determination of the claim or question  before the 
Employees ’ Insurance Court, that Court shall direct the Corporation to have the question decided by this 
Act and shall thereafter proceed with the determination of the claim or question before it in accordance 
with the decision of the medical b oard or the medical appeal tribunal, as the case may be, except where an 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 44 of 1966, s. 32, for clause ( ee) (w.e.f. 28 -1-1968).  
2. Omitted by s. 32, ibid.  (w.e.f. 28 -1-1968).  
3. Ins. by s . 32, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -1-1968).  
4. Subs.  by s. 32,  ibid.,  for “The following claims ” (w.e.f. 28 -1-1968).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 36]
36 
 appeal has been filed before the Employees ’ Insurance Court under sub -section ( 2) of section 54A in 
which case the Employees ’ Insurance Court may itself determine all the issues arisi ng before it.  
1[(2B) No matter which is in dispute between a principal employer and the Corporation in respect of 
any contribution or any other dues shall be raised by the principal employer in the Employees ’ Insurance 
Court unless he has deposited with the Court fifty per cent. of the amount due from him  as claimed by the 
Corporation:  
Provided that the Court may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, waive or reduce the amount to be 
deposited under this sub -section.]  
(3) No Civil Court shall have jurisdiction to decide or deal with any question or dispute as aforesaid 
or to adjudicate on any liability which by or under this Act is to be decided by 2[a medical board, or by a 
medical appeal tribunal or by the Employees ’ Insurance Court].  
76. Institution of proceedings, etc. —(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and any rules made by 
the State Government, all proceedings before the Employees ’ Insurance Court shall be instituted in the 
Court appointed for th e local area in which the insured person was working at the time the question or 
dispute arose.  
(2) If the Court is satisfied that any matter arising out of any proceeding pending before it can be 
more conveniently dealt with by any other Employees ’ Insurance Court in the same State, it may, subject 
to any rules made by the State Government in this behalf order such matter to be transferred to such other 
Court for disposal and shall forthwith transmit to such other Court the records connected with th at matter.  
(3) The State Government may transfer any matter pending before any Employees ’ Insurance Court 
in the State to any such Court in another State with the consent of the State Government of that State.  
(4) The Court to which any m atter is transferred under sub -section ( 2) or sub
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 36]
nt of that State.  
(4) The Court to which any m atter is transferred under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) shall 
continue the proceedings as if they had been originally instituted in it . 
77. Commencement of proceedings. —(1) The proceedings before an Employees ’ Insurance Court 
shall be commenced by application.  
3[(1A) Every such application shall be made within a period of three years from the date on which the 
cause of action arose.  
Explanation .—For th e purpose of this sub -section, — 
 (a) the cause of action i n respect of a claim for benefit shall not be deemed to arise unless the 
insured person or in the case of dependants ’ benefit, the dependants of the insured person claims or 
claim that benefit in accordance with the regulations made in that behalf within a  period of twelve 
months after the claim became due or within such further period as the Employees ’ Insurance Court 
may allow on grounds which appear to it to be reasonable ];  
4[(b) the cause of action in respect of a claim by the Corporation for recoverin g contributions 
(including interest and damages) from the principal employer shall be deemed to have arisen on the 
date on which such claim is made by the Corporation for the first time:  
Provided that no claim shall be made by the Corporation after five ye ars of the per iod to 
which the claim relates;  
(c) the cause of action in respect of a claim by the principal employer for recovering contributions 
from an immediate employer shall not be deemed to arise till the date by which the evidence of 
contributions having been paid is due to be received by the Corp oration under the regulations.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 29 of 1989, s . 29 (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
2. Subs. by Act 44 of 1966, s . 32, for  “the Employees ' Insurance Court ” (w.e.f. 28 -1-1968).  
3. Ins. by s . 33, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -1-1968).  
4. Subs. by Act 29 of 1989, s . 30, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 20 -10
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 36]
 33, ibid. (w.e.f. 28 -1-1968).  
4. Subs. by Act 29 of 1989, s . 30, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 37]
37 
 (2) Every such application shall be in such form and shall contain such particulars and shall be 
accompanied by such fee, if any, as may be prescribed by rules made by the State Government in 
consultation with the Corporation.  
78. Powers of Employees ’ Insur ance Court .—(1) The Employees ’ Insurance Court shall have all 
the powers of a Civil Court for the purposes of summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses, 
compelling the discovery and production of documents and material objects, administering oath  and 
recording evidence and such Court shall be deemed to be a Civil Court within the meaning of 1[section 
195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Crimina l Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).]  
(2) The Employees ’ Insurance Court shall follow such procedure as may be p rescribed by rules made 
by the State Government.  
(3) All costs incidental to any proceeding before an Employees ’ Insurance Court shall, subject to such 
rules as may be made in this behalf by the State Government, be in the discretion of the Court.  
(4) An order of the Employees ’ Insurance Court shall be enforceable as if it were a decree passed in a 
suit by a Civil Court.  
79. Appearance by legal practitioners, etc .—Any application, appearance or act required to be 
made or done by any person to or before an Employees ’ Insurance Court (other than appearance of a 
person required for the purpose of his examination as a witness) may be made or done by a legal 
practitioner or by an officer of a registered trade union authorized in writing by such person or with  the 
permission of the Court, by any other person so authorized.  
80. [Benefit not admissible unless claimed in time .] Omitted  by the Employees ’ State Insurance  
(Amendment ) Act, 1966 (44 of 1966), s. 34 ( w.e.f . 28-1-1968).  
81. Reference to High Court .—An Employees ’ Insurance Court may submit any question of law for 
the decision of the High Court and if it does so shall decide the question pending before it in
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 37]
for 
the decision of the High Court and if it does so shall decide the question pending before it in accordance 
with such decision.  
82. Appear. —(1) Save as expressly provided in this section, no app eal shall lie from an order of  an 
Employees ’ Insurance Court.  
(2) An appeal shall lie to the High Court from an order of an Employees ’ Insurance Court if it 
involves  a substantial question of law.  
(3) The period of limitation for an appeal under this section shall be sixty days.  
(4) The provisions of section 5 and 12 of the 2[Limitation Act, 1963 (36 -6-1963)] shall apply to 
appeals under this section.  
83. Stay of payment pending appeal .—Where the Corporation has presented an appeal against an 
order of the Employees ’ Insurance Court, that Court may, and if so directed by the High Court shall, 
pending the decision of the appeal, withhold the payment of any sum directed to be paid by the order 
appeale d against.  
CHAPTER VII  
PENALTIES  
84. Punishment for false statement .—Whoever, for the purpose of causing any increase in payment 
or benefit under this Act, or for the purpose of causing any payment or benefit to be made where no 
payment or benefit is authori sed by or under this Act, or for the purpose of avoiding any payment to be 
made by himself under this Act or enabling any other person to avoid any such payment, knowingly 
makes or causes to be made any false statement or false representation, shall  be punishable with 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 1984, s . 9, for “section 195 and Chapter XXXV of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898)”               
(w.e.f. 27 -1-1985).  
2. Subs. by Act 29 of 1989, s . 31, for “Indian Limitation Act, 1908 (9 of 1908) ” (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 38]
38 
 imprisonment for a term which may extend to 1[six months] or with fine not exceeding 2[two thous and] 
rupees, or with both:  
3[Provided that where an insured person is convicted under this section, he shall not be entitled for 
any cash b enefit under this Act for such period as may be prescribed by the Central Government].  
85. Punishment for failure to pay contributions, etc .—If any person — 
(a) fails to pay any contribution which under this Act he is liable to pay, or  
(b) deducts or attempts to deduct from the wages of an employee the whole or any part of the 
employer ’s contribution, or  
(c) in contravention of section 72 reduces the wages or any privileges or benefits admissible to an 
employee, or  
(d) in contravention of section 73 or any regulation dismisses, discharges, reduces or otherwise 
punishes an employee, or  
 (e) fails or refuses to submit any return required by the regulations, or makes a false return, or  
(f) obstructs any Inspector or other official of the Corporation in the discharge of his duties, or  
(g) is guilty of any contravention of or non -compliance with any of the requirements of this Act 
or the rules or the regulations in respect of which no special penalty is provided,  
4[he shall be punishable — 
5[(i) where he commits an offence under clause ( a), with imprisonment for a term which  may 
extend to three years but — 
(a) which shall not be less than one year, in case of failure to pay the employee ’s contribution 
which has been deducted by him from the employee ’s wages and shall also be liable to fine of ten 
thousand rupees;  
(b) which shall not be less than six months, in any other case and shall also be liable t o fine of 
five thousand rupees:  
Provided that the Court may, for any adequate and special reasons to be recorded in the judgment, 
impose a sentence of imprisonment for a lesser term;  
(ii) where he commits an offence under any of the clauses ( b) to ( g) (both inclusive), with 
imprisonment fo
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 38]
 he commits an offence under any of the clauses ( b) to ( g) (both inclusive), with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which may extend  to four thousand 
rupees, or with both.]   
6[85A. Enhanced punishment in certain cases after previous conviction .—Whoever, having been 
convicted by a court of an offence punishable under this Act, commits the same offence shall, for every 
such subsequent offence, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 7[two years 
and with  fine of five thousand rupees]:  
Provided that where such subsequent offence is for failure by the employer to pay any contribution 
which under this Act he is liable to pay, he shall, for every such subsequent offence, be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend t o 8[five years but which shall not be less than two years and 
shall also be liable to fine of twenty -five thousand rupees].  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 1989, s. 32, for “three months ” (w.e.f. 2 0-10-1989).  
2. Subs. by s. 32, ibid., for “five hundred ” (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
3.  The proviso shall stand Inserted (date to be notified) by s. 32, ibid. (w.e.f. 01 -02-1991)  
4. Subs. by Act 38 of 1975, s . 4, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -9-1975).  
5. Subs. by Act 29 of 1989, s . 33, for clauses ( i) and ( ii) (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
6. Ins. by Act 38 of 1975, s . 5 (w.e.f. 1 -9-1975).  
7. Subs. by Act 29 of 1989, s . 34, for “one year , or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or  with both”                       
(w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
8. Subs. by s . 35, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 39]
39 
 85B. Power to recover damages. —(1) Where an employer fails to pay the amount due in respect of 
any contribution or any other amount  payable under this Act, the Corporation may recover , 1[from the 
employer by way of penalty such damages not exceeding the amount of arrears as may be  specified in the 
regulations]:  
Provided that before recovering such damages, the employer shall be given a reasonable opportunity 
of being heard:  
2[Provided further that the Corporation may reduce or waive the damages recoverable under this 
section in relation to an establishment which  is a sick industrial company in respect of which a scheme for 
rehabilitation has been sanctioned by the Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction established 
under section 4 of the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985 (1 of 198 6), subject to 
such terms and conditions as may be specified in regulations.]  
(2) Any damages recoverable under sub -section ( 1) may be recovered as an arrear of land revenue 
2[or under section 45 C to section 45 -I].  
85C. Power of Court to make orders .—(1) Where an employer is convicted of an offence for 
failure to pay any contribution payable under this Act, the Court may, in addition to awarding any 
punishment, by order, in writing, require him within a period specified in the order (which the Court may 
if it thinks fit and on application in that behalf, from time to time, extend), to pay the amount of 
contribution in respect of which the offence was committ ed, 3[and to furnish the return r elating to such 
contributions].  
(2) Where an order is made under s ub-section ( 1), the employer shall not be liable under this Act in 
respect of the continuation of the offence during the period or extended period, if any, allowed by the 
Court, but if, on the expiry of such period or extended period, as the case may be, t he order of the Court 
has not been fully complied with, the employer shall deemed to have committed a furth
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 39]
 of the Court 
has not been fully complied with, the employer shall deemed to have committed a further offence and 
shall be punishable with imprisonment in respect thereof under section 85 and shall also be liable to pay 
fine which may extend to 4[one thousand] rupees for every day after such expiry on which the order has 
not been complied with.]  
86. Prosecutions .—(1) No prosecution under this Act shall be instituted except by or with the 
previous sanction of the Insurance Commissioner 5[or of such other officer of the Corporation as may be 
authori sed in this behalf by the 6[Director General of the Corporation]].  
7[(2) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate of the First Class 
shall try any offence u nder this Act.]  
(3) No Court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act except on a complaint made in 
writing in respect thereof 8***.  
9[86A. Offences by companies. —(1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a 
company, every person, who at the time the offence was committed was in  charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any person liable to any punishment, 
if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence 
to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of, any director 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 1989, s. 35, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -1-1992).  
2. Ins. by s. 35, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -1-1992).  
3. Added by s. 36, ibid. (w.e.f. 20-10-1
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 39]
1 -1-1992).  
2. Ins. by s. 35, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -1-1992).  
3. Added by s. 36, ibid. (w.e.f. 20-10-1989).  
4. Subs. by s . 36,  ibid.,  for “one hundred” (w.e.f.  20 -10-1989).  
5. Added by Act 53 of 1951, s. 22 (w.e.f. 6 -10-1951).  
6. Subs. by Act 44 of 1966, s. 35, for “Central Government ” (w.e.f. 17 -6-1967).  
7. Subs. by Act 29 of 1989, s. 37, for sub-section ( 2) (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
8. Certain words omitted by s. 37 , ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
9. Ins. by s. 38 , ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 40]
40 
 or manager, secret ary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer 
shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(i) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm and other associations of 
individuals; and  
(ii) “director ” in relation to — 
(a) a company, other than a firm, means the managing director or a whole -time director;  
(b) a firm means a partner in the firm.]  
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
87. Exemption of a factory or establishment or class of factories or establishments .—The 
appropriate Government, may, by notification in the Official Gazette and subject to such conditions as 
may be specified in the notification, exempt any factory or establishment or class of factories or 
establishments in any specified area from the operation of this Act for a period not exceeding one year 
and may from time to time by like notification ren ew any such exemption for periods not exceeding one 
year at a time.  
1[Provided that such exemptions may be granted only if the employees in such factories or 
establishments are otherwise in receipt of benefits substantially similar or superior to the bene fits 
provided under this Act:  
Provided further that an application for renewal shall be made three months before the date of expiry 
of the exemption period and a decision on the same shall be taken by the appropriate Government within 
two months of receipt  of such application.]  
88. Exemption of persons or class of persons. —The appropriate Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette and subject to such conditions as it may deem fit to impose, exempt any persons or 
class of persons employed in any  factory or establishment or class of factories or establishments to which 
this Act applies from the operation of the Act.  
89. Corporation to make representation .—No exempti
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 40]
his Act applies from the operation of the Act.  
89. Corporation to make representation .—No exemption shall be granted or renewed under  
section 87 or section 88, unless a reasonable opportunity has been given to the Corporation to make any 
representation it may wish to make in regard to the proposal and such representation has been considered 
by the appropriate Government.  
90. Exemption o f factories or establishments belonging to Government or any local  
authority .—The appropriate Government may 2[after consultation with the Corporation,] by notification 
in the Official Gazette and subject to such conditions as may be specified in the noti fication, exempt any 
factory or establishment belonging to 3*** any local authority 4[the operation of this Act], if the 
employees in any such factory or establishment are otherwise in receipt of benefits substantially similar or 
superior to the benefits p rovided under this Act.  
91. Exemption from one or more provisions of the Act .—The appropriate Government may, with 
the consent of the Corporation, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt any employees or class of 
employees in any factory or establ ishment or class of factories or establishments from one or more of the 
provisions relating to the benefits provided under this Act.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 18 of 2010, s. 20 (w.e.f. 1 -6-2010).  
2. Ins. by Act 44 of 1966, s . 36 (w.e.f. 17 -6-1967).  
3. The words “The Government or ” omitted by Act 29 of 1989, s . 39 (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
4. Ins. by Act 44 of 1966, s. 36 (w.e.f. 17 -6-1967).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 41]
41 
 1[91A. Exemptions to be either prospective or retrospective .—Any notification granting 
exemption under section 87, section 88, section 90 or section 91 may be issued so as to take effect                 
2[prospectively ] on such date as may be specified therein.]  
3[91AA. Central Government to be appropriate Governme nt.—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in this Act, in respect of establishments located in the States where medical benefit is provided 
by the Corporation, the Central Government shall be the appropriate Government.]  
4[91B. Misuse of benefits .—If the Central Government is satisfied that the benefits under this Act are 
being misused by insured persons in a factory or establishment, that Government may, by order, 
published in the Official Gazette, disentitle such persons from such of the benefits as it thinks fit:  
Provided that no such order shall be passed unless a reasonable opportunity of being heard is given to 
the concerned factory or establishment, insured persons and the trade unions registered under the Trade 
Unions Act, 1926 (16 of 1926) having members in the factory or establishment.  
91C. Writing off of losses .—Subject to the conditions as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government, where the Corporation is of opinion that the amount of contribution, interest and damages 
due to the Corp oration is irrecoverable, the Corporation may sanction the writing off finally of the said 
amount.]  
92. Power of Central Government to give directions .—5[(1)] The Central Government may give 
directions to a State Government as to the carrying into executi on of this Act in the State.  
6[(2) The Central Government may, from time to time, give such directions to the Corporation as it 
may think fit for the efficient administration of the Act, and if any such direction is given, the Corporation 
shall comply with such direction.]  
93. Corporation officers and servants to be public servants .—All officers and servants of the 
Corpora
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 41]
 Corporation officers and servants to be public servants .—All officers and servants of the 
Corporation shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 1860).  
7[93A. Liability in case of transfer of establishment .—Where an employer, in relation to a factory 
or establishment, transfers that factory or establishment in whole or in part, by sale, gift, lease or licence 
or in any other manner whatsoever, the employer and the person to whom the factory or establishment is 
so transferred shall jointly and severally be liable to pay the amount due in respect of any contribution or 
any other amount payable under this Act in respect of the periods u p to the date of such transfer:  
Provided  that the liability of the transferee shall be limited to the value of the assets obtained by him 
by such transfer.]  
94. Contributions, etc., due to Corporation to have priority over other debts .—There shall be 
deemed to be included among the debts which,  under section 49 of the Presidency -towns In solvency Act, 
1909 (3 of 1909) or under section 61 of the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920 (5 of 1920), 8[or under any 
law relating to insolvency in force 9[in the territories which, immediately before the 1st Nov ember, 1956 
were comprised in a Part B State]], 10[or under section 530 of the  Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956 )], are, 
in the distribution of the property of the insolvent or in the distribution of the assets of a company being 
wound up, to be paid in priority to all other debts, the amount due in respect of any contribution or any 
other amount payable under this Act the liability where  for accured before the date of the order of 
adjudication of the insolvent or the date of the winding up, as the case m ay be.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 44 of 1966, s. 37 (w.e.f. 17 -6-1967).  
2. Subs. by Act 18 of 2010, s. 21, for “either prospectively or re trospectively”
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 41]
.f. 17 -6-1967).  
2. Subs. by Act 18 of 2010, s. 21, for “either prospectively or re trospectively” (w.e.f. 1 -6-2010).  
3. Ins. by s. 22, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -6-2010).  
4. Ins. by Act 29 of 1989, s . 40 (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
5. Section 92 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by s . 41, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
6. Ins. by s . 41, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
7. Ins. by Act 38 of 1975, s . 6 (w.e.f. 1 -9-1975).  
8. Ins. by Act 53 of 1951, s . 23 (w.e.f. 6 -10-1951).  
9. Subs. by A.O. (No. 3) , 1956, for “in a Part B State ”. 
10. Subs. by Act 29 of 1989, s . 42, for “or under section 230 of the Indian Companies Act, 1913 (7 of 1913)”  (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 42]
42 
 1[94A. Delegation of powers .—The Corporation, and, subject to any regulations made by the 
Corporation in this behalf, the Standing Committee may direct that all or any of the powers and functions 
which may be exercised or performed by the Corporatio n or the Standing Committee, as the case may be, 
may, in relation to such matters and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified, be also 
exercisable by any officer or authority subordinate to the Corporation.]  
95. Power of Central Government  to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, 2[after 
consultation with the Corporation and] subject to the condition of previous publication, make rules   not 
inconsistent with this Act for the purpose of giving effect to the provis ions thereof.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
3[(a) the limit of wages beyond which a person shall not be deemed to be an employee ; 
(ab) the limit of maxi mum monthly  salary for the purpose of sub -section ( 1) of section 17;]  
4[(ac)] the manner in which 5[appointments] and elections of members of the Corporation, the 
Standing Committee and the Medical Benefit Council shall be made;  
(b) the quorum at meeting s of the Corporation, the Standing Committee and the Medical Benefit 
Council and the minimum number of meetings of those bodies to be held in a year;  
(c) the records to be kept of the transaction of business by the Corporation, the Standing 
Committee and the Medical Benefit Council;  
(d) the powers and duties of the 6[Director General and the Financial Commissioner] and the 
conditions of their service;  
(e) the powers and duties of the Medical Benefit Council;  
7[(ea) the types of expenses which may be termed as administrative expenses, the percentage of 
income of the Corporation which may be spent for such expenses;  
(eb) the rates of contributions and limits of wages below 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 42]
n which may be spent for such expenses;  
(eb) the rates of contributions and limits of wages below which employees are not liable to pay 
contri bution;  
(ec) the manner of calcula tion of the average daily wage;  
(ed) the manner of certifying the certificate to recover amount by the Recovery Officer;  
(ee) the amount of funeral expenses;  
(ef) the qualifications, conditions, rates and period of sickness, benefit, maternity benefit, 
disablement benefit and dependents benefit;  
8[(eff) the income of dependant parents from all sources;]   
(eg) the conditions for grant of medical benefits for insured persons who cease to be in insurable 
employment on ac count of permanent disablement;  
(eh) the conditions for grant of medical benefits for persons who have attaine d the age of 
Superannuation;]  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 53 of 1951, s . 24 (w.e.f. 6 -10-1951).  
2. Ins. by Act 44 of 1966, s . 38 (w.e.f. 28 -1-1968).  
3. Ins. by Act 29 of 1989, s . 43 (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
4. Clause ( a) re-lettered as clause ( ac) by s . 43, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
5. Subs. by s. 43,  ibid., for “nominations”  (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
6. Subs. by s . 43, ibid., for “Principal Officers ” (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
7. Ins. by s. 43 , ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
8. Ins. by Act 18 of 2010, s. 23 (w.e.f. 1 -6-2010).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 43]
43 
 1[(ehh) the conditions under which the medical benefits shall be payable to the insured person and 
spouse of an insured person who has attained the age of  superannuation, the person who retires under 
Voluntary Retirement Scheme and the person who takes pre-mature retirement;]  
2[ 3[(ei)] the manner in which and the time within which appeals may be filed to medical appeal 
tribunals o r Employees ’ Insurance Courts;]  
(f) the procedure to be adopted in the execution of contracts;  
(g) the acquisition, holding and disposal of property by the Corporation;  
 (h) the raising and repayment of loans;  
(i) the investment of the funds of the Corporation and of any provident or other benefit fund and 
their transfer or realisation ;  
(j) the basis on which the periodical valuation of the assets and liabilities of the Corporation shall 
be made;  
(k) the bank or banks in which the funds of the Corporation may be deposited, the procedure to be 
followed in regard to the crediting of moneys a ccruing or payable to the Corporation and the manner 
in which any sums may be paid out of the Corporation funds and the officers by whom such payment 
may be authori sed;  
(l) the accounts to be maintained by the Corporation and the forms in which such accou nts shall 
be kept and the times at which such accounts shall be audited;  
 (m) the publication of the accounts of the Corporation and the report of auditors, the action to be 
taken on the audit report, the powers of auditors to disallow and surcharge items of expenditure and 
the recovery of sums so disallowed or surcharged;  
(n) the preparation of budget estimates and of supplementary estimates and the manner in which 
such estimates shall be sanctioned and published;  
 (o) the establishment and maintenance of provident or other benefit fund for officers and servants 
of the Corporation; 4*** 
5[(oa) the period of non -entitlement for cash benefit in case of conviction of an insured person ;] 
 (p) any matter whic
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 43]
on -entitlement for cash benefit in case of conviction of an insured person ;] 
 (p) any matter which is required o r allowed by this Act to be prescri bed by the Central 
Government.  
6[(2A) The power to make rules conferred by this section shall include the power to give retrospective 
effect, from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this Act, to the rules or any of them but 
no retrospective effect shall be given to any rule so as to prejudicially affect the interest of any person 
other than the Corporation to whom such rule may be applicable.]  
(3) Rules made under this section shall be published in the Official Gazette and thereupon shall have 
effect as if enacted in this Ac t.  
7[(4) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session 8[or in two or more successive se ssions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid] both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule of both  Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereaf ter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 18 of 2010, s. 23 (w.e.f. 1 -6-2010).  
2. Ins. by Act 44 of 1966, s. 38 (w.e.f. 28 -1-1968).  
3. Clause ( ee) re-lettered as Clause ( ei) by Act 29 of 1989 , s. 43 (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
4. The word “and” omitted by s . 43, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
5. Ins. by s . 43, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
6. Ins. by Act 45 of 1984, s. 10 (w.e.f. 27 -1-1985).  
7. Ins. by Act 44 of 1966, s. 38 (w.e.f. 28 -1-1968).  
8. Subs. by Act 38 of 1975, s. 7, for certain  wor
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 43]
. by Act 44 of 1966, s. 38 (w.e.f. 28 -1-1968).  
8. Subs. by Act 38 of 1975, s. 7, for certain  words (w.e.f. 1 -9-1975).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 44]
44 
 96. Power of State Government t o make rules .—(1) The State Government may, 1[after 
consultation with the Corporation and] subject to the condition of previous publication, make rules not 
inconsistent with this Act in regard to all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) the constitution of Employees ’ Insurance Courts, the qualifications of persons who may be 
appointed Judges thereof, and the condit ions of service of such Judges;  
(b) the procedure to be followed in proceedings before such Courts and the execution of orders 
made by such Courts;  
(c) the fee payable in respect of applications made to the Employees ’ Insurance Court, the costs 
incidental to the proceedings in such Court, the form in which applications should be made to it and 
the particulars to be specified in such  applications ; 
(d) the establishment of hospitals, dispensaries and other institutions, the allotment of insured 
persons or their families to any such hospital, dispensary or other institution;  
(e) the scale of medical benefit which shall be provided at a ny hospital, clinic, dispensary or 
institution, the keeping of medical records and the fur nishing of statistical returns;  
2[(ee) the organisational structure, functions, powers, activities and other matters for the 
establishment of the organisation;]  
(f) the nature and extent of the staff, equipment and medicine that shall be provided at such 
hospitals,  dispensaries and institutions;  
(g) the conditions of service of the staff employed at such hospitals dispensaries and institutions; 
and  
(h) any other matt er which is required or allowed by this Act to be prescribed by the State 
Government.  
(2) Rules made under this section shall be published in the Official Gazette and thereupon shall have 
effect as if enacted in this Act.  
3[(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of the State Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 44]
be after it is made, before each 
House of the State Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or, where such Legislature consists of one 
House, before that House.]  
97. Power of Corporati on to make regulations .—(1) The Corporation may, 4*** subject to the 
condition of previous publications, make regulations, not inconsistent with this Act and the rules made 
thereunder, for the administration of the affairs of the Corporation and for carrying into eff ect the 
provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(i) the time and place of meetings of the Corp oration, the Standing Committee and the Medical 
Benefit Council and the procedure to be followed at such meetings;  
5[(ia) the time within which and the manner in which a factory or establishment shall be 
registered;]  
(ii) the matters which shall be refer red by the Standing Committee t o the Corporation for 
decision;  
(iii) the manner in which any contribution payable under this Act shall be assessed and collected;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 44 of 1966, s. 39 (w.e.f. 28 -1-1968).  
2. Ins. by Act 18 of 2010, s. 24 (w.e.f. 1 -6-2010).  
3. Ins. by Act 45 of 1984, s. 11 (w.e.f. 27 -1-1985).  
4. The words "with the prior approval of the Central Government" omitted  by Act 29 of 1989, s. 44 (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
5. Ins.  by Act 44 of 1966, s. 40 (w.e.f. 28 -1-1968).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 45]
45 
 1[(iiia) the rate of interest higher than twelve per cent. on del ayed payment of contributions;]  
(iv) reckoning of wages for the purpose of fixing the contribution payable under this Act;  
2[(iva) the register of employees to be maintained by the immediate employer;  
(ivb) the entitlement of sickness benefit or disablement benefit for temporary disablement on any 
day on which person works or remains on leave or on holiday and in respect of which he receives 
wages or for any day on which he remains on strike;]  
(v) the certification of sickness and eligibility for any cash benefit ;  
3[(vi) the method of determining whether an insured person is suffering from one or more of the 
diseases specified in the Third Schedule;]  
(vii) the assessing of the money value of any benefit which is not a cash benefit;  
(viii) the time within which  4[and the form and manner in which] any claim for a benefit may be 
made and the particulars to be specified in such claim;  
(ix) the circumstances in which an employee in receipt of disablement benefit may be dismissed, 
discharged, reduced or otherwise puni shed;  
(x) the manner in which and the place and time at which any benefit shall be paid;  
(xi) the method of calculating the amount of cash benefit payable and the circumstances in which 
and the extent to which commutation of disablement and dependant ’s benefits, may be allowed and 
the method of calculating the commutation value;  
(xii) the notice of pregnancy or of confinement and notice and proof of sickness;  
3[(xiia) specifying the authority competent to give certificate of eligibility for maternity benefit;  
(xiib) the manner of nomination by an insured woman for payment of maternity benefit in case of 
her or her child ’s death;  
(xiic) the production of proof in sup port of claim for maternity benefit or additional maternity 
benefit;]  
(xiii) the conditions under which any benefit may be suspended;  
(xiv) the conditions to be observed by a person
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 45]
nditions under which any benefit may be suspended;  
(xiv) the conditions to be observed by a person when in receipt of any benefit and the periodical 
medical examination of  such persons;  
5*   *   *   *  *  
(xvi) the appointment of medical practitioners for the purposes of this Act, the duties of such 
practitioners and the form of medical certificates;  
3[(xvia) the qualification  and experience which a person should possess for giving certificate of 
sickness;  
(xvib) the constitution of medical boards and medical appeal tribunals;]  
(xvii) the penalties for breach of regulations by fine (not exceeding two days ’ wages for a first 
breach and not exceeding three days ’ wages for any subsequent breach) which may be imposed on 
employees;  
2[(xviia ) the amount of damages to be recovered as penalty;  
(xviib ) the terms and conditions for reduction or waiver of damages in relation to a sick industrial 
company;]  
                                                           
1. Subs . by Act  29 of 1989, s . 44, for clause ( iiia) (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
2. Ins. by s. 44 , ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
3. Subs . by Act 44 of 1966, s . 40, for clause ( vi) (w.e.f. 28 -1-1968).  
4. Subs . by s. 40,  ibid., for “and the form in which”  (w.e.f. 28 -1-1968).  
5. Omitted by Act 29 of 1989, s. 44 (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 46]
46 
 (xviii) the circumstances in which and the conditions subject to which any regulation may be 
relaxed, the extent of such relaxation, and the authority by whom such relaxation may be granted;  
1[(xix) the returns to be submitted and th e registers or records to be maintained by the principal 
and immediate employers, the forms of such returns, registers or records, and the times at which such 
returns should be submitted and the particulars which such returns, registers and records should 
contain;]  
(xx) the duties and power s of 2[Social Security Officers]  and other officers and servants of the 
Corporation;  
3[(xxa) the constitution of the appellate authority and the interest on amount deposited by the 
employer with the Corporation ;] 
4[(xxi) the method of recruitment, pay and allowances, discipline, superannuation benefits and 
other conditions of service of the officers and servants of the Corporation other than the 5[Director 
General and Financial Commissioner]];  
(xxii) the procedure to be  followed in remitting contrib utions to the Corporation ; and  
(xxiii) any matter in respect of which regulations are required or permitted to be made by this  Act.  
6[(2A) The condition of previous publication shall not apply to any regulations of the nature  specified 
in clause ( xxi) of sub -section ( 2).]  
(3) Regulations made by the Corporation shall be published in the Gazette of India and thereupon 
shall have effect as if enacted in this Act.  
7[(4) Every regulation shall, as soon as may be, after it is mad e by the Corporation, be forwarded to 
the Central Government and that Government shall cause a copy of the same to be laid before each House 
of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days, which may be comprised in one 
session or i n two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately  
following the session the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modificat
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 46]
 
following the session the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in 
the regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, the regulation shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of any thing previously done under 
that regulation.]  
98. [Corporation may undertake duties in Part B States. ] Omitted  by the Employees ’ State Insurance  
(Amendment ) Act, 1951 (53 of 1951), s. 26. 
8[99. Medical care for t he families of insured persons. —At any time when its funds so permit, the 
Corporation may provide or contribute towards the cost of medical care for the families of insured 
persons.]  
9[99A. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
or give such directions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or 
expedient for removing the difficulty.  
(2) Any order made under this section shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent 
therewith in any rules or regulations made under this Act.]  
                                                           
1. Subs . by Act 53 of 1951, s . 25, for clause ( xix) (w.e.f. 6 -10-1951).  
2. Subs. by Act 18 of 2010, s. 25, for “Inspectors” (w.e.f. 1 -6-2010).  
3. Ins. by s. 25, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -6-2010).  
4. Subs . by Act 53 of 1951, s . 25, for clause ( xxi) (w.e.f. 6 -10-1951).  
5. Subs . by Act 29 of 1989, s . 44, for “Principal Officers ” (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
6. Ins. by Act 53 of 1951, s. 25 (w.e.f. 6 -10-1951).  
7. Ins. by Act 45 of 1984, s. 12 (w.e.f. 27 -1-1985).  
8. Subs. by Act 29 of 1989, s . 45, for section 99 (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
9. Ins. by Act 44 of 1966, s . 41 (w.e.f. 17 -6-1967).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 46]
, for section 99 (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
9. Ins. by Act 44 of 1966, s . 41 (w.e.f. 17 -6-1967).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 47]
47 
 1[100. Repeals and savings .— If, immediately before the day on which this Act comes into force 2[in 
any part of the territories which, immediately before the 1st November, 1956, were comprised in a Part B 
State], there is in force in 3[that part] any law corresponding to this Act, that law shal l, on such day, stand 
repealed:  
Provided th at the repeal shall n ot affect— 
 (a) the previous operations of any such law, or  
(b) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence committed against 
any such law, or  
(c) any investigation or remedy in respect of any such penalty, forfeiture or punishment;  
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced and any 
such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed, as if th is Act had not been passed:  
Provided further that subject to the preceding proviso anything done or any action taken under any 
such law shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provision of this Act and 
shall continue in  force a ccordingly unless and until superseded by anything done or any action taken 
under this Act.]  
 
 
______  
 
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 53 of 1951, s . 27 (w.e.f. 6 -10-1951).  
2. Subs. by the A.O. (No. 3) 1956, for “in a Part B State ”. 
3. Subs., ibid. 1956, for “that State ”. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 48]
48 
 1[ [THE FIRST SCHEDULE ] Omitted by the Employees’ State Insurance (Amendment ) Act, 1989             
(29 of 1989 ), s. 46 (w.e.f. 1-2-1991). ]. 
  
                                                           
1. Schedule I Omitted by Act 29 of 1989, s. 46 (w.e.f. 01-02-1991). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 49]
49 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
[See section 2 ( 15A) and ( 15B)] 
 
Sl. 
No. Description of injury  Percentage of 
loss of earning 
capacity  
PART I 
LIST OF INJURIES DEEMED TO RESULT IN PERMANENT  
TOTAL DISABLEMENT  
1. Loss of both hands or amputation at higher sites .       .             .        .        .  100 
2. Loss of a hand and a foot .       .             .        .        .               .             .  100 
3. Double amputation through leg or thigh, or amputation through leg or 
thigh on one side and loss of other foot .             .        .        .               .              100 
4. Loss of sight to such an extent as to render the claimant unable to perform 
any work for which eye sight is essential .             .        .        .               .              100 
5. Very severe facial disfigurement .             .        .        .               .             .  100 
6. Absolute deafness .             .        .        .               .             .                  .      .  100 
PART II 
LIST OF INJURIES DEEMED TO RESULT IN PERMANENT  PARTIAL DISABLEMENT  
Amputation —Upper limbs  (either arm ) 
 7. Amputation through shoulder joint .             .        .        .               .                          90 
8. Amputation below shoulder with stump less than 20.32 cm. from  tip 
of acromion .             .        .        .               .             .                  .      .  80 
9. Amputation from 20.32 cm. from tip of acromion to less than 11.43 
cm. below tip of olecranon .             .        .        .               .             .                  70 
10. Loss of a hand or of the thumb and four fingers of one hand or 
amputation from 11.43 cm. below tip of olecranon .             .        .        
.               .             .                  .         .       .           .                .  60 
11. Loss of thumb .               .             .                  .         .       .           .                 30 
12. Loss of th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 49]
 .             .                  .         .       .           .                 30 
12. Loss of thumb and its metacarpal bone .               .             .                   40 
13. Loss of four fingers of one hand .               .             .                  .          50 
14. Loss of three fingers of one hand .               .             .                  .          30 
15. Loss of two fingers of one hand .               .             .                  .         .        20 
16. Loss of terminal phalanx of thumb .               .             .                  .          20 
1[16A.  Guillotine amputation of the tip of the thumb wi thout loss of bone .   .  10] 
17. Amputation of both feet resulting in end -bearing stumps .    .   .          .  90 
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by A ct 29 of 1989, s. 47 (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 50]
50 
 Sl. No.  Description of injury  Percentage of 
loss of earning 
capacity  
 Amputation —lower limbs   
18. Amputation through both feet proximal to the metatarso -phalangeal 
joint.               .             .                  .         .       .           .                .  80 
19. Loss of all toes of both feet through the metatarso -phalangeal joint  40 
20. Loss of all toes of both feet proximal to the proximal inter -halangeal 
joint.               .             .                  .         .       .           .                .  30 
21. Loss of all toes of both feet distal to the proximal inter -phalangeal 
joint.               .             .                  .         .       .           .                .  20 
22. Amputation at hip .               .             .                  .         .       .           .                
. 90 
23. Amputation below hip with stump not exceeding 12.70 cm. in length 
measured from tip of great trenchanter .               .             .                  .         
.       .           .                .  80 
24. Amputation below hip with stump exceeding 12.70 cm. in length 
measured from tip of great trenchanter but not beyond middle thigh  70 
25. Amputation below middle thigh to 8.89 cm. below knee .          .        .                  
.         .       .           .        60 
26. Amputation below knee with stump exceeding 8.89 cm. but not 
exceeding 12.70 cm.                 .             .                  .         .            .        50 
27. Amputation below knee with stump exceeding 12.70 cm.  1[50] 
28. Amputation of one foot resulting in end -bearing .               .             .                  
.         .       .           .                .  1[50] 
29. Amputation through one foot proximal to the metatarso -phalangeal 
joint.               .             .                  .         .       .           .                .  1[50] 
30. Loss of all toes of one foot through the metatarso -phalangeal jo
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 50]
    .                .  1[50] 
30. Loss of all toes of one foot through the metatarso -phalangeal joint  20 
 Other Injuries   
31. Loss of one eye, without complications, the other being normal,  .       .  40 
32. Loss of vision of one eye without complications or disfigurement of 
eye-ball, the other being normal .               .             .                  .         .        30 
2[32A.  Partial lo ss of vision of one eye .               .             .                  .         .        
Loss of— 10] 
A.—Fingers of right or left hand  
Index finger  
33. Whole .               .             .                  .         .       .           .                .  14 
34. Two phalanges .               .             .                  .         .       .           .                 11 
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 1989, s. 47 (w.e.f. 20 -10-1989).  
2. Ins. by s. 47, ibid. (w.e.f 20 -10-1989).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 51]
51 
 Sl. No.  Description of injury  Percentage of 
loss of earning 
capacity  
35. One phalanx .               .             .                  .         .                .           .                 9 
36. Guillotine amputation of tip without loss of bone .               .             .                            5 
 Middle finger   
37. Whole .               .             .                  .         .       .           .                .  12 
38. Two phalanges .               .             .                  .         .          .           .                9 
39. One phalanx .               .             .                  .         .          .              .                 7 
40. Guillotine amputation of tip without loss of bone  4 
 Ring or little finger   
41. Whole .               .             .                  .         .       .           .                .  7 
42. Two phalanges .               .             .                  .         .       .           .                 6 
43. One phalanx .               .             .                  .         .       .           .                 5 
44. Guillotine amputation of tip without loss of bone .               .             .                  
.         .       .           .                .  2 
B.—Toes of right or left foot  
Great toe  
45. Through metatarso -phalangeal joint .               .             .                  .         
.       .           .                .  14 
46. Part, with some loss of bone .               .             .                  .         .        3 
 Any other toe   
47. Through metatarso -phalangeal joint.               .             .                  .          3 
48. Part, with some loss of bone .               .             .                  .         .        1 
 Two toes of one foot, excluding great toe   
49. Through metatarso -phalangeal joint .               .             .                  .         
.       .           .                .  5 
50. Part, with
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 51]
             .                  .         
.       .           .                .  5 
50. Part, with some loss of bone .               .             .                  .         .        2 
 Three toes of one foot, excluding great toe   
51. Through metatarso -phalangeal joint .               .             .                  .          6 
52. Part, with some loss of bone    3 
 Four toes of one foot, excluding great toe   
53. Through metatarso -phalangeal joint .               .             .                  .          9 
54. Part, with some loss of bone .               .             .                  .         .      3 
Note.—Complete and permanent loss of the use of any limb or member referred to in this Schedule shall 
be deemed to be the equivalent of the loss of that limb or member.  
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 52]
52 
 1[THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
(See section 52A)  
LIST OF OCCUPATIONAL DISEASES  
Sl. 
No. Occupational disease  Employment  
(1) (2) (3) 
PART A 
1. Infectious and parasitic diseases contracted in an occupation where 
there is a particular risk of contamination  (a) All work involving 
exposure to health or 
laboratory work;  
   
(b) All work involving 
exposure to veterinary 
work;  
   
(c) Work relating to 
handling  animals, 
animal carcasses,  part 
of such carcasses, or 
merchandise which may 
have been contaminated 
by animals or animal 
carcasses;  
   
(d) Other work carrying 
a particular risk of 
contamination.  
2. Diseases caused by work in compressed air  All work involving 
exposure to the risk 
concerned.  
3. Diseases caused by lead or its toxic compounds  All work involving 
exposure to the risk 
concerned.  
4. Poisoning by nitrous fumes  All work involving 
exposure to the risk 
concerned.  
5. Poisoning by organphosphorus compounds.  All work involving 
exposure to the risk 
concerned.  
PART B 
1. Diseases caused by phosphorus or its toxic compounds  All work involving 
exposure to the risk 
concerned.  
2. Diseases caused by mercury or its toxic compounds  All work involving 
exposure to the risk 
concerned.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 1984, s. 14, for the Third Schedule (w.e.f. 27 -1-1985).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 53]
53 
 Sl. 
No. Occupational disease  Employment  
(1) (2) (3) 
              PART B—Contd.   
3. Diseases caused by benzene or its toxic homologues  All work involving 
exposure to the risk 
concerned.  
4. Diseases caused by nitro and amido  toxic derivatives of benzene or 
its homologues.  All work involving 
exposure to the risk 
concerned.  
5. Diseases caused by chromium or its toxic compounds  All work involving 
exposure to the risk 
concerned.  
6. Diseases caused by arsenic or its toxic compounds  All work involving 
exposure to the risk 
concerned.  
7. Diseases caused by radioactive substances and ionising radiations  All work involving 
exposure to the action 
of radioactive 
substances or ionising 
radiations.  
8. Primary epithelomatous cancer  of the skin caused by tar, pitch, 
bitumen, mineral oil, anthracene, or the compounds, products of 
residues of these substances  All work involving 
exposure to the risk 
concerned.  
9. Diseases caused by the toxic halogen derivatives of hydrocarbons 
(of the aliphatic and aromatic series)  All work involving 
exposure to the risk 
concerned.  
10. Diseases caused by the carbon disulphide  All work involving 
exposure to the risk 
concerned.  
11. Occupational cataract due to infra -red radiations  All work involving 
exposure to the risk 
concerned.  
12. Diseases caused by manganese or its toxic compounds  All work involving 
exposure to the risk 
concerned.  
13. Skin diseases caused by physical, chemical or biological agents not 
included in other items  All work involving 
exposure to the risk 
concerned.  
14. Hearing impairment caused by noise  All work involving 
exposure to the risk 
concerned.  
15. Poisoning by dinitrophenol or a homologue or by substituted 
dinitrophenol or by the salts of such substances  All work involving 
exposure to the risk 
concerned.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 54]
54 
 Sl. 
No. Occupational disease  Employment  
(1) (2) (3) 
16. Diseases caused by beryllium or its toxic compounds  All work involving 
exposure to the risk 
concerned.  
17. Diseases caused by cadmium or its toxic compounds  All work involving 
exposure to the risk 
concerned.  
18. Occupational asthama caused by recognised sensitising agents 
inherent to the work process  All work involving 
exposure to the risk 
concerned.  
19. Diseases caused by flourine or its toxic compounds  All wor k involving 
exposure to the risk 
concerned.  
20. Diseases caused by nitro -glycerine or other nitroacid esters  All work involving 
exposure to the risk 
concerned.  
21. Diseases caused by alcohols and ketones.  All work involving 
exposure to the risk 
concerned.  
 PART B—Contd.   
22. Diseases caused by asphyxiants: carbon monoxide, and its toxic 
derivatives, hydrogen sulfide  All work involving 
exposure to the risk 
concerned.  
23. Lung cancer and mesotheliomas caused by asbestos.  All work involving 
exposure to the risk 
concerned.  
24. Primary neoplasm of the epithelial , lining of the urinary bladder or 
the kidney or the ureter  All work involving 
exposure to the risk 
concerned.  
PART C 
1. Pneumoconioses caused by sclerogenic mineral dust (silicosis, 
anthraoosilicosis asbestosis) and silico -tuberculosis provided that 
silicosis is an essential factor in causing the resultant incapacity or 
death  All work involving 
exposure to the risk 
concerned.  
2. Bagassosis  All work involving 
exposure to the risk 
conc erned.  
3. Bronchopulmonary diseases caused by  the cotton, flax hemp and 
sisal dust (Byssinosis)  All work involving 
exposure to the risk 
concerned.  
4. Extrinsic allergic alveelitis caused by the inhalation of organic 
dusts  All work involving 
exposure to the risk 
concerned.  
5. Bronchopulmonary diseases caused by hard metals  All work involving  
exposure to the risk 
concerned. ]]. 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 54]
volving  
exposure to the risk 
concerned. ]]. 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 55]
55 
 ANNEXURE  
Dates on which provisions of the Act came into force in different areas  
 
Date  Provisions  Areas  Notification numbers. 
etc. 
1 2 3 4 
1-9-1948  Chapter s I, II, III and VIII  All the Provinces of India  SS. 21( 2), dated the 31st 
August, 1948, Gazette of 
India,  1948, Extraordinary.  
1-4-1950  Sections 44 and 45 of 
Chapter IV and Chapter VII.  All Part A States, Ajmer, Coorg, 
Delhi  and Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands.  SS. 121(32), dated the 3rd 
April, 1950, Gazette of 
India, 1950, Part I, sec. 1.  
1-12-1950  Chapter s I, II, III, VII and 
VIII and sections 44 and 45 
of Chapter IV.  Himachal Pradesh, Bilaspur, 
Kutch, Bhopal, Tripura, Vindhya  
Pradesh and Manipur.  SRO 997, dated the 2nd 
December, 1950, Gazette 
of India, 1950, Part II, sec. 
3. 
 
24-11-1951  Do. All Part B States except the State 
of Jammu and Kashmir *. SRO 1832, dated the 24th 
November, 1951, Gazette 
of India, 1951, Part II, sec. 
3. 
24-11-1951  Chapter VA  Whole of India except the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir *. Do. 
24-2-1952  Chapter IV (except sections 
44 and 45). Chapter V and 
Chapter VI.  State of Delhi and Kanpur area of 
Uttar Pradesh.  SRO 251,  dated the 1st 
February, 1952, Gazette of 
India, 1952, Part II, sec. 3.  
1-9-1952  Sub-section (1) of section 76, 
sections 77, 78, 79 and 81 of 
Chapter VI.  Whole of India except the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir *, State of 
Delhi, Kanpur area of Uttar 
Pradesh.  SRO 1576, dated the 3rd 
September, 1952, Gazette 
of India, 1952, Part II, sec. 
3. 
1-9-1954  Chapter s I, II, III, V -A, 
VII, VIII and sections 44 
and 45 of Chapter IV.  United Khasi -Jaintia Hills 
District, Garo Hills District 
Lushai Hills District North 
Cachar Hills, Mikir Hills.  SRO 2972, dated the 1st 
September, 1954, 
Gazette of India, 1954, 
Part II, sec. 3.  
1-9-1971  Chapters I, II, III, V -A, 
VII and VIII and sections 
44 and 45 of Chapter IV.  Union terr itory of Goa, Daman 
and Diu.  S.O. 3262, dated the  1st 
September, 1971,
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 55]
f Chapter IV.  Union terr itory of Goa, Daman 
and Diu.  S.O. 3262, dated the  1st 
September, 1971, 
Gazette of India, 1971, 
Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( ii). 
20-11-1971  Chapter s I, II, III, VII and 
VIII and sections 44 and 
45 of Chapter IV.  The State of Jammu and 
Kashmir *. SRO 6163, dated the 
26th October, 1971, 
Gazette of India,  1971, 
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
01-02-2021  (i) Sections 
38,39,40,41,42,43 & 45A 
to 45H of Chapter IV.  
(ii) Sections 46 to 73 of 
Chapter V; and  
(iii) Sections 74, 75. Sub -
sections (2) to (4) of 
section 76, 80, 82 and 83 
of Chapter V I In all the areas of, Dharmapuri 
district and Ranipet district in 
the State of Tamil Nadu.  S.O. 373(E), dated the 
27th January, 2021,  
Gazette of India, 2021, 
Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( ii) 
 
*. Vide Notification No. S.O. 3912 (E), dated 30th October,  2019, this Act is made applicable to the Union territory of Jammu 
and Kashmir and the Union territory of Ladakh.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 56]
56 
  1-04-2021   Ss.  38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43 
and Ss. 45A to 45H of 
Chapter IV; Ss. 46 to 73 of 
Chapter V; and Ss. 74, 75, 
sub-section (2) to (4) of  
section 76, 80, 82 and 83 
of Chapter VI, in all the 
areas of   Unakoti district, South Tripura 
district and khowai district in 
the State of Tripura.  
 S.O. 1354(E), dated 25th 
March, 2021, Gazette of 
India, 2021, 
Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( ii) 
1-6-2021  Chapter IV (except 
sections 44 and 45 which 
have already been brought 
into force) and Chapter V 
and VI (except sub -section 
(1) of sections 76 and Ss. 
77, 78, 79 and 81,  all the areas of the Alipurduar, 
Cooch Behar, Kalimpong, 
North Dinajpur, Purul ia, and 
South Dinajpur District in the 
State of West Bengal.  
 S.O. 1950(E), dated 21st 
May, 2021, Gazette of 
India, 2021, 
Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( ii) 
01-06-2021  Chapter IV (except 
sections 44  and 45); and 
Chapter V and VI [except 
sub-section (1) of section 
76 and sections 77, 78, 79 
and 81,  Chapter IV (except sections 44  
and 45); and Chapter V and 
VI [except sub -section (1) of 
section 76 and sections 77, 
78, 79 and 81,  S.O. 2068(E), dated 28th 
May, 2021, Gazette of 
India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3( ii) 
1-8-2021  Sections 38,39,40,41,42, 
43 and sections 45A to 
45H of Chapter IV; 
sections 46 to 73 of 
chapter V; and sections 74, 
75, sub -sections (2) to (4) 
of sections 76, 80, 82 and 
83 of Chapter VI;  All the areas of Madurai district 
in the State  of Tamil Nadu.  S.O. 2983(E), dated 28th 
July, 2021, Gazette of 
India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3( ii) 
1-10-2021  Sections 38,39,40,41,42, 
43 and sections 45A to 
45H of Chapter IV; 
sections 46 to 73 of 
chapter V; and sections 74, 
75, sub -sections (2) to  (4) 
of sections 76, 80, 82 and 
83 of Chapter VI , All the areas of Dhalai, Gomati, 
North Tripura and Sepahijala 
district in the State of Tripura.  S.O. 3952 (E), dated 2 3rd 
September , 2021, 
Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, 
s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 56]
ipura.  S.O. 3952 (E), dated 2 3rd 
September , 2021, 
Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( ii) 
1-10-2021  Chapter IV (except 
sections 44 and 45 which 
have already been brought 
into force) and Chapter V 
and VI [except sub -section 
(1) of section 76 and 
sections 77, 78, 79 and 81 
which have already been 
brought into force]  In the entire areas of Baksa, 
Charaideo , Dima Hasao, 
Hailakandi, Hojai and 
Kokrajha district in the State 
of Assam , in addition to the 
already implemented area in 
the district.  S.O. 3964(E), dated 24th 
September, 2021, 
Gazette of India,  
Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( ii) 
1-11-2021  Sections 38, 39, 40,41, 42, 
43 and sections 45A to 45H 
of Chapter IV; sections 46 to 
73 of Chapter V; and  
sections 74, 75, sub -sections 
(2) to (4) of section 76, 80, 
82 and 83 of Chapter VI,  
 In the areas of Ahmednagar, 
Jalna and Yavatmal district in 
the State of Maha rashtra.  S.O. 4476 (E), dated 
27th October, 2021, 
Gazette of India,  
Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( ii) 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 57]
57 
 1-11-2021  Sections 38, 39, 40, 41,  
42, 43 and sections  45A 
to 45H of Chapter IV:  
sections 46 to 73 of 
Chapter V; and  
Sections 74, 75,                     
sub-sections (2) to (4) of 
section 76,  80, 82 and 83 
of Chapter VI;  
 In all the  areas of Coimbatore 
and Thanjavur district s in the 
State of Tamil Nadu . S.O. 4526 (E), dated 
29th October, 2021, 
Gazette of India,  
Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( ii) 
1-1-2022  Sections 38,39,40,41,42,43 
and sections 45A to 45H of 
Chapter IV; sections 46 to 
73 of Chapter V; and 
sections 74, 75, sub -
sections (2) to (4) of 
sections 76, 80, 82 and 83 
of Chapter VI,  
 All the entire areas of the 
following districts in the state of 
Assam: -- 
1. Assam -Barpeta, Bongaigon, 
Bishwanath, Cachar, Chirang, 
Darrang, Dhemaji, Dhubri, 
Golaghat, Goalpara, 
Lakhimpur, Majuli, Nalbari, 
Marigaon, Nagaon, Sibsagar, 
Udalguri, West Kabri Anglo g 
(in addition to the already 
implemented area in the 
district).  
2. Assam -- Kabri Anglong, 
Karimganj, South Salmara 
Mankachar.  S.O. 5371 (E), dated 
23rd December, 2021, 
Gazette of India,  
Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( ii) 
1-4-2022  Sections 38, 39, 40, 41,  42, 
43 and sections 45A to 45H 
of Chapter IV, ss. 46 to 73 
of Chapter V and ss. 74, 75, 
sub-sections (2) to (4) of ss. 
76, 80, 82 and 83 of 
Chapter VI ; All the areas of Nagapattinam 
district in the State of Tamil 
Nadu.  
 S.O. 1534 (E), dated 
31st March,  2022, 
Gazette of India,  
Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( ii) 
1-9-2022  Sections 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 
43 and sections 45A to 45H 
of Chapter IV;  
Sections 46 to 73 of 
Chapter V; and  
Sections 74, 75,                     
sub-sections (2) and (4) of 
section 76, 80 , 82 and 83 of 
Chapter VI.  All the areas of 
Ramanathapuram and 
Sivagangai districts in the State 
of Tamil Nadu.  S.O. 3741(E), dated 10th 
August, 2022, Gazette of 
India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
1-10-2022  Sections 38 to 43 and 
sections 45A to 45H of 
Ch
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 57]
 Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
1-10-2022  Sections 38 to 43 and 
sections 45A to 45H of 
Chapter IV; sections 46 to 
73 of Chapter V; and 
sections 74, 75, sub -section 
(2) to (4) of section 76, 80, 
82 and 83 of Chapter VI.  All the area of Krishnagiri and 
Tiruchirappalli districts in 
addition to the already notified 
areas in the district a nd in all 
the area of Perambalur district, 
in the State of Tamil Nadu.  S.O. 4340(E), dated 15th 
September  2022, 
Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( ii). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 58]
58 
 1-12-2022  Section 38 to 43 and 
section s 45A to 45H of 
Chapter IV; sections 46 to 
73 of chapter V; and 
sections 74, 75,                        
sub-sections (2) to (4) of 
section s 76, 80, 82 and 83 
of Chapter  VI. All the area of Dindigul district 
in addition to the already 
notified areas of the said district 
in the State of Tamil Nadu.  S.O. 5335(E), dated 16th 
November 2022, Gazette 
of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
1-12-2022  Section s 38 to 43 and 
section s 45A to 45H of 
Chapter IV; sections 46 to 
73 of chapter V; and 
sections 74, 75,                       
sub-sections (2) to (4) of 
section s 76, 80, 82 and 83 
of chapter  VI. All the area of Gajapati district 
in addition to the already 
notified area of the said district 
and in all the areas of Nuapada, 
Malkangiri and Deogarh  
districts in the state of Odisha.  S.O. 5338(E), dated 16th 
November 2022, Gazette 
of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
1-1-2023  Sections 38 to 43 and 
sections 45A to 45H of 
chapter IV; sections 46 to 
73 of Chapter V; and  
Sections 74, 75, sub-
sections (2) to (4) of 
sections 76, 80, 82 and 83 
of Chapter VI . All the areas of Shore, Shajapur 
and Guna districts in addition to 
the already notified areas of the 
said districts, in the State of 
Madhya Pradesh.  S.O. 5878(E), dated 15th 
December 2022, Gazette 
of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
1-2-2023  Sections 38 to 43 and 
sections 45A to 45H of 
Chapter IV;  sections 46 to 
73 of Chapter V; and 
sections 74, 75, sub -
sections (2) to (4) of section 
76, 80, 82 and 8 3 of 
Chapter VI ; All the areas of Chhindwara 
and Singrauli districts, in 
addition to the already notified 
areas of the said districts in the 
State of Madhya Pradesh.  S.O. 384(E), dated 24th 
January , 2023, Gazette 
of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
1-2-2023  Sections 38 to 43 and 
sections 45A to 45H of 
Chapter IV; sections 46 to 
73 of Chapter V; and 
sections 74, 75, sub
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 58]
 and 
sections 45A to 45H of 
Chapter IV; sections 46 to 
73 of Chapter V; and 
sections 74, 75, sub -
sections (2) to (4) of section 
76, 80, 82 and 83 of 
Chapter VI,  All the areas of Aizawl district, 
in addition to the already 
notified areas of  the said district 
in the State of Mizoram.  S.O. 385(E), dated 24th 
January , 2023, Gazette 
of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
1-04-2023  Sections 38 to 43 and 
sections 45A to 45H of 
Chapter IV; sections 46 to 
73 of Chapter V; and 
sections 74, 75,                       
sub-sections (2) to (4) of 
section 76, sections 80, 82 
and 83 of Chapter V I, All the areas of Gandhinagar 
district, in addit ion to the 
already notified areas of the 
said district in the State of 
Gujarat.  S.O. 1191(E), dated 13th 
March, 2023, Gazette of 
India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 59]
59 
 1-04-2023  Sections 38 to 43 and 
sections 45A to 45H of 
Chapter IV; sections 46 to  
73 of Chapter V; and 
sections 74, 75, sub -
sections (2) to (4) of 
section 76, sections 80, 82 
and 83 of Chapter VI,  All the areas of East khasi Hills 
and Ri -Bhoi districts  in addition 
to the already notified areas of 
the said districts in the State of 
Meghalaya.  S.O. 1426(E), dated 24th 
March, 2023, Gazette of 
India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
1-04-2023  Sections 38 to 43 and 
sections 45A to 45H of 
Chapter IV;  sections 46 to 
73 of Chapter V; and 
sections 74, 75,                      
sub-sections (2) to (4) of 
section 76, sections 80, 82 
and 83 of Chapter VI;  All the areas of Kanchipuram, 
Tirupattur, Tiruvannamalai and 
Viluppuram  districts in addition 
to the already notified areas of 
the said districts and in all the 
areas of kallakurichi district in 
the State of Tamil Nadu.  S.O. 1427(E), dated 24th 
March, 2023, Gazette of 
India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
01-04-2023  Sections 38 to 43 and 
sections 45A to 45H of 
Chapter IV; sections 46 to 
73 of Chapter V; and 
sections 74, 75, sub -
section (2) to (4) of 
section 76, 80, 82 and 83 
of Chapter VI,  All the areas of Valsad district 
in addition to the already 
notified areas of the said district 
in the State of Gujarat.  S.O. 1415(E), dated 29th 
March, 2023, Gazette of 
India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
1-05-2023  Sections 38 to 43 and 
sections 45A to 45H of 
Chapter IV;  sections 46 to 
73 of Chapter V; and 
sections 74, 75,                       
sub-sections (2) to (4) of 
section 76, 80, 82 and 83 
of Chapter VI,  All the areas of Kavarat ti, 
Agatti and Minicoy Islands in 
the Union Territory of 
Lakshadeep.  S.O. 1875(E), dated 25th 
April, 2023, Gazette of 
India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
 
1-06-2023  Section s 38 to 43 and 
section s 45A to 45H of 
Chapter IV; section s 46 to 
73 of Chapter V; and 
section s 74, 75, sub -
sections (2
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 59]
5A to 45H of 
Chapter IV; section s 46 to 
73 of Chapter V; and 
section s 74, 75, sub -
sections (2) to (4) of 
section 76, 80, 82 and 83 
of Chapter VI,  All the areas of Arwal, Jamui, 
Kaimur, Khagari a, Kishanganj, 
Madhepura, Madhubani, 
Nawada, Purnia, Sheikhpura 
and West Champaran, in 
addition to the already notified 
areas of the said districts, in the 
State of Bihar.  S.O. 2244(E), dated 23rd 
May, 2023, Gazette of 
India,  Extraordinary, 
Part II, Sec . 3(ii). 
1-11-2023  Section s 38 to 43 and 
section 45A to section 
45H of Chapter IV; 
section s 46 to 73 of 
Chapter V; and section s 
74, 75, sub -sections (2) to 
(4) of section 76, 80, 82 
and section 83 of Chapter 
VI,  All the areas of Lalitpur, 
kushinagar, Kausambi, Budaun, 
Sultanpur, Deoria, Ballia, 
Jaunpur, Azamgarh, Baghpat, 
Chitrakoot, Sambhal and 
Ayodhya districts in the State of 
Uttar Pradesh.  S.O. 4498(E), dated 13th 
October, 2023, Gazette 
of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, Sec. 3(ii).  
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 60]
60 
 1-12-2023  Sections 38 to 43 and 
section 45A to section 
45H of Chapter IV; 
sections 46 to 73 of 
Chapter V; and sections 
74, 75, sub -sections (2) to 
(4) of section 76, 80, 82 
and section 83 of Chapter 
VI,  All areas of Mainpuri district, 
in addition to the already 
notified areas of the said district 
and in all the areas of Basti 
district in the State of Uttar 
Pradesh.  S.O. 5033(E), dated               
23rd November, 2023, 
Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, 
Sec. 3(ii).  
1-12-2023  Sections 38 to 43 and 
section 45A to section 
45H of Chapter IV; 
sections 46 to 73 of 
Chapter V; and sections 
74, 75, sub -sections (2) to 
(4) of section 76, 80, 82 
and section 83 of Chapter 
VI,  All the areas of Etah, 
Lakhimpur Khiri and 
Balrampur districts in the St ate 
of Uttar Pradesh.  S.O. 5034(E), dated           
23rd November, 2023, 
Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, 
Sec. 3(ii).  
1-12-2023  Sections 38 to 43 and 
section 45A to section 
45H of Chapter IV; 
sections 46 to 73 of 
Chapter V; and sections 
74, 75, sub-sections (2) to 
(4) of section 76, 80, 82 
and section 83 of Chapter 
VI, All the areas of Pudukottai 
district in addition to the 
already notified areas of the 
said district in the State of 
Tamil Nadu.   S.O. 5035(E), dated              
23rd November, 20 23, 
Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, 
Sec. 3(ii).  
1-12-2023  Sections 38 to 43 and 
section 45A to section 
45H of Chapter IV; 
sections 46 to 73 of 
Chapter V; and sections 
74, 75, sub -sections (2) to 
(4) of section 76, 80, 82 
and section 83 of Chapter 
VI, All areas of the Kandhamal 
district in the State of Odisha.  S.O. 5036(E), dated                      
23rd November, 2023, 
Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, 
Sec. 3(ii).  
1-3-2024  Sections 38 to 43; 
sections 45A to 45H; 
sections 46 to 73; 
sections 74 and 75; sub - 
section (2) to (4) of 
section 76; section 80; 
and sections 82 and 83  All areas of the Nabrangpur 
district in t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 60]
 (4) of 
section 76; section 80; 
and sections 82 and 83  All areas of the Nabrangpur 
district in the State of Odisha.  S.O. 802(E), dated                     
20th February,  2024, 
Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, 
Sec. 3(ii).  
1-3-2024  Sections 38 to 43; 
sections 45A to 45H; 
sections 46 to 73; 
sections 74 and 75; sub - 
section (2) to (4) of 
section 76; section 80; 
and sections 82 and 83  All areas of the Nayagarh 
distri ct in the State of Odisha.  S.O. 803(E), dated                     
20th February, 2024, 
Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, 
Sec. 3(ii).  
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE ACT, 1948.pdf - page 61]
61 
 1-8-2024  Sections 38 to 43  (both 
inclusive) ; sections 45A, 
45AA, 45B, 45C, 45D, 
45E, 45F, 45G, 45H and 
45I;   sections 46 to 73  
(both inclusive) ; section s 
74 and 75; sub -section (2) 
to (4) of section 76; and 
sections 82 and 83  All the areas of Bishn upur, 
Senapati, Ukhrul, Kangpokpi, 
Churachandpur and Thoubal 
districts in the State of 
Manipur.  S.O. 2696(E), dated                     
10th July, 2024, Gazette 
of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, Sec. 3(ii).  
 
For notifications by which Chapter IV (except sections 44 and 45), Chapter V and Chapter VI [except  
sub-section ( 1) of section 76, sections 77, 78 and 79 and 81] were brought into force in different areas, 
cities, towns and industrial area, see Gazette of India, Part II, section 3.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION  ACT, 1923  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
 
CHAPTER II  
EMPLOYEE ’S COMPENSATION  
3. Employer’s liability for compensation.  
4. Amount o f compensation.  
4A. Compensation to be paid when due and penalty for default.  
5. Method of calculating wages.  
6. Review.  
7. Commutation of half -monthly payments.  
8. Distribution of compensation . 
9. Compensation not to be assigned, attached or charged . 
10. Notice and claim . 
10A. Power to require from employers statements regarding fatal accidents . 
10B. Reports of fatal accidents and serious bodily injuries . 
11. Medical examination . 
12. Contracting . 
13. Remedies of employer against stranger . 
14.  Insolvency of employer . 
14A. Compensation to be  first charge on assets transferred by employer . 
15. Special provisions relating to masters and seamen . 
15A. Special provisions relating to captains and other members of crew of aircrafts . 
15B. Special provisions relating to employees abroad of companies and m otor vehicles . 
16. Returns as to compensation . 
17. Contracting out . 
17A.Duty of employer to inform employee of his rights . 
18. [Repealed. ]. 
18A. Penalties . 
 
CHAPTER III  
COMMISSIONERS  
19. Reference to Commissioners.  
20. Appointment of Commissioners . 
21. Venue of proceedings and t ransfer . 
22. Form of application . 
22A. Power of Commissioner to require further deposit in cases of fatal accident . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 2]
2 
 SECTIONS  
23. Powers and procedure of Commissioners . 
24. Appearance of parties . 
25. Method of recording evidence . 
25A. Time limit of disposal of cases relati ng to compensation . 
26. Costs . 
27. Power to submit eases . 
28. Registration of Agreements . 
29. Effect of failure to register agreement . 
30. Appeals . 
30A. [Omitted .]. 
31. Recovery . 
 
CHAPTER IV  
RULES  
32. Power of the State Government to make rules.  
33. [Repealed .]. 
34. Publication of rules.  
35. Rules to give effect to arrangements with other countries for the transfer of money paid as 
compensation.  
36. Rules made by Central Government to be laid before Parliament.  
SCHEDULE I .—LIST OF INJURIES DEEMED TO RESULT IN PERMANENT TOTAL 
DISABLEMENT . 
SCHEDULE II .—LIST OF PERSONS WHO, SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS OF SECTION 2 
(1) (nn),’ ARE INCLUDED IN THE DEFINITION OF EMPLOYEES . 
SCHEDULE III .—LIST OF OCCUPATIONAL DISEASES . 
SCHEDULE IV .—FACTORS FOR WORKING OUT LUMP SUM EQ UIVALENT OF 
COMPENSATION AMOUNT IN CASE OF PER MANENT DISABLEMENT 
AND DEATH . 
 
 
 
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 3]
3 
 THE EMPLOYEE ’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923  
ACT No. 8 OF 19231 
[5th March , 1923]  
An Act to provide for the payment by certain classes of employers to their 2[employees]  of 
compensation for injury by accident.  
WHEREAS  it is exp edient to provide for the payment by certain classes of employers to their 
3[employee s] of compensation for injury by accident; It is hereby enacted as follows: —  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the  4[Employee ’s] 
Compen sation Act, 1923.  
5[(2) It extends to the whole of India 6***.]  
(3) It shall come into force on the first day of July, 1924.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context, — 
7*  *  *   *    * 
(b) “Commissioner” means a Commissioner for  Workmen’s Compensation appointed under 
section 20;  
(c) “compensation” means compensation as provided for by this Act;  
8[(d) “dependant” means any of the following relatives of a deceased 9[employee ], namely: — 
(i) a widow, a minor 10[legitimate or adopted] son, and unmarried 10[legitimate or adopted] 
daughter, or a widowed mother; and  
(ii) if wholly dependent on the earnings of the 9[employee ] at the time of his death, a son or a 
daughter who has attained the a ge of 18 years and who is infirm;  
(iii) if wholly or in part dependent on the earnings of the 9[employee ] at the time of his death,  
(a) a widower,  
(b) a parent other than a widowed mother,  
                                                      
1. This Act has be en extended to — 
(1)Goa, Doman and Diu by Reg. 12 of 1962, s. 3 and Sch.  (w.e.f. 15 -8-1963) ; 
(2) Dadra cud Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and Sch. I;  
(3) Pondicherry by Reg. 7 of 1963, s. 3 and Sch. I; and  
(4) Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands b y Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 and Sch.  
This Act has been modified in its application to apprentices under the Apprentices Act, 1961 (52 of 1961) by s. 16 and to tha t 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 3]
n its application to apprentices under the Apprentices Act, 1961 (52 of 1961) by s. 16 and to tha t 
Act. 
2. Subs. by Act 45 of 2009, s. 2, for “workmen” (w.e.f. 18 -1-2010 )  
3. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for “workmen” (w.e.f. 18 -1-2010).  
4. Subs. by s. 4 , ibid.,  for “Workmen’s” (w.e.f. 18 -1-2010 )  
5. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for sub -section (2).  
6. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 51 of 1970, s. 2 and Sch edule  (w.e.f. 1 -9-1971).  
7. Clause (a) omitted by Act 8 of 1959, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -6-1959).  
8. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for the clause ( d) (w.e.f. 1 -6-1959). 
9. Subs. by Act 45 of 2009, s. 5, for “ workman” (w.e.f. 18 -1-2010)  
10. Subs. by Act 30 of 1995, s. 2 for “legitimate” (w.e. f. 15-9-1995).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 4]
4 
 (c) a minor illegitimate son, an unmarried ille gitimate daughter o r a daughter  
1[legitimate or illegitimate or adopted] if married and a minor or if widowed and a minor,  
(d) a minor brother or a unmarried sister or a widowed sister if a minor,  
(e) a widowed daughter -in-law, 
 (f) a minor child of a pre -deceased son,  
(g) a minor child of a pre -deceased daughter where no parent of the child is alive, or  
(h) a paternal grandparent if no parent of the 2[employee ]is alive.]  
3[Explanation .—For the purpose of sub -clause ( ii) and items ( f) and ( g) of  
sub-clause (iii), references to a son, dauthter or child include an adopted son, daughter or 
child respectively;  
4[(dd) “employee”  means a person, who is — 
(i) a railway servant as defined in clause ( 34) of section 2 of the Railways Act, 1989  
(24 of 1989) , not permanently employed in a ny administ rative d istrict or sub -divisional office of 
a railway and not employed in any s uch capacity as is specified in Schedule II; or  
(ii) (a) a master, seaman or other member of the crew of a ship,  
(b) a captain or other member of the crew of an air craft,  
(c) a person recruited as driver, helper, mechanic, cleaner or in any other capacity in 
connection with a motor vehicle,  
(d)  a person recruited for work abroad by a company,  
and who is employed outside India in any such capacity as is specified in  Schedule II and the 
ship, aircraft or motor vehicle, or company, as the case may be, is registered in India; or  
(iii) employed in any such capacity as is specified in Schedule II, whether the contract of 
employment was made before or after the passing of this Act and whether such contract is 
expressed or implied, oral or in writing; but does not include any person working in the capacity 
of a member of the Armed Forces of the Union; and any reference to any employee who has been 
injured shall, where the em ployee is dead, include a reference to his dependants or any of them;]  
(e) “e
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 4]
 shall, where the em ployee is dead, include a reference to his dependants or any of them;]  
(e) “employer” includes any body of persons whether incorporated or not and any managing agent 
of an employer and the legal representative of a deceased employer, and, when the services of 
a2[employee ] are temporarily lent or let on hire to another person by the person with whom the 
2[employee ] has entered into a contract of s ervice or apprenticeship, means -such other person while 
the 2[employee ] is working for him;  
(f) “managing agent” m eans any person appointed or acting as the representative of another 
person for the purpose of carrying on such other person ’s trade or business, but does not include an 
individual manager subordinate to an employer;  
  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 30 of 1995, s. 2, for “legitimate or illegitimate” (w.e.f. 15 -9-1995).  
2. Subs. by Act 45 of 2009, s. 5, for “ workman” (w.e.f.  18-1-2010 ). 
3. Ins. by Act 30 of 1995, 2 (w.e.f.15 -9-1995).  
4. Ins. by Act 45 of 2009, s. 6 (w.e.f . 18-1-2010 ). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 5]
5 
 1[(ff) “minor” means a person who has  not attained the age of 18 years;]  
(g) “partial disablement” means, where the disablement is of a temporary nature, such 
disablement as reduces the earning capacity of a 2[employee ] in any employment in which he was 
engaged at the time of the accident res ulting in the disablement, and, where the disablement is of a 
permanent nature, such disablement as reduces his earning capacity in every employment which he 
was capable of undertaking at that time: provid ed that every injury specified 3[in Part II of Sche dule I] 
shall be deemed to result in  permanent partial disablement;  
(h) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(i) “qualified medical practitioner” means any person registered 4* * * under any 5[Central Act, 
Provincial Act or an Act  of the Legislature of a 6[State ]] providing for the maintenance of a register of 
medical practitioners, or, in any area where no such last -mentioned Act is in force, any person 
declared by the State Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, to be a qualified medical 
practitioner for the purposes of this Act;  
7*  *  *  *  * 
(k) “seaman” means any person f orming part of the crew of any 8* * * ship, but d oes not include 
the master of9[the] ship;  
(l) “total disablement” means such disablement, whether of a temporary  or permanent nature, as 
incapacitates a2[employee ] for all work which he was capable of performing at the time of the 
accident resulting in such disablement:  
10[Provided that permanent total disablement shall be deemed t o result from every in jury speci fied 
in Part I of Schedule I or from any combination of injuries specified in Part II thereof where the 
aggregate percentage of the loss of earning capacity, as specified in the said Part H against those 
injuries, amounts to one hundred per cent. ’ or more;]  
(m) “wages” includes any privilege or benefit which is capable of being estimated in money, 
other than a t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 5]
ges” includes any privilege or benefit which is capable of being estimated in money, 
other than a travelling allowance or the value of any travelling concession or a contribution paid by 
the employer of a2[employee ] towards any pension o r provident fund or a sum paid to a2[employee ] to 
cover any special expenses entailed on him by the nature of his employment;  
11*  *  *  *  * 
(2) The exercise and performance of the powers and duties of a local authority or of any department 
12[acting on beh alf of the Government] shall, for the purposes of this Act, unless a contrary intention 
appears, be deemed to be the Trade or bus iness of such authority or department.  
  
                                                      
1. In the application of the Act to Bengal, a new clause ( ff) has been ins, here by the Workmen's Compensation (Bengal 
Amendment) Act, 1942 (Ben. 6 of 1942), s. 3.  
2. Subs. by Act 45 of 2009, s. 5, for “ workman” (w.e.f. 18-1-2010  ) 
3. Subs. by  Act 64 of 1962, s. 2, for “in the First Schedule” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1963).  
4. The words  and figures  “under the Medical Act, 1858, or any Act amending the same, or” omitted by Act 8 of 1959, s. 2  
(w.e.f. 1 -61959).  
5. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “Act of the Cen tral Legislature or of any Legislature in a Province of India”  
6. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 3) Order, 1956, for “Part A State or Part B State”.  
7. Clause (j) rep. by Act 15 of 1933, s. 2.  
8. The word “registered” omitted by s. 2, ibid.  
9. Subs. by s. 2, ibid. ,for “any such”.  
10. Subs. by Act 64 of 1962, s. 2, for the proviso (w.e.f. 1 -2-1963).  
11. Clause ( n) omitted by Act 45 of 2009, s. 6 (w.e.f. 18 -1-2010 ). 
12. Subs. by A. O. 1937, for “of the Govt.”.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 6]
6 
 1[(3) The Central Government or the State Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, after 
giving not less than three months ’ notice of its intention so to do, may, by a like notification, add to 
Schedule H any class of persons employed in any occupation which it is satisfied is a hazardous 
occupation, and the provisions of this A ct shall thereupon apply, in case of a notification by the Central 
Government, within the territories to which the Act extends, or, in the case of a notification by the State 
Government, within the State, to such classes of person:  
Provided that in making addition, the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may 
be, may direct that the provisions of this Act shall apply to such classes of persons in respect of specified 
injuries only.]  
CHAPTER II  
WORKMEN’S COMPENSATION  
3. Employer ’s liability  for compensation .—(1) If personal injury is caused to a 2[employee ] by 
accident arising out of and in the course of his employment, his employer shall be liable to pay 
compensation in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter:  
Provided that the emplo yer shall not be so liable — 
(a) in respect of any injury which does not result in the total or partial disablement of the 
2[employee ] for a period exceeding 3[three] days;  
(b) in respect of any 4[injury, not resulting in death5[or permanent total disableme nt], caused by] 
an accident which is directly attributable to — 
(i) the2[employee ] having been at the time thereof under the influence of drink or drugs, or  
(ii) thewilful disobedience of the 2[employee ] to an order expressly given, or to a rule 
expressly f ramed, for the purpose of securing the safety of employee’s , or 
(iii) thewilful removal or disregard by the 2[employee ] of any safety guard or other device 
which he knew to have been provided for the purpose of securing the safety of 6[employee s] 7***  
8*                                         *                            
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 6]
ety of 6[employee s] 7***  
8*                                         *                            *                                *                              *  
9[(2) If a [employee ] employed in any employment specified in Pat A of Schedule III contracts any 
disease specified therei n as an occupational disease peculiar to that employment, or if a2[employee ], 
whilst in the service of an employer in whose service he has been employed for a continuous period of not 
less than six months (which period shall not include a period of service  under any other employer in the 
same kind of employment) in any employment specified in Part B of Schedule III, contracts any disease 
specified therein as an occupational disease peculiar to that employment, or if a2[employee ] whilst in the 
service of one  or more employers in any employment specified in Part C of Schedule III for such 
continuous period as the Central Government may specify in respect of each such employment, contracts 
any disease specified therein as an occupational disease peculiar to tha t employment, the contracting of 
the disease shall be deemed to be an injury by accident within the meaning of this section and, unless the 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 30 of 1995, s.2, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 15 -9-1995).  
2. Subs. by  Act 45 of 2009, s. 5, for “w orkman” (w.e.f.  18-1-2010 ). 
3. Subs. by Act 8 of 1959, s. 3, for “seven” (w.e.f.1 -6-1959).  
4. Subs. by Act 15 of 1933, s. 3, for “injury to a workman resulting from”.  
5. Ins. by Act 30 of 1995, s. 3 (w.e.f. 15 -9-1995).  
6. Subs. by Act 45 of 2009, s. 5, for “workmen” (w.e.f. 18 -1-2010).  
7. The word “or” omitted by Act 5 of 1929, s. 2.  
8. Clause (c)omitted by s. 2, ibid.  
9. Subs. by Act 8 of 1959, s. 3, for sub -sections (2)and (3) (w.e.f. 1-6-1959).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 7]
7 
 contrary is proved, the accident shall be deemed to have arisen out of, and in the course of, the 
employment:  
1[Prov ided that if it is proved, — 
(a) that a 2[employee ] whilst in the service of one or more employers in any employment 
specified in Part C of Schedule III has contracted a disease specified therein as an occupational 
disease peculiar to that employment during  a continuous period which is less than the period specified 
under this sub -section for that employment, and  
(b) that the disease has arisen out of and in the course of the employment;  
the contracting of such disease shall be deemed to be an injury by acci dent within the meaning of this 
section : 
Provided further that if it is proved that a2[employee ] who having served under any employer in any 
employment specified in Part B of Schedule III or who having served under one or more employers in any 
employment s pecified in Part C of that Schedule, for a continuous period specified under this sub -section 
for that employment and he has after the cessation of such service contracted any disease specified in the 
said Part B or the said Part C, as the case may be, as an occupational disease peculiar to the employment 
and that such disease arose out of the employment, the contracting of the disease shall be deemed to be an 
injury by accident within the meaning of this section.]  
3[(2A) If a2[employee ] employed in any emp loyment specified in Part C of Schedule III contracts any 
occupational disease peculiar to that employment, the contracting whereof is deemed to be an injury by 
accident within the meaning of this section, and such employment was under more than one employ er, all 
such employers shall be liable for the payment of the compensation in such proportion as the 
Commissioner may, in the circumstances, deem just.]  
(3) 4[The Central Government or the State Government] after giving, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, not less than three months ’ notice of it
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 7]
t] after giving, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, not less than three months ’ notice of its intention so to do, may, by a like notification, add any 
description of employment to the employments specified in Schedule III, and shall specify in the case of 
employments so added the diseases which shall be deemed for the purposes of this section to be 
occupational diseases peculiar to those employments respectively, and thereupon the provisions of sub -
section ( 2) shall apply 5[in the case of a notification by the Central Government, within the territories  to 
which this Act extends or, in case of a notification by the State G overnment, within the State] 6*** as if 
such diseases had been declared by this Act to be occupational diseases peculiar to those employments.]  
(4)Save as provided by 7[sub-sections ( 2), (2A)] and ( 3) no compensation shall be payable to 
a2[employee ] in respect of any d isease unless the disease is 8*** directly attributable to a specific injury 
by accident arising out of and in the course of his employment.  
(5) Nothing herein contained sh all be deemed to confer any right to compensation on a2[employee ] in 
respect of any injury if he has instituted in a Civil Court a suit for damages in respect of the injury against 
the employer or any other person; and no suit for damages shall be maintain able by a2[employee ] in any 
Court of law in respect of any injury — 
(a) if he has instituted a claim to compensation in respect of the injury before a Commissioner; or  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 64 of 1962, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1963).  
2. Subs.  by Act 45 of 2009, s. 5, for “w orkman” (w.e.f.  18-1-2010 ). 
3. Subs. by Act 64 of 1962, s. 3, for sub -section (2A) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1963).  
4. Subs. by Act 30 of 1995, s. 3, for certain word s (w.e.f. 15 -9-1995).  
5. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -9-1995).  
6. Certain words omitted by Act 51 of 1970, s. 2 and the Schedule  (w.e.f. 1 -9-1971).
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 7]
5 -9-1995).  
6. Certain words omitted by Act 51 of 1970, s. 2 and the Schedule  (w.e.f. 1 -9-1971).  
7. Subs. by Act 8 of 1959, s. 3, for “sub -section ( 2)” (w.e.f. 1 -6-1959).  
8. The words “solely and” omitte d by Act 15 of 1933, s. 3.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 8]
8 
 (b) if an agreement has been come to between the 1[employee ] and his employer providing f or the 
payment of compensation in respect of the injury in accordance with the provisions of this Act.  
2[4. Amount of compensation. —(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the amount of 
compensation shall be as follows, namely: — 
(a) where death results from the injury  an amount equal to 3[fifty per cent.] of the 
monthly wages of the deceased 1[employee ] 
multiplied by the relevant factor;  
or 
an amount of 4[one lakh and twenty thousand 
rupees], whichever is more;  
 
(b) where permanent total disablement 
results from the injury  an amount equal to 5[sixty per cent.] of the 
monthly wages of the injured 1[employee ] 
multiplied by the relevant factor;  
or 
an amount of 6[one lakh and forty  thousand 
rupees],whichever is more:  
7[Provided that the Central Government m ay, by notification in the Official Gazette, from time to 
time, enhance the amount of compensation mentioned in clauses ( a) and ( b);] 
Explanation I.—For the purposes of clause ( a) and clause ( b), “relevant factor”, in relation to 
a1[employee ] means the fa ctor specified i n the second column of Schedule IV against the entry in the 
first column of that Schedule specifying the number of years which are the same as the completed 
years of the age of the 1[employee ] on his last birthday immediately preceding the date on which the 
compensation fell due.  
8*        *                                 *                                                   **  
(c) where  permanent partial disablement 
results from the injury.  (i) in the case of an injury specified in Part II  of 
Schedule I, such percentage of the compensation 
which would have been payable in the case of 
permanent total disablement as is specified 
therein as being the percentage of the loss of 
earning capacity caused by that injury, and  
(ii) in the case of an i njury not specified in 
Schedule I, such percentage of th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 8]
hat injury, and  
(ii) in the case of an i njury not specified in 
Schedule I, such percentage of the compensation 
payable in the case of permanent total 
disablement as is proportionate to the loss of 
earning capacity (as assessed by the qualified 
medical practitioner) permanently caused by the 
injury. 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 2009, s. 5, for “workman” (w.e.f. 18 -1-2010)  
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 1984, s. 3, for s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -7-1984).  
3. Subs. by Act 30 of 1995, s. 4, for “forty per cent.” (w.e.f. 15 -9-1995).  
4. Subs. by Act 45 of 2 009, s. 7, for “eighty thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 18 -1-2010). Earlier it was amended by Act 46 of 2000, s. 3  
(w.e.f. 8 -12-2000).  
5. Subs. by Act 45 of 1995, s.4 ,for “fifty per cent.” (w.e.f. 15 -9-1995).  
6. Subs. by Act 45 of 2009, s. 7, for “ninety thousand  rupees” (w.e.f. 18 -1-2010). Earlier it was amended by Act 46 of 2000, s. 3 
(w.e.f. 8 -12-2000).  
7. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -1-2010).  
8. Explanation II  omitted by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f.18 -1-2010).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 9]
9 
  
Explanation I.—Where more injuries than one are caused by the same accident, the amount of 
compensation payable under this head shall be aggregated but not so in any case as to exceed the 
amount which would have been payable if permanent total disabl ement had resulted from the injuries.  
Explanation II.—In assessing the loss of earning capacity for the purposes of sub -clause ( ii), the 
qualified medical practitioner shall have due regard to the percentages of loss of earning capacity in 
relation to diff erent injuries specified in Schedule I;  
(d) where temporary disablement, whether total 
or partial results from the injury  a half -monthly payment of the sum equivalent 
to twenty -five per cent. of monthly wages of 
the 1[employee ], to be paid in accordance w ith 
the provisions of sub -section ( 2). 
2[(1A) Notwithsta nding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), while fixing the amount of 
compensation payable to a1[employee ] in respect of an accident occurred outside India, the Commissioner 
shall take into account the amount of compensation, if any, awarded to such 1[employee ] in accordance 
with the law of the country in which the accident occurred and shall reduce the amount fixed by him by 
the amount of compensation awarded to the 1[employee ] in accordance with th e law of that country.]  
3[(1B) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify, for the purposes 
of sub -section ( I), such monthly wages in relation to an employ ee as it may consider necessary ;] 
(2) The half -monthly payment refe rred to in clause  (d) of sub -section ( 1) shall be payable on the 
sixteenth day — 
(i) from the date of disablement where such disablement lasts for a period of twenty -eight days or 
more, or  
(ii) after the expiry of a waiting period of three days from the dat e of disablement where such 
disablement lasts for a period of less than twenty -eight days; and thereafter half -monthly during the 
disablement or duri
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 9]
period of less than twenty -eight days; and thereafter half -monthly during the 
disablement or during a period of five years, whichever period is shorter:  
Provided that — 
(a) there shall deducted from any lu mp sum or half -monthly payments to which the 1[employee ] 
is entitled the amount of any payment or allowance which the 1[employee ] has received from the 
employer by way of compensation during the period of disablement prior to the receipt of such lump 
sum o r of the first half -monthly payment, as the case may be; and  
(b) no half -monthly payment shall in any case exceed the amount, if any, by which half the 
amount of the monthly wages of the 1[employee ] before the accident execeds half the amount of such 
wages  which he is earning after the accident.  
Explanation .—Any payment or allowance which the 1[employee ] has received from the employer 
towards his medical treatment shall not be deemed to be a payment or allowance received by him by way 
of compensation within  the meaning of clause ( a) of the proviso.  
3[(2A) The employee shall be reimbursed the actual medical expenditure incurred by him for 
treatment of injuries caused d uring the course of employment. ] 
  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 2 009, s. 5, for “workman” (w.e.f . 18-1-2010 ). 
2. Ins. by Act 30 of 1995, s. 4 (w.e.f. 15 -9-1995).  
3. Ins. by Act 45 of 2009, s. 7 (w.e .f. 18-1-2010 ). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 10]
10 
 (3) On the ceasing of the disablement before the date on which any half -monthly payment falls due 
there shall be payable in respect of that half -month a sum proportionate to the duration of the disablement 
in that half -month.]  
1[(4) If the injury of the 2[employee ] results his death, the employer shall, in addit ion to the 
compensation under sub -section ( 1), deposit with the Commissioner a sum of 3[two thousand and five 
hundred rupees ] for payment of the same to the eldest surviving dependant of the 2[employee ] towards the 
expenditure of the funeral of such 2[empl oyee ] or where the2[employee ] did not have a dependant or was 
not living with his dependant at the time of his death to the person who actually incurred such 
expenditure.]  
4[Provided that the Central Government may, by notification  in the Official Gazette,  from time to 
time, enhance the amount specifi ed in this sub -section.]  
5[4A. Compensation to be paid w hen due and penalty for default .—(1) Compensation under 
section 4 shall be paid as soon as it falls due.  
(2) In cases where the employer does not accept t he liability for compensation to the extent claimed, 
he shall be bound to make provisional payment based on the extent of liability which he accepts, and, 
such payment shall be deposited with the Commissioner or made to the 2[employee ], as the case may be,  
without prejudice to the right of the 2[employee ] to make any further claim.  
6[(3) Where any employer is in default in paying the compensation due under this Act within one 
month from the date it fell due, the Commissioner shall — 
(a) direct that the emplo yer shall, in addition to the amount of the arrears, pay simple interest 
thereon at the rate of twelve per cent. per annum or at such higher, rate not exceeding the maximum 
of the lending rates of any scheduled bank as may be specified by the Central Gover nment by 
notification in the Official Gazette, on the amount due; and  
(b) if, in his opinion
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 10]
over nment by 
notification in the Official Gazette, on the amount due; and  
(b) if, in his opinion, there is no justification for the delay, direct that the employer shall, in 
addition to the amount of the arrears and interest thereon, pay a further sum not exce eding fifty per 
cent. of such amount by way of penalty:  
Provid ed that an order for the payment of penalty shall not be passed under clause ( b) without giving 
a reasonable opportunity to the employer to show cause why it should not be passed.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, “scheduled bank” means a bank for the time 
being included in the Second Schedule to the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934.  
7[(3A) The interest and the penalty payable under sub -section ( 3) shall be paid to the 2[employee ] or 
his dependant, as the case may be. ] 
5.8[Method of calculating wages .—8***9[In this Act and for the purposes thereof the expression 
“monthly wages” means me amount of wages deemed to be payable for a month ’s service (whether the 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 30 of 1995, s. 4 (w.e.f.15 -9-1995).  
2. Subs. by Act 45 of 2009, s. 5, for “workman” (w.e.f.18 -1-2010).  
3. Subs. by Act 46 of 2000, s. 3, for “one thousand rupees” (w.e.f.8 -12-2000).  
4. Ins. by Act 45 of 2009, s. 7 (w. e. f. 18 -1-2010).  
5. Ins. by Act 8 of 1959, s. 5 (w.e.f.1 -6-1959).  
6. Subs. by Act 30 of 1995, s. 5 for sub -section (3) (w.e.f.15 -9-1995),  
7. Subs. by Act 46 of 20 00, s. 4, for sub -section ( 3A) (w.e.f.8 -12-2000).  
8.The brackets and figure “( 1)” omitted by Act 9 of 1938, s. 4.  Earlier section 5 was re-numbered as sub -section ( 1) of that 
section by Act 5 of 1929, s. 3 . 
9. Subs. by Act 13 of 1939, s. 2 (w.e.f. 30 -6-1934), for “For the purposes of this Act the monthly wages of a workman shall be 
calculated”. The words in italics subs. by Act 15 of 1933, s. 5, for “section 4”.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 10]
5 of 1933, s. 5, for “section 4”.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 11]
11 
 wages are payable by the  month or by whatever other period or at piece rates), and calculated] as follows, 
namely: — 
(a) where the 1[employee ] has, during a continuous period of not less than twelve months 
immediately preceding the accident, been in the service of the employer who  is liable to - pay 
compensation, the monthly wages of the 1[employee ] shall be one -twelfth of the total wages which 
have fallen due for payment to him by the employer in the last twelve months of that period;  
2[(b) where the whole of the continuous period of service immediately preceding the accident 
during which the 1[employee ] was in the service of the employer who is liable to pay the 
compensation  was less than one month, the m onthly wages of the 1[employee ] shall be 3*** the 
average monthly amount which , during the twelve months immediately  preceding the accident, was 
being earned by a1[employee ] employed on the same work by the same employer, or, if there was no 
1[employee ] so employed, by a1[employee ] employed on similar work in the same locality;]  
4[(c)] 5[in other cases [including cases in which it is not possible for want of necessary 
information to calculate the monthly wages under clause ( b)]], the monthly wages shall be thirty 
times the total wages earned in respect of the last continuous period o f service immediately preceding 
the accident from the employer who is liable to pay compensation, divided by the number of days 
comprising such period.  
6*  *    *   *  * 
Explanation .—A period of service s hall, for the purposes of 7[this 8[section]] be deem ed to be 
continuous which has not been interrupted by a period of absence from work exceeding fourteen 
days.  
9*   *   *  *  * 
6. Review .—(1) Any half -monthly payment payable under this Act, either under an agreement 
between the parties or under the order o f a Commissioner, may be reviewed by the Commissioner, on the 
application either of the employer or of the 1[employee ] accompa
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 11]
iewed by the Commissioner, on the 
application either of the employer or of the 1[employee ] accompanied by the certificate of a qualified 
medical practitioner that there has been a change in the condition of the 1[employee ] or, subject to rules 
made under this Act, on application made without such certificate.  
(2) Any half -monthly payment may, on review under this section, subject to the provisions of this 
Act, be continued, increased, decreased or ended, or if the accident is fou nd to have resulted in permanent 
disablement, be converted to the lump sum to which the 1[employee ] is entitled less any amount which he 
has already received by way of half -monthly payments.  
7. Commutation of half -monthly payments .—Any right to receive hal f-monthly payments may, by 
agreement between the parties or, if the parties cannot agree  and the payments have been continued for 
not less than six months, on the application of either party to the Commissioner be redeemed by the 
payment of a lump sum of s uch amount as may be agreed to by the parties or determined by the 
Commissioner, as the case may be.  
  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 2009, s. 5, for “workman” (w.e.f. 18 -1-2010).  
2. Ins. by Act 15 of 1933, s. 5. 
3. The words “deemed to be” omitted by Act 13 of 1939, s. 2 (w.e.f. 30 -6-1934).  
4. Clause  (b) relettered as cl ause (c) by Act 15 of 1933, s. 5.  
5. Subs. by Act 8 of 1959, s. 6, for “in other cases” (w.e.f. 1 -6-1959).  
6. The proviso omitted by Act 15 of 1933, s. 5.  
7. Subs. by Act 5 of 1929, s. 3, for “this section”.  
8. Subs. by Act 9 of 1938, s. 4, for “sub -section”.  
9.  Sub-section (2) omitted by Act 15 of 1933, s. 5.  Earlier it was added by Act 5 of 1929, s. 3 . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 12]
12 
 8. Distribution of compensation .—1[(1) No payment of compensation in respect of a 2[employee ] 
whose injury has resulted in death, and no payment of a lum p sum as compensation to a woman or a 
person under a legal disability, shall be made otherwise than by deposit with the Commissioner, and no 
such payment made directly by an employer shall be deemed to be a payment of compensation:  
3[Provided that, in the case of a deceased 2[employee ], an employer may make to any dependant 
advan ces on account of compensation 4[of an amount equal to three months ’ wages of such 2[employee ] 
and so much of such amount] as does not exceed the compensation payable to that depend ant shall be 
deducted by the Commissioner from such compensation and repaid to the employer.]  
(2) Any other sum amounting to not less than ten rupees which is payable as compensation may be 
deposited with the Commissioner on behalf of the person entitled t hereto.  
(3) The receipt of the Commissioner shall be a sufficient discharge in respect of any compensation 
deposited with him.]  
(4) On the deposit of a ny money under sub -section ( 1) 5[as compensation in respect of a deceased 
2[employee ] the Commissioner 6*** shall, if he thinks necessary, cause  notice to be published or to be ; 
served on each dependant in such manner as he thinks fit, calling upon the dependants to appear before 
him on such date as he may fix for determining the distribution of the compensat ion. If the Commissioner 
is satisfied after any inquiry which he may deem necessary, that no dependant exists, he shall repay the 
balance of the money to the employer by whom it was paid. The Commissioner shall, on application by 
the employer, furnish a st atement showing in detail all disbursements made.  
7[(5) Compensation deposited  in respect of a deceased 2[employee ] shall, subject to any deduction 
made under sub -section ( 4), be apportioned among the dependants of the deceased 2[employee ] or any of 
them i n
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 12]
 -section ( 4), be apportioned among the dependants of the deceased 2[employee ] or any of 
them i n such proportion as the Commissioner thinks fit, or may, in the discretion of the Commissioner, be 
allotted to any one dependant.  
(6) Where a ny compensation deposited with the Commissioner is payable to any person, the 
Commissioner shall, if the person to  whom the compen sation is payable is not a woman or a person under 
a legal disability, and may, in other cases, pay the money to the person entitled thereto.  
(7) Where any lump sum deposited with the Commissioner is payable to a woman or a person under a 
legal disability, such sum may be invested, applied or otherwise dealt with for the benefit of the woman, 
or of such person during his disability, in such manner as the Commissioner may direct; and where a  
half-monthly payment is payable to any person unde r a legal disability, the Commissioner may, of his 
own motion or on an applicati on made to him in this behalf, o rder that the payment be made during the 
disability to any dependant of the employee  or to any other person, whom the Commissioner thinks best 
fitted to provide for the welfare of the 2[employee ].] 
8[(8)] Where, on application made to him in this behalf or otherwise, the Commissioner is satisfied 
that, on account of neglect of children on the part of parent or on account of the variation of the 
circumstances of any dependant or for any other sufficient cause, an order of the Commissioner as to the 
distribution of any sum paid as compensation or as to the manner in which any sum payable to any such 
dependant is to be invested, applied or otherwise d ealt with, ought to be varied, the Commissioner may 
make such orders for the variation of the former order as he thinks just in the circumstances of the case:  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 5 of 1929, s. 4, for s ub-sections ( 1) to ( 3). 
2. Subs. by Act 45 of 2009, s. 5, for “workman” (w.e.f.
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 12]
1929, s. 4, for s ub-sections ( 1) to ( 3). 
2. Subs. by Act 45 of 2009, s. 5, for “workman” (w.e.f.18 -1-2010).  
3. Subs. by Act 15 of 1933, s. 6, for the proviso.  
4. Ins. by Act 5 of 1929, s. 4.  
5. Subs. by Act 30 of 1995, s. 6, for certain words (w.e.f.15 -9-1995).  
6. Certain words omitted by Act 30 of 1995, s. 6 (w.e.f.15 -9-1995).  
7. Subs. by Act 5 of 1929, s. 4, for sub -section (5).  
8. Sub -section ( 6) renumbered as sub -section ( 8) by Act 5 of 1929, s. 4.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 13]
13 
 Provided that no such order prejudicial to any person shall be made unless such person has been g iven 
an opportunity of showing cause why the order should not be made, or shall be made in any case in which 
it would involve the repayment by a dependant of any sum already paid to him.  
1[(9) Where the Commissioner varies any order under sub -section ( 8) by reason of the fact that 
payment of compensation to any person has been obtained b y fraud, impersonation or other improper 
means, any amount so paid to or on behalf of such person may be recovered in the manner hereinafter 
provided in section 31].  
9. Comp ensation not to be assigned, attached or charged .—Save as provided by this Act, no lump 
sum or half -monthly payment payable under this Act shall in any way be capable of being assigned or 
charged or be liable to attachment or pass to any person other than the 2[employee ] by operation of law, 
nor shall any - claim be set off against the same.  
10. Notice and claim .—(1) 3[No claim for compensation shall be entertained by a Commissioner 
unless notice of the accident has been given in the manner hereinafter provi ded as soon as practicable 
after the happening thereof and unless the claim is preferred before him within 4[two years] of the 
occurrence of the accident or, in case of death, within 4[two years] from the date of death:]  
Provided that, where the accident i s the contracting of a disease in respect of which the provisions of 
sub-section ( 2) of section 3 are applicable, the accident shall be deemed to have occurred on the  first of 
the days during which  the 2[employee ] was continuously absent from work in conse quence of the 
disablement caused by the disease:  
5[Provided further that in case of partial disablement due to the contracting of any such disease and 
which does not force the 2[employee ] to absent himself from work, the period of two years shall be 
counte d from the day the2[employee ]gives notice of the disablement
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 13]
e period of two years shall be 
counte d from the day the2[employee ]gives notice of the disablement to his employer:  
Provided further that if a 2[employee ] who, having been employed in an employment for a continuous 
period, specified under sub -section ( 2) of section 3 in respect of that employm ent, ceasesto be so 
employed and develops symptoms of an occupational disease peculiar to that employment within two 
years of the cessation of employment, the accident shall be deemed to have occurred on the day on which 
the symptoms were first detected:]  
6[Provided further that the want of or any defect or irregularity in a no tice shall not be a bar to the 
7[entertainment of a claim] — 
(a) if the claim is 8[preferred] in respect of the death of a2[employee ] resulting from an accident 
which occurred on the p remises of the employer, or at any place where the 2[employee ] at the time of 
the accident was working under the control of - the employer or of any person employed by him, and 
the 2[employee ] died on such premises or at such place, or on any premises belon ging to the 
employer, or died without having left the vicinity of the premises or place where the accident 
occurred, or  
(b) if the employer 9[or any one of several employers or any person responsible to the employer 
for the management of any branch of the trade or business in which the injured 2[employee ] was 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 1929, s. 4.  
2. Subs. by Act 45 of 2009, s. 5, for “ workman” (w.e.f.  18-1-2010 ). 
3. Subs. by Act 9 of 1938, s. 5, for the original words.  
4. Subs. by Act 8 of 1959 , s. 8, for “one year” (w.e.f. 1-6-1959).  
5. Ins. by Act 64 of 1962, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1-2-1963).  
6. Ins. by Act 15 of 1933, s. 7.  
7. Subs. by Act 9 of  1938, s. 5, for “maintenance of proceedings”.  
8. Subs. by s. 5, ibid. 
9. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 13]
d. 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 14]
14 
 employed] had knowledge of the accident from any other source at or about the time when it 
occurred:  
Provided furt her, that the Commissioner may 1[entertain] and decide any claim to compensation in 
any case notwithstanding that the notice has not been gi ven, or the claim has not been 2[preferred], in due 
time as provided in this sub -section, if he is satisfied that the fa ilure so to give the notice of 3[prefer] the 
claim, as the case may be, was due to sufficient cause.  
(2) Every such notice shall give the name and address of the persons injured and shall state in 
ordinary language the cause for the injury and the date on which the accident happened, and shall be 
served on the employer or upon 4[any one of] several employers, or upon any p erson 5*** responsible to 
the employer for the management of any branch o f the trade or business in which  the injured 6[employee ] 
was employed.  
7[(3) The State Government may require that any prescribed class of employer s shall maintain at their 
premises at which 8[employee s] are employed a notice -book, in the prescribed form, which shall be 
readily accessible at all reasonable times to any injured6[employee ] employed on the premises and to any 
person acting bona fide  on his behalf.  
(4) A notice under this section may be served by delivering it at, or sending it by registered post 
addressed to, the residence or any office or place of business of the person on whom it is to be served, or, 
where a notice -book is maintained, by entry in the notice -book.]  
9[10A. Power to require from employers statements regarding fatal accidents .—(1) Where a 
Commissioner receives information from any source that a6[employee ] has died as a result of an accident 
arising out of and in the course of his employment, he may send by registered post a notice to the 
workman ’s employer requiring him to submit, within thirty days of the service of the notice, a statement, 
in the prescribed for m, giving the circu
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 14]
in thirty days of the service of the notice, a statement, 
in the prescribed for m, giving the circumstances attending the death of the 6[employ ee], and indicating 
whether, in the opinion of the employer, he is or is not liable to deposit compensation on account of the 
death.  
(2) If the employer is of opinion that he is liable to deposit compensation, he shall make the deposit 
within thirty days o f the service of the notice.  
(3) If the employer is of opinion that he is not liable to deposit compensation, he shall in his statement 
indicate the grounds on which he disclaims liability.  
(4) Where the employer has so disclaimed liability, the Commission er, after such enquiry as he may 
think fit, may inform any of the dependants of the deceased 6[employee ], that it is open to the dependants 
to prefer a claim for compensation, and may give them such other further information as he may think fit.  
  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 9 of 1938, s. 5, for “admit”.  
2. Subs . by s. 5, ibid.,  for “instituted”.  
3. Subs. by s. 5, ibid.,  for “institute”.  
4. Subs. by Act 7 of 1924, s. 2 and the First Schedule , for “any one or”.  
5. The word “directly” omitted by Act 9 of 1938, s. 5.  
6. Subs. by Act 45 of 2009, s. 5, for “ workman” (w.e.f. 18-1-2010 ). 
7. Subs. by Act 15 of 1933, s. 7, for sub -section (3).  
8. Subs. by Act 45 of 2 009, s. 5, f or “workmen” (w.e.f. 18 -1-2010 ). 
9. Ins. by Act 15 of 1933, s. 8.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 15]
15 
 10B. Rep orts of fatal accidents and serious bodily injuries .—(1) Where, by any law for the time 
being in force, notice is required to be given to any authority, by or on behalf of an employer, of any 
accident occurring on his p remises which results in death 1[or serious bodily injury], the person required 
to give the notice shall, within seven days of the death 1[or serious bodily injury], send a report to the 
Commissioner giving the circumstances attending the death 1[or serious. bodily injury]:  
Provided that wher e the State Government has so prescribed the person required to give the notice 
may instead of sending such report to the Commissioner send it to the authority to whom he is required to 
give the notice.  
1[Explanation .—“Serious bodily injury” means an injur y which involves, or in all probability will 
involve the permanent loss of the use of, or permanent injury to, any limb, or the permanent loss of or 
injury to the sight or hearing, or the fracture of any limb, or the enforced absence of the injured person 
from work for a period exceeding twenty days.]  
(2) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, extend the provisions of  
sub-section ( 1) to any class of premises other than those coming within the scope of that sub -section, and 
may,  by such notification, specify the persons who shall send the report to the Commissioner:  
1[(3) Nothing in this section shall apply to factories to which the Employees ’ State Insurance Act, 
1948 (34 of 1948), applies.]  
11. Medical examination .—(1) Where a 2[employee ] has given notice of an accident, he shall, if the 
employer, before the expiry of three days from the time at which service of the notice has been effected, 
offers to have him examined free of charge by a qualified medical practitioner, submit h imself for such 
examination, and any 2[employee ] who is in receipt of a half monthly payment under this Act shall, if so 
required, submit himself for such e
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 15]
n receipt of a half monthly payment under this Act shall, if so 
required, submit himself for such examination from time to time:  
Provided that a2[employee ] shall not be required to submit himself for  examination by a medical 
practitioner otherwise than in accordance with rules made under this Act, or at more frequent intervals 
than may be prescribed.  
(2) If a2[employee ], on being required to do so by the employer under sub -section ( 1) or by the 
Commis sioner at any time, refuses to submit himself for examination by a qualified medical practitioner 
or in any way obstructs the same, his right to compensation shall be suspended during the continuance of 
such refusal or obstruction unless, in the ’ case of r efusal, he was prevented by any sufficient cause from 
so submitting himself.  
(3) If a2[employee ], before the expiry of period within which he is liable under sub -section ( 1) to be 
required to submit himself for medical examination, voluntarily leaves witho ut having been so examined 
the vicinity of the place in which he was employed, his right to compensation shall be suspended until he 
returns and offers himself for such examination.  
(4) Where a2[employee ], whose right to compensation has been suspended und er sub -section ( 2) or  
sub-section ( 3), dies without having submitted himself for medical examination as required by either of 
those sub -sections, the Commissioner may, if he thinks fit, direct the payment of compensation to the 
dependants of the deceased 2[employee ]. 
(5) Where under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) a right to compensation is suspended, no 
compensation shall be payable in respect of the period of  suspension, and, if the period of suspension 
commences before the expiry of the waiting perio d referred to in clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of section 4, 
the waiting period shall be increased by the period during which the suspension continues.  
                                                      
1. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 15]
 during which the suspension continues.  
                                                      
1. Ins.  by Act 8 of 1959, s. 9 (w.e.f. 1-6-1959).  
2. Subs. by Act 45 of 20 09, s. 5, for “Workman” (w.e.f.18 -1-2010 ). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 16]
16 
 (6) Where an injured 1[employee ] has refused to be attended by a qualified medical practitioner 
whose se rvices have been offered to him by the employer free of charge or having accepted such offer has 
deliberately disregarded the instructions of such medical practitioner, then,2[if it is proved that the 
1[employee ] has not thereafter been regularly attended by a qualified medical practitioner or having been 
so attended has deliberately failed to follow his instructions and that such refusal, disregard or failure was 
unreasonable] in the circumstances of the case and that the injury has been aggravated thereby , the injury 
and resulting disablement shall be deemed to be of the same nature and duration as they might reasonably 
have been expected to be if the 1[employee]  had been regularly attended by a qualified medical 
practitioner 3[whose instructions he had fo llowed]., and compensation, it any, shall be payable 
accordingly.  
12. Contracting .—(1) Where any person (hereinafter in this section referred to as the principal) in 
the course of or for the purposes of his trade or business contracts with any other person  (hereinafter in 
this section referred to as the contractor) for the execution by or under the contractor of the whole or any 
part of any work which is ordinarily part of the trade or business of the principal, the principal shall be 
liable to pay to any 1[employee ] employed in the execution of the work any compensation which he 
would have been liable to pay if that 1[employee ] had been immediately employed by him; and where 
compensation is claimed from the  principal, this Act shall apply as if references t o the principal were 
substituted for references to the employer except that the amount of compensation shall be calculated with 
reference to the wages of the 1[employee ] under the employer  by whom he is immediately employed.  
(2) Where the principal is liab le to pay c ompensation u nder this section, he shall be entitl
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 16]
d.  
(2) Where the principal is liab le to pay c ompensation u nder this section, he shall be entitled to be 
indemnified by the contractor 4[,or any other person, from whom the 1[employee ] could have recovered 
compensation and where a contractor who is himself a principal is liable to pay compe nsation or to 
indemnify a principal under this section he shall be entitled to be indemnified by any person standing to 
him in the relation of a contractor  from whom the 1[employee ] could have recovered compensation] and 
all questions as to the right to an d the amount of any such indemnity shall, in default of agreement, be 
settled by the Commissioner.  
(3) Nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing a1[employee ] from recovering 
compensation from the contractor instead of the principal.  
(4) This section shall not apply in any case where the accident occurred elsewhere than on, in or about 
the premises on which the principal has undertaken or usually undertakes, as the case may be, to execute 
the work or which are otherwise under hi s control or ma nagement.  
13. Remedies of employer against stranger .—Where a1[employee ] has recovered compensation in 
respect of any injury caused under circumstances creating  a legal liability of some person other than the 
person by whom the compensation was paid to pay damages in respect thereof, the person by whom the 
compensation was paid and any person who has been called on to pay an indemnity under section 12 shall 
be entitled to be indemnified by the person so liable to pay damages as aforesaid.  
14. Insolvency of e mployer .—(1) Where any employer has entered into a contract with any insurers 
in respect of any liability under this Act to any 1[employee ], then in the event of the employer becoming 
insolvent or making a composition or scheme of arrangement with his cred itors or, if the employer is a 
company, in the event of the company having commenced to be wound up, the rights of the employer 
a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 16]

company, in the event of the company having commenced to be wound up, the rights of the employer 
against the insurers as respects that liability shall, notwithst anding anything in any law for t he time being 
in force relating to insolvency or the winding up of companies, be transferred to and vest in the 
1[employee ], and upon any such transfer the insurers shall have the same rights and remedies and be 
                                                      
1. Subs.  by Act 45 of 2009, s. 5, for “w orkman” (w.e.f. 18-1-2010 ). 
2. Sub s. by Act 9 of 1938, s. 6, for certain words.  
3. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. 
4. Ins. by Act 15 of 1933, s. 9.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 17]
17 
 subject to the same liabilities as if they were the employer, so, however, t hat the insurers -shall not be 
under any greater liability to the 1[employee ] than they would have been under to the employer.  
(2) If the liability of the insurers to the 1[employee ] is less than the liability of the employer to the 
1[employee ], the 1[emplo yee] may prove for the balance in the insolvency proceedings or liquidation.  
(3) Where in any case such as is referred to in sub -section ( 1) the contract of the employer with the 
insurers is void or voidable by reason of non -compliance on the part of the e mployer with any terms or 
conditions of the contract (other than a stipulation for the payment of premia), the provisions of that  
sub-section shall apply as if the contract were not void or voidable, and the insurers  shall be entitled to 
prove in the inso lvency proceedings or liquidation for the amount paid to the 1[employee ]: 
Provided that the provisions of this sub -section shall not apply in any case in which the 1[employee ] 
fails to give notice to the insurers of the happening of the accident and of any  resulting disablement as 
soon as practicable after he becomes aware of the institution of the insolvency or liquidation proceedings.  
(4) There shall be deemed to be included among the debts which under section 49 of the Presidency -
towns Insolvency Act, 19 09 (3 of 1909), or under section 61 of the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920  
(5 of 1920), or under 2[section 530 of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) ] arc in the distribution of the 
property of an insolvent or in the distribution of the assets of a compan y being wound up to be paid in 
priority to all other debts, the amount due in respect of any compensation the liability wherefor accrued 
before the date of the order of adjudication of the insolvent or the date of the commencement of the 
winding up, as the  ease may be, and those Acts shall have effect accordingly.  
(5) Where the compensa
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 17]
ding up, as the  ease may be, and those Acts shall have effect accordingly.  
(5) Where the compensation is a half -monthly payment, the amount due in respect thereof shall, for 
the purposes of this sec tion, be taken to be the amount of the lump sum for which the half -monthl y 
payment could, if redeemable, be redeemed if application were made for that purpose under section 7, and 
a certificate of the Commissioner as to the amount of such sum shall be conclusive proof thereof.  
(6) The provisions of sub -section ( 4) shall apply i n the ease of any amount for which an insurer is 
entitled to prove under sub -section ( 3), but otherwise those provisions shall not apply where the insolvent 
or the company being wound up has entered into such a contract with insurers as is referred to in  
sub-section ( 1). 
(7) This section shall not apply where a company is wound up voluntarily merely for the purposes of 
reconstruction or of amalgamation with another company.  
3[14A. Compensation to be first charge on assets transferred by employer .—Where an employer 
transfers his assets before any amount due in respect of any compensation, the liability where for accrued 
before the date of the transfer, has been paid, such amount shall, notwithstanding anything contained in 
any other law for the time being in  force, be a first charge on that part of the assets so transferred as 
consists of immovable property.]  
15. Special provisions relating to masters and seamen .—This Act shall apply in the case of 
4[employee s] who are masters of 5*** ships or seamen subject to the following modifications namely: — 
(1) The notice of the accident and the claim for compensation may, except where the person 
injured is the master of the ship, be served on the master of the ship as if he were the employer, but 
where the accident hap pened and the disablement commenced on board the ship it shall not be 
necessary for any seaman to give any notice of the accident.  
                  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 17]
p it shall not be 
necessary for any seaman to give any notice of the accident.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 2009, s. 5, for “ workman” (w.e.f. 18-1-2010 ). 
2. Subs. by Act 30 of 1995, s. 7, for certain words (w.e.f. 15-9-1995).  
3. Ins. by Act 8  of 1959, s. 10 (w.e.f. 1-6-1959).  
4. Subs. by Act 45 of 2 009, s. 5, for “workmen” (w.e.f.18 -1-2010 ). 
5. The word “registered” omitted by Act 15 of 1933, s. 10.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 18]
18 
 (2) In the case of the death of a master or seaman, the claim for com pensation shall be made 
within 1[one year] after the new s of the death has been received by the claimant or, wherethe ship has 
been or is deemed to have been lost with all hands, within eighteen months of the date on which the 
ship was, or is deemed to have been, so lost:  
2[Provided that the Commissioner may en tertain any claim to compensation in any case 
notwithstanding that the claim has not been preferred in due time as provided in this sub -section, if he 
is satisfied that the failure so to prefer the claim was due to sufficient cause.]  
(3) Where an injured m aster or seaman is discharged  or left behind in any part of 3[India or] 4[in 
any foreign country] any depositions taken by any Judge or Magistrate in that part or by any Consular 
Officer in the foreign country and transmitted by the person by whom they are  taken to the Central 
Government or any State Government  shall, in any proceedings for enforcing the claim, be admissible 
in evidence — 
(a) if the deposition is authenticated by the signature of the Judge, Magistrate or Consular 
Officer before whom it is ma de; 
(b) if the defendant or the person accused, as the case may be, had an opportunity by himself 
or his agent to cross -examine the witness; and  
(c) if the deposition was made in the course of a criminal proceeding, on proof that the 
deposition was made in  the presence of the person accused;  
and it shall not be necessary in any case to prove the signature or official character of the person 
appearing to have signed any such deposition and a certificate by such person that the defendant or the 
person accused  had an opportunity of cross -examining the witness and that the deposition if made in a 
criminal proceeding was made in the presence of the person accused shall, unless the contrary is proved, 
be sufficient evidence that he., had that opportunity and that it was so made.  
5*                  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 18]
e sufficient evidence that he., had that opportunity and that it was so made.  
5*                                  *                                       *                              *                            *  
6[(4)] No 7[half -monthly payment] shall be payable in respect of the period during which the owner of 
the ship is, under any law  in force for the time being 8*** relating to merchant shipping, liable to defray 
the expenses of maintenance of the injured master or seaman.  
9[(5) No compensation shall be payable under this Act in respect of any injury in respe ct of which 
provision is made for payment of a gratuity, allowanc e or pension under the War Pensi ons and Detention 
Allowances (Mercantile Marine, etc.) Scheme, 1939, or the War Pensions and Detention Allowances 
(Indian Seamen, etc.)Scheme, 1941, made under  the Pensions (Navy, Army, Air Force and Mercantile 
Marine) Act, 1939 (2 & 3 Geo.), or under the War Pensions and Detention Allowances (Indian Seamen) 
Scheme, 1942 (6, c. 83), made by the Central Government.  
(6) Failure to give a notice or make a claim or commence proceedings within the time required by this 
Act shall not be a bar to the maintenance of proceedings under this Act in respect of any personal injury, 
if— 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 8 of 1959, s. 11, for “six months” (w.e.f.1 -6-1959).  
2. Added by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f.1 -6-1959).  
3. Ins. by the A.O. 1950.  
4. Subs. by Act 22 of 1984, s. 4, for certain words (w.e.f.1 -7-1984).  
5. Clause ( 4) omitted by Act 9 of 1938, s. 7.  
6. Clause ( 5) renumbered as clause ( 4) of that section by s. 7, ibid. 
7. Subs. by Act 7 of 1924, s . 2 and the First Schedule , for “monthly payment”.  
8. The words “in Part A  States and Part C States” omitted by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3, and  the Schedule . 
9. Subs. by Act 1 of 1942, s. 2 (w.e.f.3 -9-1939).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 18]
9-1939).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 19]
19 
 (a) an application has been made for payment in respect of that injury under any of the sch emes 
referred to in the preceding clause, and  
(b) the State Government certifies that the said application was made in the reasonable belief that 
the injury was one in respect of which the scheme under which the application was made makes 
provision for pay ments, and that the application was rejected or that payments made in pursuance of 
the application were discontinued on the ground that the injury was not such an injury, and  
(c) the proceedings under this Act are commenced within one month from the date o n which the 
said certificate of the State Government was furnished to the person commencing the proceedings.]  
1[15A. Special provisions relating to captains and other members of crew of aircrafts .—This Act 
shall apply in the case of 2[employee s] who are ca ptains or other members of the crew of aircrafts subject 
to the fo llowing modifications, namely: — 
(1) The notice of the accident and the claim for compensation may, except where the person 
injured is the captain of the aircraft, be served on the captain of  the aircraft as if he were the 
employer, but where the accident happened and the disablement commenced on board the aircraft it 
shall not be necessary for any member of the crew to give notice of the accident.  
(2) In the case of the death of the captain o r other member of the crew, the claim for 
compensation shall be made within one year after the news of the death has been received by the 
claimant or, where the aircraft has been or is deemed to have been lost with all hands, within eighteen 
months of the date on which the aircraft was, or is deemed to have been, so lost:  
Provided that the Commissioner may entertain any claim for compensation  in any case 
notwithstanding that the claim has not been preferred in due time as provided in this sub -section, if he  
is satisfied that the failure so to prefer the claim was due to sufficie
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 19]
 this sub -section, if he  
is satisfied that the failure so to prefer the claim was due to sufficient cause.  
(3) Where an inju red captain or other member of the crew of the aircraft is discharged or left 
behind in any part of India or in any other country, any depositions taken by any Judge or Magistrate 
in that part or by any Consular Officer in the foreign country and transmitted by the person by whom 
they are taken to the Central Government or any State Government shall, in any proceedings for 
enforcing the claims, be admissible in evidence — 
(a) if the deposition is authenticated by the signature of the Judge, Magistrate or Consular 
Officer before whom it is made;  
(b) if the defendant or the person accused, as the case may be, had an opportunity by himself 
or his agent to cross -examine the witness;  
(c) if the deposition was made in the course of a criminal proceeding, on proof that the 
deposition was made in the presence of the person accused,  
and it shall not be necessary in any case to prove the signature or official character of  the person 
appearing to have signed any such deposition and a certificate by such person that the defendant or the 
person accused had an opportunity of cross -examining the witness and that the deposition if made in a 
criminal proceedings was made in the p resence of the person accused shall, unless the contrary is proved, 
be sufficient evidence that he had that opportunity and that it was so made.  
15B. Special provisions relating to 2[employee s] abroad of companies and motor vehicles .—This 
Act shall apply — 
(i) in the case of 2[employee s] who are persons recruited by companies registered in India and 
working as such abroad, and  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 30 of 1995, s. 8 (w.e.f. 15-9-1995).  
2. Subs. by Act 45 of 2009, s. 5, for “workmen” (w.e.f.18 -1-2010).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 19]
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 20]
20 
 (ii) persons sent for work abroad along with motor vehicles registered under the Motor Vehicles, 
Act, 1988 (59 of 1988) as drivers, h elpers, mechanics, cleaners or other 1[employee s], subject to the 
following modifications, namely: — 
(1) The notice of the accident and the claim for compensation may be served on the local 
agent of the company, or the local agent of the owner of the motor vehicle, in the country of 
accident, as the case may be.  
(2) In the case of death of the 2[employee ] in respect of whom the provisions of this section 
shall apply, the claim for compensation shall be made within one year after the news of the death 
has bee n received by the claimant:  
Provided that the Commissioner may entertain any claim for compensation in any case 
notwithstanding that the claim has not been preferred in due time as provided in this sub section, if 
he is satisfied that the failure so to pre fer the claim was due to sufficient cause.  
(3) Where an injured 2[employee ] is discharged or left behind in any part of India or in any 
other country any depositions taken by any Judge or Magistrate in that part or by any Consular 
Officer, in the foreign c ountry and transmitted by the person by whom they are taken to the 
Central Government or any State Government shall, in any proceedings for enforcing the claims, 
be admissible in evidence — 
(a) if the deposition is authenticated by the signature of the Judg e, Magistrate or Consular 
Officer before whom it is made;  
(b) if the defendant or the person accused, as the case may be, had an opportunity by 
himself or his agent to cross -examine the witness;  
(c) if the deposition was made in the course of a criminal pr oceeding, on proof that the 
deposition was made in the presence of ‘the person accused,  
and it shall not be necessary in any case to prove the signature 017 official character of the peron  
appearing to have signed any such deposition and a certificate by s uch person that the defend
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 20]
ron  
appearing to have signed any such deposition and a certificate by s uch person that the defendant or 
the person accused had an opportunity of cross -examining the witness and that the deposition if made 
in a criminal proceding vas made in the presence of the person accused shall, unless the contrary is 
proved, be sufficient  evidence that he had that opportunity and that it was so made.]  
16. Returns as to compensation .—The 3[State Government] may by notification in the Official 
Gazette , direct that every person employing 1[employee s], or that any specified class of such perso ns, 
shall send at such time and in such form and to such authority, as may be specified in the notification, a 
correct return specifying the number of injuries in respect of which compensation has been paid by the 
employer during the previous year and the amount of such compensation together with such other 
particulars  as to the compensation as the 3[State Government] may direct.  
17. Contracting out .—Any contract or agreement whether made before or after the commencement 
of this Act, whereby a2[employee ] relinquishes any right of compensation from the employer for personal 
injury arising out of or in the course of the employment, shall be null and void in so far as it purports to 
remove or reduce the liabilit y of any person to pay compensation under this Act . 
4[17A.Duty of employer to inform employee of his rights .—Every employer shall immediately at 
the time of employment of an employee, inform the employee of his rights to compensation under this 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 2009, s. 5, for “workmen” (w.e.f.18 -1-2010).  
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid.,  for “workman” (w.e.f. 18-1-2010).  
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “G.G. in C”.  
4. Ins. by Act 11 of 2017 , s. 2 (w.e.f .15-5-2017 ). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 21]
21 
 Act, in writing as well as through electronic means, in Engli sh or Hindi or in the official language of the 
area of employment, as may be understood by the employee.]  
18. [Proof of age.] Rep. by the Workmen ’s Compensation (Amendment) Act, 1959  (8 of 1959 ) s. 12 
(w.e.f. 1-6-1959 ). 
1[18A. Penalties .—(1) Whoever — 
(a) fails to maintain a notice -book which he is required to maintain under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 10, or  
(b) fails to send to the Commissioner a statement which he is required to sent under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 10A, or  
(c) fails to send a report whi ch he is required to sent under section 10B, or  
(d) fails to make a return which he is required to make under 2[section 16,  or] 
3[(e) fails to inform the employee of his rights to compensation as required under section 17A;]  
shall be punishable  with fine 4[which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to 
one lakh rupees] . 
(2) No prosecution under this section shall be instituted except by or with the previous sanction of a 
Commissioner, and no Court shall take cognizance of any off ence under this section, un less complaint 
thereof is made 5[within six months of the date on which the alleged commission of the offence came to 
the knowledge of the Commissioner].]  
CHAPTER III  
COMMISSIONERS  
19. Reference to Commissioners .—(1) If any ques tion arises in any proceedings under this Act as to 
the liability of any person to pay compensation (including any question as to whether a person injured is 
or is not a 6[employee ]) or as to the amount or duration of compensation (including any question a s to the 
nature or extent of disablement), the question shall, in defau lt of agreement, be settled by 7[a 
Commissioner].  
(2) No Civil Court shall have jurisdiction to settle, decide or deal with any question which is by or 
under this Act required to be ‘settled, decided or dealt with by a Commissioner or to enfo rce any liability 
incurred u
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 21]
red to be ‘settled, decided or dealt with by a Commissioner or to enfo rce any liability 
incurred unde r this Act.  
20. Appointment of Commissioners .—(1) The State Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, 8[who is or has been a member of a State Judicial S ervice for a period of not less than 
five years or is or has been for not less than five years an advocate or a pleader or is or has been a 
Gazetted Officer for not less th an five years having education qualifications and experience in personnel 
management , human resource development and industrial relations] appoint any person to be a 
Commissioner for Workmen ’s Compensation for such9*** area as may be specified in the notification.  
 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 15 of 1933, s. 11.  
2. Subs. by Act 11 of 2017, s. 3, for “section 16” (w.e.f. 15-5-2017).  
3. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f.15 -5-2017).  
4. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “which may extend to five thousand rupees” (w.e.f.15 -5-2017).  
5. Subs. by Act 64 of 1962, s. 6, for certain words (w.e.f. 1-2-1963).  
6. Subs. by Act 45 of 2009, s. 5, for “ workman” (w.e.f.18 -1-2010).  
7. Subs. by Act 15 of 1933, s. 12, for “the Commissioner”.  
8. Ins. by Act 45 of 2009, s. 8 (w.e.f.18 -1-2010).  
9. The word “local” omitted by Act 64 of 1962, s. 7 (w.e.f. 1-2-1963).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 22]
22 
  
 
1[(2) Where more than one Commissioner had been appointed for any 2*** area, the State 
Government  may, by general or special order, regulate the distribution of business between them.]  
3[(3)] Any Commissioner may, for the purpose of deciding any matter referred to him for decision 
under this Act, choose one or more persons pos sessing special knowledge of any matter relevant to the 
matter under inquiry to assist him in holding the inquiry.  
3[(4)] Every Commissioner shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
21. Venue of proce edings a nd transfer .—4[(1) Where any matter is under this Act to be done by or 
before a Commi ssioner, the same shall, subject to the provisions of this Act and to any rules made 
hereunder, be done by or before the Comm issioner for the area in which — 
(a) the accident took place which resulted in the injury; or  
(b) the5[employee ] or in case of his death, the dependant claiming the compensation ordinarily 
resides; or  
(c) the employer has his registered office:  
Provided that no matter shall be processed before or by a Commissioner, other than the 
Commissioner having jurisdiction over the area in which the accident took place, without his giving 
notice in the manner prescribed by the Central Government to the Commissioner having jurisdiction over 
the area and the  State Government concerned:  
Provided further that, where the 5[employee ], being the master of a ship or a seaman or the captain or 
a member of the crew of an aircraft or a5[employee ] in a motor vehicle or a company, meets with the 
accident outside India a ny such matter may be done by or before a Commissioner for the area in which 
the owner or agent of the ship, aircraft or motor vehicle resides or carries on business or the registered 
office of the company is situate, as the case may be.  
(1A) If a Commissi oner, other than the Commissioner with whom any money has been deposited 
under se
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 22]
1A) If a Commissi oner, other than the Commissioner with whom any money has been deposited 
under section 8, proceeds with a matter under this Act, the former may for the proper disposal of the 
matter call for transfer of any records or money remaining with the latter and on  receipt of such a request, 
he shall comply with the same.]  
(2) If a Commissioner is satisfied 6[that any matter arising out of any proceedings pending before 
him] can be more conveniently depth with by any other Commissioner, whether in the same State or not, 
he may, subject to rules made under this Act, order such matter to be transferred to such other 
Commissioner either for report or for disposal, and, if he does so, shall forthwith transmit to such other 
Commissioner all documents relevant for the deci sion of such matter and, where the matter is transferred 
for disposal, shall also transmit in the prescribed manner any money remaining in his hands or invested 
by his for the benefit of any party to the proceedings:  
  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 15 of 1933, s. 13.  
2. The word “local” omitted by Act 64 of 1962, s. 7 (w.e.f. 1-2-1963).  
3. Sub -section ( 2) and ( 3) renumbered as sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4) to that section re spectively by Act 15 of 1933, s. 13.  
4. Subs. by Act 30 of 1995, s. 10, for sub -section ( 1),(w.e.f.15 -5-1995).  
5. Subs. by Act 45 of 2009, s. 5, for “ workman” (w.e.f.18 -1-2010 ). 
6. Subs. by Act 9 of 1938, s. 9, for certain words.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 23]
23 
 1[Provided that the Commissioner shal l not, where any party to the proceedings has appeared before 
him, make any order of transfer relating to the distribution among dependants of a lump sum without 
giving such party an opportunity of being heard:]  
2*****  
(3) The Commissioner to whom any matt er is so transferred shall, subject to rules made under this 
Act, inquire thereinto and, if the matter was transferred for report, return his report thereon or, if the 
matter was transferred for disposal, continue the proceedings as if they had originally commenced before 
him. 
(4) On receipt of a report from a Commissioner to whom any matter has been transferred for report 
under sub -section ( 2), the Commissioner by whom it, was referred shall decide the matter referred in 
conformity with such report.  
3[(5) The State Government may transfer any matter from any Commissioner appointed by it to any 
other Commissioner appointed by it.]  
22. Form of application .—4[(1) Where an accident occurs in respect of which liability to pay 
compensation under this Act arises, a claim for such compensation may, subject to the prov isions of this 
Act, be made before the Commissioner.  
(1A) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), no application for the settlement] of  any matter by a 
Commissioner, 5[other than an application by  a dependant or dependants for compensation] shall be made 
unless and until some question has arisen between the parties in connection therewith which they have 
been unable to settle by agreement.  
(2) 6[An application to a Commissioner] may be made in such  form and shall be accompanied by such 
fee, if any, as may be prescribed, and shall contain, in addition to any particulars which may be 
prescribed, the following particulars, namely: — 
(a) a concise statement of the circumstances in which the application i s made and the relief or 
order which the applicant claims;  
(b) in the case of a claim for compensation against an employe
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 23]
 
order which the applicant claims;  
(b) in the case of a claim for compensation against an employer, the date of service of notice of 
the accident on the employer and, if such notice has not been served or has not been served in due 
time, the reason for such omission;  
(c) the names and addresses of the parties; and  
(d) 5[except in the case of an application by dependants for compensation] a concise statement of 
the matt ers on which agreement has and 7[of] those on which agreement has not been come to.  
(3) If the applicant is illiterate or for any other reason is unable to furnish the required information in 
writing, the application shall, if the applicant so desires, be prepared under the direction of the 
Commissioner.  
STATE AMEN DMEN T 
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 22 of Act No. 8 of 1923.—In section 22 of the Employ ees’ Compensation 
Act, 1923, in sub -sectio n (1-A) the following proviso shall be inserted  at the end, namely :-- 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 9 of 1938, s. 9. 
2. Second proviso omitted by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 15-9-1995).  
3. Ins. by Act 15 of 1933, s. 14.  
4. Subs. by Act 30 of 1995, s . 11, for certain words (w.e.f. 15-9-1995).  
5. Ins. by Act 15 of 1933, s. 15.  
6. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for “where any such que stion has arisen, the application”.  
7. Subs. by Act 37 of 1925, s. 2 and the First Schedule , for “on”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 24]
24 
 “Provided that if an  application  is not made befo re the Commissioner by an employee or by 
dependent or dependents thereo f within a period of ninty days from the date of the occurrence  of the 
accident, then without pre judice to  the right conferred to an employee or dependent or dependents thereof 
under this act or the rules made thereunder, such applica tion may be filed by an officer autho rized by the 
State Government  in this behalf for the purp ose of compensation to be paid t o such employee or 
dependent or depen dents thereof;  
Provided further  that w here it comes to the notice of the Commissi oner that applicant for 
compensation arising out of same accident has been filed by both the employee or dependent or 
dependents thereof and by the officer re ferred to in the first provi so, the Commissioner shall club both the 
applica tions and decide the same by single or der wi thout pre judice to  the rig ht of such employee or 
dependents thereof. ” 
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 27 of 2018, s. 2] 
1[22A. Power of Commissioner to require further deposit in cases of fatal accident .—(1) Where 
any sum has been deposited by an employer as compensation payable in respect of a 2[employee ] whose 
injury has resulted in death, and in the opinio n of the Commissioner such sum is insufficient, the 
Commissioner may, by notice in writing stating his reasons, call upon the employer to show cause why he 
should not make a further deposit within such time as may be stated in the notice.  
(2) If the employ er fails to show cause to the satisfaction of the Commissioner, the Commissioner 
may make an award determining the total amount payable, and requiring the employer to deposit the 
deficiency.]  
23. Powers and procedure of Commissioners .—The Commissioner shal l have all the powers of a 
Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), for the purpose of taking evidence on 
oath (which such Commissioner is hereby empowered to impose) and of 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 24]
 purpose of taking evidence on 
oath (which such Commissioner is hereby empowered to impose) and of enforcing the attendance of 
witnesses and compelling the p roduction of d ocuments and material objects, 3[and the Commissioner 
shall be deemed to be a Civil  Court for all the purposes of 4[section 195 and of Chapter XXVI of the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)].  
5[24. Appearance of parties .—Any appeara nce, application or act required to be made or done by 
any person before or to a Commissioner (other than an appearance of a party which is required for the 
purpose of his examination as a witness) may be made or done on behalf of such person by a legal 
practitioner or by an official of an Insurance Company or a registered Trade Union or by an Inspector 
appointed under sub -section ( 1) of section 8 of the Factories Act, 1 948 (63 of 1948), or under sub -section 
(1) of section 5 of the Mines Act, 1952 (35 of 19 52), or by any other officer specified by the State 
Government in this behalf, authorised in writing by such person, or, with the permission of the 
Commissioner, by any other person so authorised.]6 
25. Method of recording evidence .—The Commissioner shall make a brief memorandum of the 
substance of the evidence of every witness as the examination of the witness proceeds, and such 
memorandum shall be written and signed by the Commissioner with his own hand and shall form part of 
the record:  
Provided that, if  the Commissioner is prevented from making such memorandum, he shall record the 
reason of his inability to do so and shall cause such memorandum to be made in writing from his dictation 
and shall sign the same, and such memorandum shall form part of the re cord:  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 15 of 1933, s. 16.  
2. Subs. by Act 45 of 2009, s. 5, for “workman” (w.e.f.18 -1-2010).  
3. Ins. by Act 5 of 1929, s. 5.  
4. Subs. by Act 30 o f 1995, s. 12, for certain words (w.e.f.15 -9-199
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 24]
ns. by Act 5 of 1929, s. 5.  
4. Subs. by Act 30 o f 1995, s. 12, for certain words (w.e.f.15 -9-1995).  
5. Subs. by Act 8 of 1959, s. 14, for s. 24 (w.e.f.1 -6-1959).  
6. In the application of the Act to Bengal, new ss. 24A and 24B have been ins. here by Ben. Act 6 of 1942, s. 4.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 25]
25 
 Provided further that the evidence of any medical witness shall be taken down as nearly as may be 
word for word.  
1[25A. Time limit of disposal of cases relating to compensation .—The Commissioner shall dispose 
of the matter relating to compensation un der this Act within a period of three months from the date of 
reference and intimate the decision in respect thereof within the said period to the employee. ] 
26. Costs .—All costs, incidental to any proceedings before a Commissioner, shall, subject to rules  
made under this Act, be in the discretion  of the Commissioner.  
27. Power to submit eases .—A Commissioner may, if he thinks fit, submit any question of law for 
the decision of the High Court and, if he does so, shall decide the question in conformity with such 
decision.  
28.  Registration of Agreements .—(1) Where the amount of any lump sum payable as compensation 
has been settled by agreement, whether by way or redemption of a half -monthly payment or otherwise, or 
wher e any compensation has been so settled a s being payable 2[to a woman or a person under a legal 
disability] 3*** a memorandum thereof shall be sent by the employer to the Commissioner, who shall, on 
being satisfied as to its genuineness, record the memorandum in a register in the prescribed manne r: 
Provided that — 
(a) no such memorandum shall be recorded before seven days after communication by the 
Commissioner of notice to the parties concerned;  
4*****  
(c) the Commissioner may at any time rectify  the register;  
(d) where it appears to the Commissio ner that an agreement as to the payment of a lump sum 
whether by way of redemption of a half -monthly payment or otherwise, or an agreement as to the 
amount of compensation payable 5[to a woman or a person under a legal di sability] 6*** ought not to 
be regi stered by reason of the inadequacy of the sum or amount, or by reason of the agreement having 
been obtained by fraud or undue influence  or other improper means,
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 25]
 reason of the agreement having 
been obtained by fraud or undue influence  or other improper means, he may refuse to record the 
memorandum of the agreement 7[and may make such order] including an  order as to any sum already 
paid under the agreement, as he thinks just in the circumstances.  
(2) An agreement for the payment of compensation which has be en registered under sub -section ( 1) 
shall be enforceable under this Act notwithstanding anything con tained in the Indian Contract Act, 1872 
(9 of 1872), or in any other law for the time being in force.  
29. Effect of failure to register agreement .—Where a memorandum of any agreement the 
registration of which is required by section 28, is not sent to the C ommissioner as required by that 
section, the employer shall be liable  to pay the full amount of compensation which he is liable to pay 
under the provisions of this Act, and notwithstanding an thing contained in the proviso to sub -section ( 1) 
of section 4, shall not, unless the Commissioner otherwise directs, be entitled to deduct more than half of 
any amount paid to the 8[employee]  by way of compensation whether under the agreement or otherwise.  
30. Appeals .—(1) An appeal shall lie to the High Court from th e following ord ers of a 
Commissioner, namely: — 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 45 of 2009, s.  9 (w.e.f.18 -1-2010).  
2. Subs. by Act 5 of 1929, s. 6, for certain words.  
3. The words “or to a dependant” omitted by Act 7 of 1924, s. 3 and the Second Schedule . 
4. Clause (b) omitted by Act 5 of 1929, s. 6.  
5. Subs. by Act 5 of 1929, s. 6, for certain wo rds. 
6. The words “or to any dependant” omitted by Act 7 of 1924, s. 3 and  the Second Schedule . 
7. Subs. by Act 7 of 1924, s. 2 and Sch. I, for “or may make such order”.  
8. Subs. by Act 45 of 2009, s. 5, for “workman” (w.e.f.18 -1-2010).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 26]
26 
 (a) an order awarding as compensation a lump sum whether by way of redemption  of a half -
monthly payment or otherwise or disallowing a claim in full or in part for a lump sum;  
1[(aa) an order awarding interest or penalty under section 4A;]  
(b) an order refusing to allow redemption of a half -monthly payment;  
(c) an order providing for the distribution of compensation among the dependants of a deceased 
6[employee ], or disallowing any claim of a person alleging him self to be such dependant;  
(d) an order allowing or disallowing any claim for the amount of an indemnity under the 
provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 12; or  
(e) an order refusing to register a memorandum of agreement or registering the same or provid ing 
for the registration of the same subject to conditions:  
Provided that no appeal shall lie against any order unless a substantial question of law is involved in 
the appeal and, in the case of an order other than an order such as is referred to in clause  (b), unless the 
amount in dispute in the appeal is not less than 2[ten thousand rupees or such higher amount as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify] : 
Provided, further, that no appeal shall lie in any case in which  the parties have agreed to abide by the 
decision of the Commissioner, or in which the order of the Commissioner gives effect to an agreement 
come to by the parties:  
3[Provide d further that no appeal by an employer under clause ( a) shall lie unless the mem orandum of 
appeal is accompanied by a certificate by the Commissioner to the effect that the appellant has deposited 
with him the amount payable under the order appealed against.]  
(2) The period of limitation for an appeal under this section shall be sixty  days.  
(3) The provisions of section 5 of 4[the Indian Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963)] shall be applicable 
to appeals under this section.  
30A. [Withholding of certain payments pending decision of app
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 26]
able 
to appeals under this section.  
30A. [Withholding of certain payments pending decision of appeal ].—Omitted by the Employee’s 
Compensation ( Amendment ) Act 2017 , s. 5 (w.e.f. 15-5-2017 ). 
31. Recovery .—The Commissioner may recover is an arrear of land -revenue any amount payable by 
any person under this Act, whether under an agreement for the payment of compensation or otherwise, 
and the Commissioner shal l be deemed to be a public officer within the meaning of section 5 of the 
Revenue  Recovery Act, 1890 (1 of 1890)5. 
CHAPTER IV  
RULES  
32. Power of the State Government to make rules .—(/) The 6[State Government] may make rules7 
to carry out the purposes of th is Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) for prescribing the intervals at which and the conditions subject to which an application  for 
review may be made under section 6 when not accompanied by a medical certificate;  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 8 of  1959, s . 15 (w.e.f. 1-6-1959).  
2. Subs. by Act 11 of 2017, s. 4, for “ three hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 15-5-2017).  
3. Ins. by Act 15 of 1933, s. 17.  
4. Subs. by Act 30 of 1995, s. 13, for certain wor ds (w.e.f. 15-9-1995).  
5. In the application of the Act to Ben gal, a new s. 31A has been ins. here by the Bengal Touts Act, 1942 (Ben. 5 of 1942), s. 12.  
6. Subs. by the A. O. 1937, for “G. G. in C”,  
7. For th e Workmen’s Compensation Rules, 1924, see  Gazette of India, 1924, Pt. I, p 586.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 27]
27 
 (b) for prescribing the intervals at which and the conditions subject to, which a 1[employee ] may 
be required to submit himself for medical examination under sub -section  (1) of section 11;  
(c) for prescribing the procedure to be followed by Commissioners in the disposal of cases under 
this Act and by the parties in such cases;  
(d) for r egulating the transfer of matters and cases from one Commissioner to another and the 
transfer of money in such cases;  
(e) for prescribing the manner in which money in the hands of a Commissioner may be invested 
for the benefit of dependants of a deceased 7[employee ] and for the transfer of money so invested 
from one Commissioner to another;  
(f) for the representation in proceedings before Commissioners of parties who are minors or a re 
unable to make an appearance;2 
(g) for prescribing the form and manner in which memoranda of agreements shall be presented 
and registered;  
(h) for the withhol ding by Commissioners, whether in whole or in part of half -monthly payments 
pending decision on applica tions for review of the same;3*** 
2*   *   *  *  * 
2[(i) for regulating the scales of costs which may be allowed in proceedings under this Act;  
(j) for p rescribing and determining the amount of  the fees payable in respect of any proceedings 
before a Comm issioner under this Act;  
(k) for the maintenance by Commissioners of registers and records of proceedings before them;  
(l) for  prescribing the classes of e mployers who shall maintain notice -books under  
sub-section ( 3) of section 10, and the form of such notice -books;  
(m) for prescribing the form of statement to be submitted by emplo yers under section 10A; 4***  
(n) for  prescrib ing the cases in which the re port referred to in section 10B may be sent to an 
authority other than the Commissioner;]  
5[(o) for prescribing abstracts of this Act and requiring the employers to display notices 
containing such abstracts;  
(p) for prescribing the ma
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 27]
 requiring the employers to display notices 
containing such abstracts;  
(p) for prescribing the manner in which diseases  specified as occupational diseases may be 
diagnosed;  
(q) for prescribing the manner in which diseases may be certified for any of the purposes of this 
Act; 
(r) for prescribing the manner in which, and the standards by which, incapacity ,may be 
assessed.]  
6[(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before the 
State Legislature].  
33.[Power of Local Government to make rules .] Rep. by the A.O. 1937 . 
34. Publication of rules .—(1) The po wer to make rules conferred by 7[section 32] shall be subjec t to 
the condition of the rules being made after previous publication.  
(2) The date to be specified in accordance with clause ( 3) of section 23 of the General Clauses Act, 
1897 GO of 1897); as that after which a draft of rul es proposed to be made under section 32  8*** will be 
taken into consideration, shall not be less than three months from the date on which  
the draft of the proposed rules was published for general information.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 2009, s . 5, for “workman” (w.e.f.18 -1-2010).  
2. In the application of the Act of Bengal, new clauses ( ff), (ff1) and ( ff2) have been ins. here by Ben, Act 6 of 1942, s. 5.  
3. The word “and” at the end of cl. ( h) and the original cl. ( i) omitted, and the new cls, (i) to ( n), which were the same as cls, ( a) 
to (f) of s. 33, ins. by the A. O. 1937.  
4. The word “and” omitted by Act 58 of 1960, s. 3 and the Second Schedule . 
5. Ins. by Act 8 of 1959, s. 16 (w.e.f. 1-6-1959).  
6. Ins. by Act 4  of 1986, s. 2 and Sch edule  (w.e.f.15-5-1986).  
7. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “sections 32 and 33”.  
8. The words and figures “or section 33” rep.; ibid. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 28]
28 
 (3) Rules so made shall be published in 1*** t he Official Gazette 2*** and, on such  publication, shall 
have effect as if enacted in this Act.  
3[35. Rules to give effect to arrangements with other countries for the transfer  of money paid as 
compensation .—4[(1)] The Central Government may by notificatio n in the Official Gazette, make  rules 
for the transfer 5*** 6[to any foreign country] of money 7[deposited with] a Commissioner under this Act 
8[which has been awarded to or may be due to], any person r esiding or about to reside in 9[such foreig n 
country] and for the receipt 10[distri bution] and administration in 11[any State] of any money 12[depos ited] 
under the law relating to Workmen ’s compensation 13*** 14[in any foreign country], 15[which has been 
awarded to, or may be due to] any person residing or about to  reside in 11[any State]:]  
10[Provided  that no sum deposited under this Act in respect of fatal accidents shall be so transferred 
without the consent of the employer concerned until the Commissioner receiving the sum has passed 
orders determining its distr ibution and apportionment under the provisions of sub -section ( 4) and ( 5) of 
section 8.]  
(2) Where money deposited with a Commissioner has been so transferred in accordance with the rules 
made under this section, the provisions elsewhere contained in this Act regarding distribution by the 
Commissioner of compensation ’ deposited with him shall cease to apply in respect of any such money.  
16[36. Rules made by Central Government to be laid before Parliament .—Every rule made under 
this Act by the Central Governm ent shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each House of 
Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or 
in 17[two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the se ssion immediately following the 
session or the successive sessions aforesaid], both Houses agree in maki
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 28]
 immediately following the 
session or the successive sessions aforesaid], both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both Houses  agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.]  
  
                                                      
1. The words “The Gazette of India or” rep., by the A. O. 1937.  
2. The words “as the case may be” rep., ibid. 
3. Ins. by Act 15 of 19 33, s. 20.  
4. The original s. 35 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) of that section by Act 7 of 1937, s. 2.  
5. The words “to any Part B State or” ins. by. the A.O. 1948, omitted by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch.  
6. Subs. by Act 22 of 1984, s. 5, for certain words  (w.e.f. 1-7-1984).  
7. Subs. by Act 7 of 1937, s. 2, for “paid to”.  
8. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “for the benefit of”.  
9. Subs. by Act 22 of 1984, -s. 5, for  “such part of country” (w.e.f. 1-7-1984).  
10. Ins. by Act 7 of 1937, s. 2.  
11. Subs. by Act 3 of 195 1, s. 3 and Sch., for “a Part A State or Part C State”.  
12. Subs. by Act 7 of 1937, s. 2, for “awarded”.  
13. Of the words “in any Part B State or” ins. by the A.O. 1950, first five words were omitted by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch.,  and 
the word “or” was o mitted by Act 36 of 1957, s. 3 and Sch. II.  
14. Subs. by Act 22 of 1984, s. 5, for certain words (w.e.f. 1-7-1984).  
15. Subs. by Act 7 of 1937, s. 2, for “and applicable for the benefit of”.  
16. Ins. by Act 64 of 1962, s. 8 (w.e.f. 1-2-1963).  
17. Subs. by Ac t 65 of 1976,  s. 3, for certain words (w.e.f. 21-5-1976).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 29]
29 
 1[SCHEDULE I  
[See sections 2( 1) and ( 4)]  
2[PART I  
LIST OF INJURIES DEE MED TO RESULT IN PERMANENT TOTAL DISABLEMENT ] 
Serial 
No. Description of injury  Percentage  of loss 
of earning  
capacity  
1. Loss of both hands or  amputation at higher sites…………………………….  100 
2. Loss of a hand and a foot…………………………………………………….  100 
3. Double amp utation through leg or thigh, or amputation through leg or thigh 
on one side and loss of other foot…………………………………………..  100 
4. Loss of sight to such an extent as to render the claimant unable to perform 
any work for which eye sight is essential………………………………… ... 100 
5. Very severe facial disfigurement……………………………………………  100 
6. Absolute deafness…………………………………………………………  100 
  
3[PART II  
LIST OF INJURIES DEEMED TO - RESULT IN PERMANENT PARTIAL DISABLEMENT]  
Amputation cases —upper limbs (either arm)  
4[1] Amputation th rough shoulder joint………………………………………………………   90 
4[2] Amputation below  shoulder with stump less than 5[20.32 cms.] from tip of  acromion  …. 80 
6[3] Amputation from 7[20.32 cms] from tip of acromion to less than 7[11.43cms.] 
below tip of olecranon…….  70 
 6[4] Loss of a hand or of the thumb and four fingers of one hand or amputation from 
6[11.43] below tip of  olecranon…………………………………………………….  60 
6[5] Loss of thu mb……………………………………………  30 
6[6] Loss of thumb and its m etacarpal bone……………………………………………  40 
6[7] Loss of f our fingers o f one hand………………………………………………  50 
6[8] Loss of three fingers of one hand………………………………………………  30 
6[9] Loss of two fingers of  one hand……………………………………………………  20 
6[10] Loss of terminal phala nx of thumb………………………………………………  20 
6[10A  Guillotine Amputatio n of tip of thumb without loss of bone ………  10] 
   
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 8 of 1959, s. 17 , for the first Schedule I (w.e.f. 1-6-1959).  
2. Subs. by Act 64 of 1962, s. 9,  for heading (w.e.f. 1-2-1963).  
3. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f.1 -2-1963).  
4. Serial Nos. 7 to 54 renu
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 29]
heading (w.e.f. 1-2-1963).  
3. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f.1 -2-1963).  
4. Serial Nos. 7 to 54 renumbered as serial Nos. 1 to 48 respectively by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-2-1963).  
5. Subs. by Act 30 of 1995, s. 14, for “8” (w.e.f. 15-9-1995).  
6. Serial Nos. 7 to 54 renumbered as serial Nos. 1 to 48 respectively by Act 64 of 1962, s. 9 (w.e.f. 1-2-1963).  
7. Subs. by Act 30 of 1995, s. 14 for certain numbers (w .e.f.15-9-1995).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 30]
30 
 Serial 
No. Description of injury  Percentage  of loss 
of earning  
capacity  
Amputation cases —lower limbs  
1[11] Amputation of both feet resulting in end -bearing tumps…………………  90 
1[12] Amputation through both  feet proximal to the  metatarso -phalangeal 
joint…  80 
1[13] Loss of all toes of both feet through the me tatarso -phalangeal joint………  40 
1[14] Loss of all toes of both feet proximal to the proximal in terphalangeal 
joint… ……  30 
1[15] Loss of all toes of both  feet distal to the pro ximal interphalangeal 
joint…………  20 
1[16] Amputation at hip………………………………………………………  90 
1[17] Amputation below hip with stump not exceeding 2[12.70 cms.] in length 
measured from tip of great trenchanter……………………………………  80 
1[18] Amputatio n below hip with stump exceeding 2[12.70 cms.] in length 
measured from tip of great trenchanter but not beyond middle 
thigh………………………  70 
1[19] Amputation below hip middle thigh to 2[8.89 cms.] blow nee……………  60 
1[20] Amputation below knee with stump exceedin g [8.89] but not exceeding 
5”………..  [50]1 
1[21] Amputation below knee with stump exceeding 2[12.70 cms.]……………  [50]1 
1[22] Amputation of one foot resulting in end -bearing……………………… … [50]1 
1[23] Amputation through one foot proximal to the metatarso -phalange al 
joint… …………..  50 
1[24] Loss of all toes of one foot through the metatarso -phalangeal 
joint…………………  20 
Other injuries  
1[25] Loss of one eye, without complication, the other being 
normal…………………  40 
1[26] Loss of vision of one eye, without complications o r disfigurement of eye -
ball, the other being normal……………………………………………  30 
3[26A]  Loss of partial vision of one eye………………………………………  10 
 
  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 30 of 1995, s. 14 for certain numbers (w.e.f.15 -9-1995).  
2. Serial No. 7 to 54 as serial Nos. 1 to 48 respectively by Act 64 of 1962 s. 9 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1963).  
3. Ins. by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f.15 -9-1995).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 30]
w.e.f. 1 -2-1963).  
3. Ins. by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f.15 -9-1995).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 31]
31 
 Serial 
No. Description of injury  Percentage  
of loss of 
earning  
capacity  
Loss of — 
A.—Fingers of right or left  
hand Inde x finger  
1[27] Whole  14 
1[28] Two phalanges  11 
1[29] One phalanx  9 
1[30] Guillotine amputation of tip without loss of bone  5 
Middle Finger  
1[31] Whole  12 
1[32] Two phalanges  9 
1[33] One phalanx  7 
1[34] Guillotine  amputation of tip without loss of bone  4 
Ring or little finger  
1[35] Whole  7 
1[36] Two phalanges  6 
1[37] One phalanx  5 
1[38] Guillotine amputation of tip without loss of bone  2 
B.—Toes of right or left foot  
Great toe  
1[39] Through metatarso -phalangcal joint  14 
1[40] Part, with som e loss of bone  3 
Any other toe  
1[41] Through metatarso -phalangcal joint  3 
1[42] Part, with some loss of bone  1 
Two toes of one foot, excluding great toe  
1[43] Through metatarso -phalangcal joint  5 
1[44] Part, with some loss of bone  2 
Three toes of on e foot, excluding great toe  
1[45] Through metatarso -phalangcal joint  6 
1[46] Part, with some loss of bone  3 
 
  
                                                      
1. Serial Nos. 7 to 54 renumbered as serial Nos. 1 to 48 respectively by Act 64 of 1962, s. 9 (w.e.f. 1-2-1963).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 32]
32 
 Serial 
No. Description of injury  Percentage  
of loss of 
earning  
capacity  
Four toes of one foot, excluding great toe  
1[47] Through metatarso -phalangcal joint  9 
1[48] Part, with some loss of bone  3.] 
 
2[NOTE.—Complete and permament loss of the use of any limb or member referred to in this Schedule 
shall be deemed to be the equivalent of the loss of that limb or member.]  
 
                                                      
1. Serial Nos. 7 to 54 renumbered as serial Nos. 1 to 48 respectively by Act 64 of 1962, s. 9 (w.e.f. 1-2-1963).  
2. Ins. by Act 58 of 1960, s. 3 and Sch. II.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 33]
33 
 SCHEDULE II  
[See1[section 2 ( 1) (dd)]] 
LIST OF PERSONS WHO, SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS OF 1[SECTION 2 ( 1) (dd)],’ARE INCLUDED IN THE  
DEFINITION OF 2[EMPLOYEE S] 
The following persons are employee’s  within the meaning of 1[section 2 ( 1) (dd)] and subject to the 
provisions of that  section, that is to say, any person who is — 
3[4[(i) 5[employed in railways ], in connection with the operation 6[repair or maintenance of a lift 
or a vehicle propelled by steam or other mechanical power or by electricity or in connection with the 
loading o r unloading of any such vehicle; or  
(ii) employed, 7***, in any premises wherein or within the precincts whereof a manufacturing 
process as defined in clause ( k) of section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948) is being carried 
on, or in any kind of wo rk whatsoever incidental to or connected with any such manufacturing 
process or with the article made 8[whether or not employment in any such work is within such 
premises or precincts], and steam, water or other mechanical power or electrical power is used ; or 
(iii) employed for the purpose of making, altering, repairing, ornamenting, finishing or otherwise 
adapting for use, transport or sale any ‘article or part of an article in any premises 9***; 10*** 
7[Explanation .—for the purposes of this clause, person s employed outside such premises or 
precincts but in any work incidental to, or connected with, the work relating to making, altering, 
repairing, ornamenting, finishing or otherwise adapting for use, transport or sale any article or part of 
an ‘article sha ll be deemed to be employed within such premises or precincts; or]  
(iv) employed in the ma nufacture or handling of explosiv es in connection with the employer ’s 
trade or business; or  
(v) employed, in any mine as defined in clause ( j) of section 2 of the Min es Act, 1952 (35 of 
1952), in any mining operation or in any kind of work, 11***, incidental to or connected with any 
mining operati
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 33]
 mining operation or in any kind of work, 11***, incidental to or connected with any 
mining operation or with the mineral obtained, or in any kind of work whatsoever below ground; or  
(vi) employed as the master or as a seama n of— 
(a) any ship which is propelled wholly or in part by steam or other mechanical power or by 
electricity or which is towed or intended to be towed by a ship so propelled; or  
12*   *  *   *  * 
(c) any sea -going ship not included in sub -clause ( a) 13*** provided with sufficient area for 
navigation under sails alone; or  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 2009, s. 10, for “section 2( 1)(n)” (w.e.f.18 -1-2010).  
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “workmen” (w.e.f.18 -1-2010).  
3. Subs. by Act 15 of 1933, s. 21, for cls. ( i) to ( xiii). 
4. Subs. by  Act 8 of 1959, s. 18, for cls. ( i) to ( ix) (w.e.f. 1-6-1959).  
5. Subs. by Act 45 of 2009, s. 10, for “employed, otherwise than in a clerical capacity or on a railway” (w.e.f.18 -1-2010).  
6. Ins. by Act 30 of 1995, s. 15 (w.e.f.15 -9-1995).  
7. The words “othe rwise than in a clerical capacity” omitted b y Act 45 of 2010, s. 10 (w.e.f. 18-1-2010).  
8. Ins. by Act 64 of 1962, s. 10 (w.e.f.1 -2-1963).  
9. The words “wherein or within the precincts whereof twenty or more persons are so employed” omitted by Act 45 of 200 9, s. 
10 (w.e.f.18 -1-2010).  
10. The word “or” omitted b y Act 64 of 1962, s. 10 (w.e.f. 1-2-1963).  
11. The word “other than clerical work” omitted b y Act 45 of 2009, s. 10 (w.e.f. 18-1-2010).  
12. Clause ( b) omitted by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f.18 -1-2010).  
13. The w ords, brackets and letter “or sub -clause ( b)” omitted by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f.18 -1-2010).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 34]
34 
 (vii) employed for the purpose  of— 
(a) loading, unloading, fuelling, constructing, repairing, demolishing, cleaning or painting 
any ship of which he is not the master or a member of the crew,  or handling or transport within 
the limits of any port subject to 1[(the Ports Act, 1908 (5 of 1908) or the Major Port Trusts Act, 
1963 (38 of 1963)], of goods which have been discharged from or are to be loaded into any 
vessel; or  
(b) warping a ship thro ugh the lock; or  
(c) mooring and unmooring ships at harbour wall berths or in pier; or  
(d) removing or replacing dry dock caisoons when vessels are entering or leaving dry docks; 
or 
(e) the docking or undocking of any vessel during an emergency; or  
(f) preparing splicing coir springs and check wires, painting depth marks on lock -sides, 
removing or replacing fenders whenever necessary, landing  of gangways, maintaining life -buoys 
up to standard or any other maintenance work of a like nature; or  
(g) any work o n jolly -boats for bringing a ship ’s line to the wharf; or  
(viii) employed in the construction, maintenance, repair or demolition of —  
(a) any building which is designed to be or is or has been more than one storey in height 
above the ground or twelve feet or more from the ground level to the apex of the roof; or  
(b) any dam or embankment which is twelve feet or more in height from its lowest to its 
highest point; or  
(c) any road, bridge, tunnel or canal; or  
(d) any wharf, quay, sea -wall or other marine work  including any moorings ofships, or  
(ix) employed in setting up, maintaining, repairing or taking down any telegraph or telephone line 
or post or any overhead electric line or cable or post or standard or fittings and fixtures for the same; 
or 
(x) employed , 2***, in the construction, working, repair or demolition of any aerial ropeway, 
canal, pipe -line, or sewer; or  
(xi) employed in the service of any fire brigade; or  
(xii) employed upon a railway as defined in 3[cl
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 34]
) employed in the service of any fire brigade; or  
(xii) employed upon a railway as defined in 3[clause (31) of section 2 and sub -section ( 1) of 
section 197 of the Railways Act, 1890 (9 of 1890)], either directly or through  a sub -contractor, by a 
person fulfilling a contract with the railway administration; or  
(xiii) employed as an inspector, mail guard, sorter or van pe on in the Railway Mail S ervice 4[or as 
a telegraphist or as a po stal or railway Signaller], or employed in any occupation ordinar ily involving - 
outdoor work in the Indian Posts and Telegraphs Department; or  
(xiv) employed, 5***, in connection with operations for winning natural p etroleum or natural gas; 
or 
  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 30 of 1995, s. 15 for certain words (w.e.f.15 -9-95). 
2. The words “otherwise than in a clerical capacity” omitted by Act 45 of 2009, s. 10 (w.e.f.18 -1-2010).  
3. Subs. by Act 30 of 1995, s. 15, for certain words (w.e.f.15 -9-1995).  
4. Ins. by Act 8 of 1959, s. 18 (w.e.f.1 -6-1959).  
5. The words “otherwise than in a clerical capacity” omitted by Act 45 of 2009, s. 10 (w.e.f.18 -1-2010).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 35]
35 
 (xv) employed in any occupation involving blasting operation; or  
(xvi) employed  in the making of any excavation 1*** or explosives have been used, or whose 
depth from its highe st to its lowest point exceeds 2[twelve] feet; or  
(xvii) employed in the operation of any ferry boat capable of carrying more than ten persons; or  
3[(xviii) employed on any estate which is maintained for the purpose of growing cardamom, 
cinchona, coffee, rubber or tea; or]  
4[(xix) employed, 5***, in the g enerating, transforming, transmitting or distribution of electrical 
energy or i n generation or supply o f gas; or]  
(xx) employed in a lighthouse as defined in clause ( d) of section 2 of the Indian Lighthouse Act, 
1927 (17 of 1927); or  
(xxi) employed in prod ucing cinematograph pictures intended for public exhibition or in 
exhibiting such pictures; or  
(xxii) employed in the training, keeping or working of elephants or wild animals; or  
6[(xxiii) employed in the tapping of palm -trees or the felling or logging of  trees, or the transport of 
timber by inland waters, or the control or extinguishing of forest fires; or  
(xxiv) employed in operations for the catching or hunting of elephants or other wild animals; or]  
7[(xxv) employed as a diver; 1[or 
(xxvi) employed in the handling or transport of goods in, or within the precincts of, — 
(a) any warehouse or other p lace in which goods are stored, 8***; or 
(b) any market 9***; or 
(xxvii ) employed in any occupation involving the handling and manipulation of radium or X -rays 
apparatus, or contact with radio -active substances;] 10[or] 
10(xxviii ) employed in or in connection with the construction, erection, dismantling, operation or 
maintenance of an aircraft as defined in section 2 of the Indian Aircraft Act, 1934 (22 of 1934); or 
(xxix) 4[employed in horticultural operations, forestry, bee -keeping or farming” by tractors or 
other contrivances driven by steam or other mechanical power or by electricity; or
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 35]
” by tractors or 
other contrivances driven by steam or other mechanical power or by electricity; or  
(xxx) employed, 11***, in the construction, working, repair or maintenance of a tubewell; or  
(xxxi) employed in the maintenance, repair or renewal of electric fittings in any building; or  
(xxxii ) employed in a circus.]  
                                                      
1. The words “in which  on any one day of the prec eding twelve months more than twenty -five persons have been employed” 
omitted by Act 45 of 2009, s. 10 (w.e.f.18 -1-2010).  
2. Subs. by Act 8 of 1959, s. 18, for “twenty”  (w.e.f. 1-6-1959).  
3. Subs. by Act 45 of 2009, s. 10 for item  (xviii) (w.e.f.18 -1-2010).  
4. Subs. by Act 30 of 1995, s. 15, for item ( xix) and “employed in farming” (w.e.f.15 -9-1995).  
5. The words “otherwise than in a clerical capacity” omitted by Act 45 of 2009, s. 10 (w.e.f.18 -1-2010).  
6. Ins. by Act 9 of 1938, s.  11. 
7. Original cl. ( xxiii) renumbered ( xxv) by s. 11, ibid. 
8. The words “and in which on any one day of the preceding twelve months ten or more persons have been so employed” omitted 
by Act 45 of 2009, s. 10 (w.e.f.18 -1-2010).  
9. The words “in which on any one day of the preceding twelve months fifty or more persons have been so employed” omitted by 
s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 18-1-2010).  
10. Ins. by Act 8 of 1959, s. 18 (w.e.f. 1 -6-1959).  
11. The words “otherwise than in a clerical capacity” omitted by Act 45 o f 2009, s. 10 (w.e.f.18 -1-2010).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 36]
36 
  
1[(xxxiii ) employed as watchman in any factory or establishment; or  
(xxxiv ) employed in any operation in the se a for catching fish; or  
(xxxv) employed in any employment which requires handling of snakes for the purpose of 
extraction of venom or for the purpose of looking after snakes or handling any other  poisionous 
animal or insect; or  
(xxxvi) employed in handling  animals like horses, mules and bulls; or  
(xxxvii ) employed for the purpose of loading or unloading an mechanically propelled vehicle or in 
the handling or transport of goods which have been loaded in such vehicles; or  
(xxxviii ) employed in cleaning of sew er lines or septic tanks within the limits of a local authority; 
or 
(xxxix) employed on surveys and investigation, exploration or gauge or dischange observation of 
rivers including drilling operations, hydrological observations and flood forecasting activi ties ground 
water surveys and exploration; or  
(xl) employed in cleaning of jungles or reclaiming land or ponds2***; or 
(xli) employed in cultivation of land or rearing and maintenance of live -stock or forest operations 
of fishing 2***; or 
(xlii) employed i n installation, maintenance or repair of pumping equipment used for lifting of 
water from wells, tubewells, ponds, lakes, streams and the like; or  
(xliii) employed in the construction, boring or deepening of an open well or dug well, bore well, 
bore-cum-dug well, filter  point and the like; or  
(xliv) employed in spraying and dusting of insecticides or pesticides in  agricultural operations or 
plantations; or  
(xlv) employed in mechanised harvesting and threshing operations; or  
(xlvi) employed in working or rep air or maintenance of bu lldozers, tractors, power tille rs and the 
like; or  
(xlvii) employed as artist for drawing pictures on advertisement boards at a height of 3.66 metres 
or more from the ground level; or  
(xlviii ) employed in any newspaper establishment  as defined in the Working Journa
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 36]
ound level; or  
(xlviii ) employed in any newspaper establishment  as defined in the Working Journalists and Other 
Newspaper Employees (Conditions of Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955 and engaged 
in outdoor work].  
Explanation .—In this Schedule,  “the preceding twelve months” relates in any particular case to  
the twelve months ending with the day on which the accident in such case occurred.]  
  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 30 of 1995, s. 15 (w.e.f.15 -9-1995).  
2. The words “in which on any one day of the preceding twelve months more than twenty -five persons have been employed” 
omitted by Act 45 of 2009, s. 10 (w.e.f.18 -1-2010).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 37]
37 
 1[SCHEDULE III  
(See section 3)  
LIST OF OCCUPATIONAL DISEASES  
Serial 
No Occupational disease  Employment  
(1) (2) (3) 
PART A 
1.  Infectious and parasitic diseases contra cted 
in an occupation where there is a particular 
risk of contamination.  (a) All work involving exposure to health or 
laboratory work;  
(b) All work involving exposure to veterinary 
work;  
(c) Work relating to handling animals, animal 
carcasses, part of such  carcasses, or merchandise 
which may have been contaminated by animals or 
animal carcasses;  
(d) other work carrying a particular risk of 
contamination.  
2.  Diseases caused by work in compressed 
air. All work involving exposure to the risk concerned.  
3.  Diseases caused by lead or its toxic 
compounds.  All work involving exposure to the risk concerned.  
4.  Poisoning by nitrous fumes.  All work involving exposure to the risk concerned.  
5.  Poisoning by 
organophosphoruscompounds.  All work involving exposure to the risk concerned.  
PART B 
1.  Diseases caused by phosphorus or its toxic 
compounds.  All work involving exposure to the risk concerned.  
2. Diseases caused by mercury or its toxic 
compounds.  All work involving exposure to the risk concerned.  
3. Disea ses caused by benzene or its toxic 
homologues.  All work involving exposure to the risk concerned.  
4. Diseases caused by nitro and amido toxic 
derivatives of benzene or its homologues.  All work involving exposure to the risk concerned.  
5. Diseases caused by chromium or its toxic 
compounds.  All work involving exposure to the risk concerned.  
6. Diseases caused by arsenic or its toxic 
compounds.  All work involving exposure to the risk concerned.  
7. Diseases caused by radioactive substances 
and ionising radi ations;  All work involving exposure to the action of 
radioactive substances or ionising radiations.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 1984, s. 6 for Sch. (w.e.f.1 -7-1984).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 37]
                          
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 1984, s. 6 for Sch. (w.e.f.1 -7-1984).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 38]
38 
 Serial 
No Occupational disease  Employment  
(1) (2) (3) 
 8. Primary epitheliomatous cancer of the skin 
caused by tar, pitch, bitumen, mineral oil, 
anthrace ne, or the compounds, products or 
residues of these substances.  All work involving exposure to the risk concerned.  
9. Diseases caused by the toxic halogen 
derivatives of hydrocarbons (of the 
aliphatic and aromatic series).  All work involving exposure to t he risk concerned.  
10. Diseases caused by carbon disulphide.  
 All work involving exposure to the risk concerned.  
11. Occupational cataract due to infra -red 
radiations.  
 All work involving exposure to the risk concerned.  
12. Diseases caused by manganese or its toxic 
compounds.  All work involving exposure to the risk concerned.  
13. Skin diseases caused by physical, 
chemical or biological agents not 
included in other items.  All work involving exposure to the risk concerned.  
14. Hearing impairment caused b y noise.  All work involving exposure to the risk concerned.  
15. Poisoning by dinitrophenol or a  
homologue  or by substituted  
dinitrophenol or by the salts of such 
substances.  All work involving exposure to the risk concerned.  
16. Diseases caused by beryl lium or its toxic 
compounds.  All work involving exposure to the risk concerned.  
17. Diseases caused by cadmium or its toxic 
compounds.  All work involving exposure to the risk concerned.  
18. Occupational asthma caused by 
recognized sensitising agents inhe rent 
to the work process.  All work involving exposure to the risk concerned.  
19. Diseases caused by fluorine or its toxic 
compounds.  All work involving exposure to the risk concerned.  
20. Diseases caused by nitroglycerine or other 
nitroacid esters.  All w ork involving exposure to the risk concerned.  
21. Diseases caused by alcohols and 
ketones.  All work involving exposure to the risk concerned.  
22. Diseases caused by asphyxiants: carbon 
monoxide, and its toxic derivatives, 
hydrogen sulfide.
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 38]

22. Diseases caused by asphyxiants: carbon 
monoxide, and its toxic derivatives, 
hydrogen sulfide.  All work invol ving exposure to the risk concerned.  
23. Lung cancer and mesotheliomas caused by 
asbestos.  All work involving exposure to the risk concerned.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 39]
39 
 Serial 
No Occupational disease  Employment  
(1) (2) (3) 
24. Primary neoplasm of the epithelial lining of 
the u rinary bladder or the kidney or the 
ureter.  All work involving exposure to the risk concerned.  
1[25. Snow blindness in snow bound areas.  All work involving exposure to the risk concerned.  
26. Disease due to effect of heat in extreme hot 
climate.  All work  involving exposure to the risk concerned.  
27. Disease due to effect of cold in extreme 
cold climate.  All work involving exposure to the risk 
concerned.]  
PART C 
1. Pneumoconioses caused by sclerogenic 
mineral dust (silicoses, anthraoo -silicosis, 
asbesto sis) and silico -tuberculosis provided 
that silicosis is an essential factor in 
causing the resultant incapacity or death.  All work involving exposure to the risk concerned.  
2. Bagassosis  All work involving exposure to the risk concerned.  
3. Bronchopulmon ary diseases caused by 
cotton, flax hemp and sisal dust 
(Byssionsis),  All work involving exposure to the risk concerned.  
4. Extrinsic allergic alveelitis caused by the 
inhalation of organic dusts.  All work involving exposure to the risk concerned.  
5. Bronchopulmonary diseases caused by 
hard metals.  All work involving exposure to the risk concerned.  
 
                                                      
1. Ins. 64 Act 30 of 1995, of 16 (w.e.f. 15 -9-95). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 40]
40 
 1[SCHEDULE IV  
(See section 4)  
FACTORS FOR WORKING OUT LUMP SUM EQUIVALENT OF COMPENSATION AMOUNT IN CASE OF 
PERMANENT DISABLEMENT AND DEATH.  
 
Completed yea rs of age on the last birthday of the 
employee immediately preceding the date on which 
the compensation fell due  Factors  
1 2 
Not more than        16… . 228.54  
17….  227.49  
18….  226.38  
19….  225.22  
20….  224.00  
21….  222.71  
22….  221.37  
23….  219.95  
24….  218.47  
25….  216.91  
26….  215.28 
27….  213.57  
not more than 28….  211.79  
29….  209.92  
30….  207.98  
31….  205.95  
32….  203.85  
33….  201.66  
34….  199.40  
35….  197.06  
36….  194.64  
37….  192.14  
38….  189.56  
39….  186.90  
40….  184.17  
                                                      
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 1984, s. 7, for Sch. IV (w.e.f. 1 -7-1984).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYEE’S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923.pdf - page 41]
41 
 Completed years of age on  the last birthday of the 
employee immediately preceding the date on which 
the compensation fell due                                     Factors  
1 2 
41….  181.37  
42….  178.49  
43….  175.54  
44….  172.52  
45….  169.44  
46….  166.29  
47….  163.07  
48….  159.80  
49… 156.47  
50…  153.09  
51…  149.67  
52…  146.20  
53…  142.68  
54…  139.13  
55…  135.56  
56…  131.95  
57…  128.33  
58…  124.70  
59…  121.05  
60…..  117.41  
61…..  113.77  
62…..  110.14  
63…..  106.52  
64…..  102.93  
           65 or more….  99.37.]  
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYMENT EXCHANGES (COMPULSORY NOTIFICATION OF VACANCIES).pdf - page 1]
1 THE EMPLOYMENT EXCHANGES (COMPULSORY NOTIFICATION OF VACANCIES) 
ACT, 1959  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Act not to apply in relation to certain vacancies . 
4. Notification of vacancies to employment exchanges . 
5. Employers to furnish information and returns in prescribed form . 
6. Right of access to records or documents . 
7. Penalties.  
8. Cognizance of offences . 
9. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
10. Power to make rules . 
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYMENT EXCHANGES (COMPULSORY NOTIFICATION OF VACANCIES).pdf - page 2]
2 THE EMPLOYMENT  EXCHANGES (COMPULSORY NOTIFICATION OF VACANCIES) 
ACT, 1959  
ACT NO. 31 OF 1959  
[2nd September , 1959 .] 
An Act to provide for the compulsory notification of vacancies to employment exchanges.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
 1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Employment Exchanges 
(Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959.  
(2) It extends to the whole of  India1* * * . 
(3) It shall come into force in a State on such date2as the Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf for such State and different dates may be appointed for 
different States or for different area s of a State.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a)“appropriate Government ” means— 
(1) in relation to — 
(a) any establishment of any railway, major port, mine or oil -field, or  
(b) any establishme nt owned, controlled or managed  by— 
(i) the Central Government or a department of the Central Government , 
(ii) a company in which not less than fifty -one per cent . of the share capital is held by 
the Central Government or partly by the Central Government and partly by one or more 
State Governments,  
(iii) a corporation (including a co -operative society) established by or under a Central 
Act which is owned, controlled or  managed by the Central Government,  
the Central Government;  
(2) in relation to any other establishment, the Government of the State in which that other 
establishment is situate;  
(b) “employee ” means any person who is employed in an establishment to do any work for 
remuneration;  
(c) “employer ” means any person who employs one or more other persons to do any work in an 
establishment for remuneration and includes any person entrusted with the supervision and control of 
employees in such establishment;  
(d) “employment exchange ” means any office or place establi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYMENT EXCHANGES (COMPULSORY NOTIFICATION OF VACANCIES).pdf - page 2]
 of 
employees in such establishment;  
(d) “employment exchange ” means any office or place established and maintained by the 
Government for the collection and furnishing of information, either by the keeping of reg isters or 
otherwise, respecting — 
(i) persons who seek to engage employees,  
(ii) person s who seek employment, and  
(iii) vacancies to which persons seeking employment may be appointed;  
(e) “establishment ” means— 
                                                           
1. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir”  omitted by Act 51 of 1970, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f.  1-9-1971 ). 
2.1st May , 1960, vide notification No. G.S.R. 382, dated 1st April, 1960, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 
3(i), in respect of all the States to which the Act extends and in the Union territories of Delhi, Himachal Pradesh,  
Manipur and Tripura.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYMENT EXCHANGES (COMPULSORY NOTIFICATION OF VACANCIES).pdf - page 3]
3 (a) any office, or  
(b) any place where any industry, trade, business or occupation is carried on ; 
(f) “establishment  in public sector ” means an establishment owned, controlled or managed by — 
(1) the Government or a department of the Government;  
(2) a Government company as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 
1956) ; 
(3) a corporation (including a co-operative society) established by or under a Central, 
Provincial or State Act, which is owned, controlled or managed by the Government;  
(4) a local authority;  
(g) “establishment in private sector ” means an establishment which is not an establish ment in  
public sector and where ordinarily twenty -five or more persons are employed to work for 
remuneration;  
(h) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(i) “unskilled office work ” means work done in an establishment by any of the following 
categories of employees, namely :— 
(1) daftri; 
(2) jemadar , orderly and peon;  
(3) dusting man or farash ; 
(4) bundle or record lifter;  
(5) process server;  
(6) watchman;  
(7) sweeper;  
(8) any  other employee doing any routine or unskilled work which the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be unskilled office work.  
3. Act not to apply in relation to certain vacancies .—(1) This Act shall not  apply in relation to 
vacancies ,— 
(a) in any employment in agriculture (including horticulture) in any establishment in private 
sector other than employment as agricultural or farm machinery operatives;  
(b) in any employment in domestic service;  
(c) in any employment the total duration of which is less than three months;  
(d) in any employment to do unskilled office work;  
(e) in any employment connect ed with the staff of Parliament.  
(2) Unless the Central Government otherwise directs by notification in t he Official Gazette in this 
behalf, this Act shall not also apply in relation to — 
(a) vacancies which are propose
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYMENT EXCHANGES (COMPULSORY NOTIFICATION OF VACANCIES).pdf - page 3]
tte in this 
behalf, this Act shall not also apply in relation to — 
(a) vacancies which are proposed to be filled through promotion or by absorption of surplus staff 
of any branch or department of the same establishment or on the result of an y examination conducted 
or interview held by, or on the recommendation of, any independent agency, such as the Union or a 
State Public Service Commission and the like;  
(b) vacancies in an employment which carries a remuneration of less than sixty rupees in  a 
month.  
4. Notification of vacancies to employment exchanges .—(1) After the commencement of this Act 
in any State or area thereof, the employer in every establishment in public sector in that State or area 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYMENT EXCHANGES (COMPULSORY NOTIFICATION OF VACANCIES).pdf - page 4]
4 shall, before filling up any vacancy in any employment in that establishment, notify that vacancy to such 
employment exchanges as may be prescribed.  
(2) The appropriate Government may, by notification  in the Official Gazette, require that from such 
date as may be specified in the notification, the employer in every establishment in private sector or every 
establishment pertaining to any class or category of establishments in private sector shall, befor e filling 
up any vacancy in any employment in that establishment, notify that vacancy to such employment 
exchanges as may be prescribed, and the employer shall thereupon comply with such requisition.  
(3) The manner in which the vacancies referred to in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall be 
notified to the employment exchanges and the particulars of employments in which such vacancies have 
occurred or are about to occur shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(4) Nothing in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall b e deemed to impose any obligation upon any employer 
to recruit any person through the employment exchange to fill any vacancy merely because that vacancy 
has been notified under any of those sub -sections.  
5. Employers to furnish information and returns in prescribed form .—(1) After the 
commencement of this Act in any State or area thereof, the employer in every establishment in public 
sector in that State or area shall furnish such information or return as may be prescribed in relation to 
vacancies that have occurred or are about to occur in that establishment, to such employment exchanges 
as may be prescribed.  
(2) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, require that from such 
date as may be specified in the notification, the employer in every establishment in private sector or every 
establishment pertaining to any class or category of establishments in private sector shall furnish such 
information or return as may be prescribed in relation to v
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYMENT EXCHANGES (COMPULSORY NOTIFICATION OF VACANCIES).pdf - page 4]
ts in private sector shall furnish such 
information or return as may be prescribed in relation to vacancies that have occurred o r are about to 
occur in that establishment to such employment exchanges as may be prescribed, and the employer shall 
thereupon comply with such requisition.  
(3) The form in which, and the intervals of time at which, such information or return shall be 
furnished and the particulars which they shall contain shall be such as may be prescribed.  
6. Right of access to records or documents .—Such officer of Government as may be prescribed in 
this behalf, or any person authorised by him in writing, shall have access  to any relevant record or 
document in the possession of any employer required to furnish any information or returns under section 
5 and may enter at any reasonable time any premises where he believes such record or document to be 
and inspect or take copies of relevant records or documents or ask any question necessary for obtaining 
any information required under that section.  
 7. Penalties .—(1) If any employer fails to notify to the employment exchanges prescribed for the 
purpose any vacancy in contra vention of sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) of section 4, he shall be 
punishable for the first offence with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees and for every 
subsequent offence with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.  
(2) If any person — 
(a) required to furnish any information or return — 
(i) refuses or neglects to furnish such information or return, or  
(ii) furnishes or causes to be furnished any information or return which he knows to be false, 
or 
(iii) refuses to answer, or gives  a false answer to, any question necessary for obtaining any 
information required to be furnished under section 5; or  
(b) impedes the right of access to relevant records or documents or the right of entry conferred by 
section 6,  
he shall be punishable for the first offence with fine which may extend to
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYMENT EXCHANGES (COMPULSORY NOTIFICATION OF VACANCIES).pdf - page 4]
onferred by 
section 6,  
he shall be punishable for the first offence with fine which may extend to two hundred and fifty rupees 
and for every subsequent offence with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYMENT EXCHANGES (COMPULSORY NOTIFICATION OF VACANCIES).pdf - page 5]
5 8. Cognizance of offences .—No prosecution for an offence under this Act shall be instituted except 
by, or with the sanction of, such officer of Government as may be prescribed in this behalf or any person 
authorised by that officer in writing.  
9. Protection of action taken in good f aith.—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie 
against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
10. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazet te 
and subject to the condition of previous publication, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any o f the following matters , namely:— 
(a) the employment exchange or exchanges to which, the form and manner in which, and the time 
within which vacancies shall be notified , and the particulars of employments in which such vacancies 
have occurred or are about to occur;  
(b) the  form and manner in which, and the intervals at which, information and returns required 
under section 5 shall be furnished , and the particulars which they shall contain;  
(c) the officers by whom and the manner in which the right of access to documents and the right 
of entry conferred by section 6 may be exercised;  
(d) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed under this Act.  
1[(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions , and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Hou ses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EMPLOYMENT EXCHANGES (COMPULSORY NOTIFICATION OF VACANCIES).pdf - page 5]
le or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annu lment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EPIDEMIC DISEASES ACT, 1897.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE EPIDEMIC DISEASES ACT, 1897  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1.  Short title and extent . 
1A. Definitions.  
2.  Power to take special measures and prescribe regulations as to dangerous epidemic disease.  
2A. Powers of Central Government.  
2B. Prohibition of violence against health care service personnel and damage to property.  
3. Penalty . 
3A. Cognizance, investigation and trial of offences.  
3B. Composition of certain offences.  
3C. Presumption as to certain offences.  
3D. Presumpti on of culpable mental state.  
3E. Compensation for acts of violence.  
4.    Protection to persons acting under Act.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EPIDEMIC DISEASES ACT, 1897.pdf - page 2]
2 
 THE EPIDEMIC DISEASES ACT, 1897  
ACT NO. 3 OF 18971 
[4th February , 1897 .] 
An Act to provide for the better prevention of the spread of Dangerous Epidemic Diseases.  
WHEREAS  it is expedient to provide for the better prevention of the spread of dangerous epidemic 
disease; It is hereby enacted as follows : — 
1. Short title and extent. —(1) This Act may be called the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897.  
2[(2) It extends to the whole of India 3***] 4* * * 
5*         *         *         *         * 
6[1A. Definitions .—In this, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “act  of violence” includes any of the following acts committed by any person against a 
healthcare service personnel serving during an epidemic, which causes or may cause — 
(i) harassment impacting the living or working conditions of such healthcare service  
personnel and preventing him from discharging his duties;  
(ii) harm, injury, hurt, intimidation or danger to the life of such healthcare service 
personnel, either within the premises of a clinical establishment or otherwise;  
(iii) obstruction  or hindrance to such healthcare service personnel in the discharge of 
his duties, either within the premises of a clinical establishment or otherwise; or  
(iv) loss or damage to any property or documents in the custody of, or in relation to, 
such healthcar e service personnel;  
(b) “healthcare service personnel” means a person who while carrying out his duties in 
relation to epidemic related responsibilities, may come in direct contact with affected patients 
and thereby is at the risk of being impacted by suc h disease, and includes — 
(i) any public and clinical healthcare provider such as doctor, nurse, paramedical 
worker and community health worker;  
(ii) any other person empowered under the Act to take measures to prevent the 
outbreak of the disease or spread thereof; and  
                                                      
1. This Act has been amended in its application to —  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EPIDEMIC DISEASES ACT, 1897.pdf - page 2]
                                             
1. This Act has been amended in its application to —  
(1) the Punjab by the Epidemic Diseases (Punjab Amendment) Act, 1944 (Punjab Act 3 of 1944); in East Pun jab by 
East Punjab Act 1 of 1947:  
(2) the C. P. and Berar by the C. P. and Berar Epidemic Diseases (Amendment) Act, 1945 (C. P. and Berar Act 4 of 1945).  
 The Act has been extended to —  
(1) the whole of Madhya Pradesh by M.P. Act 23 of 1958 (when notified).  
(2) the transferred territories of Punjab by Punjab Act 8 of 1961.  
(3) in Dadra and Nagar Haveli (w.e.f. 1 -7-1965) by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and Sch.  
(4) to Lakshadweep (w.e.f. 1 -10-1967) : vide Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 and Sch.  
(5) Union territory of Pondicherry by Act 26 of 1968, s. 3 and Sch.  
The Act has been repealed in its application to Bellary District by Mysore Act 14 of 1955.  
2. Subs . by the A. 0. 1950.  
3. The words, figures and letters “except the territories which, immediately before the 1st November, 1956, were 
comprised in Part B States” omitted by Act 34 of 2020, s. 2 (w.e.f. 22 -4-2020).  
4. The word “and” rep. b y Act 10 of 1914, s. 3 and  the Second Schedule.  
5. Sub-section ( 3) rep . by s. 3 and the Second Schedule, ibid. 
6. Ins. by Act 34 of 2020, s. 3 (w.e.f. 22 -4-2020).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EPIDEMIC DISEASES ACT, 1897.pdf - page 3]
3 
 (iii) any person declared as such by the State Government, by notification in the 
Official Gazette;  
(c) “property” includes — 
(i) a clinical establishment as defined in the Clinical Establishments (Registration and 
Regulation) Act, 2010  (23 of 2010) ; 
(ii) any facility identified for quarantine and isolation of patients during an epidemic;  
(iii) a mobile medical unit; and  
(iv) any other property in which a healthcare service personnel has direct interest in 
relating to the epidemic;  
(d) the words  and expressions used herein and not defined, but defined in the Indian Ports 
Act, 1908 (15 of 1908), the Aircraft Act, 1934 (22 of 1934) or the Land Ports Authority of 
India Act, 2010 (31 of 2010), as the case may be, shall have the same meaning as assign ed to 
them in that Act.]  
1[2. Power to take special measures and prescribe regulations as to dangerous epidemic 
disease.—(1) When at any time the 2[State Government] is satisfied that 2[the State] or any part 
thereof is visited by, or threatened with, an outbreak of any dangerous epidemic disease, the 3[State 
Government], if 4[it] thinks that the ordinary provisions of the law for the time being in force are 
insufficient for the purpose,  may take, or require or empower any person to take, such me asures 
and, by public notice, prescribe such temporary regulations to be observed by the public or by any 
person or class of persons as 4[it] shall deem necessary to prevent the outbreak of such d isease or 
the spread thereof, and may determine in what manner and by whom any expenses incurred 
(including compensation if any) shall be defrayed. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the 2[State 
Government] may take measures  and prescribe regulations for — 
5*   *       *       *             * 
                        
 (b) the inspection of persons travelling by railway or otherwise, and the segregation, in hospital, 
temporary accommodation or other
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EPIDEMIC DISEASES ACT, 1897.pdf - page 3]
velling by railway or otherwise, and the segregation, in hospital, 
temporary accommodation or otherwise, of persons suspected by the inspecting officer of being infected 
with any such disease.  
6*              *             *                          *                          * 
7[2A. Powers of Central Govern ment.—When the Central Government is satisfied that India 
or any part thereof is visited by, or threatened with, an outbrea k of any dangerous epidemic 
disease and that the ordin ary provisions of the law for the time being in force are insufficient to 
prevent the outbreak of such disease or the spread thereof, 8[the Central Government may take 
such measures, as it deems fit and prescribe regulations for the inspection of any bus o r train or 
goods vehicle or ship or vessel or aircraft leaving or arriving at any land port or aerodrome, as the 
case may be, in the territories to which this Act extends and for such detention thereof, or of any 
person intending to travel therein, or arri ving thereby, as may be necessary .] 
                                                      
1. For Notifications issued under this section, see different local Rules and Orders.  
2. Subs . by the A. O. 1937, for “G.G. in C. ” 
3. Subs ., ibid., for “India ”. 
4. Subs ., ibid., for “he”. 
5. Paragraph ( a) omitted, ibid. 
6. Sub-section ( 3) omitted by Act 38 of 1920,  s. 2 and  the First  Schedule.  
7. Ins. by  Act 38 of 1920, s. 2 and the First Schedule. Earlier substitute d by the A. O.1937.  
8. Subs. by Act 34 of 2020, s. 4, for certain words  (w.e.f. 22 -4-2020).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EPIDEMIC DISEASES ACT, 1897.pdf - page 4]
4 
 1[2B. Prohibi tion of violence against health care service personnel and damage to property .—No 
person shall indulge in any act of violence against a healthcare service personnel or cause any damage or 
loss to any property  during an epidemic.]  
3. Penalty. —2[(1)] Any person disobeying any regulation or order made under this Act shall 
be deemed to have committed an offence punishable under section 188 of the Indian Penal Code 
(45 of 1860).  
3[(2) Whoever, — 
(i) commits  or abets the commission of an act of violence against a healthcare service 
personnel; or  
(ii) abets or cause damage or loss to any property,  
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three months, but 
which may extend to five years, and with fine, which shall not be less than fifty thousand 
rupees, but which may extend to two lakh rupees.  
(3) Whoever, while committing an act of violence against  a healthcare service personnel, 
cause s grievous hurt as defined in section 320 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) to such 
person, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six 
months, but which may extend to seven years and with fine, which shall not be less than one 
lakh rupees, but which may ext end to five lakh rupees.]  
4[3A. Cognizance, investigation and trial of offences .—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), — 
(i) an offence punishable under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) of section 3 shall be 
cognizable and non -bailable;  
(ii) any case registered under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) of section 3 shall be 
investigated by a police officer not below the rank of Inspector;  
(iii) investigation of a case under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) of section 3 shall 
be completed within a period of thirty days from the date of registration of the First 
Information Report;  
(iv) in every inquiry or trial of a case under sub -section (
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EPIDEMIC DISEASES ACT, 1897.pdf - page 4]
on of the First 
Information Report;  
(iv) in every inquiry or trial of a case under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) of 
section 3, the proceedings shall be held as expeditiously as possible, and in particular, 
when the examination of witnesses has once begun, the same shall be continued from day 
to day until all the witnessed in attendance have been examined, unless the Court finds the 
adjournment of the same beyond the following day to be necessary for reasons to be 
recorded, and an endeavor shall be made to ensure that the inquiry or trial is concluded 
within a period of one year:  
Provided that where the trial is not concluded within the said period, the Judge shall  
record the reasons for not having done so:  
Provided further that the said period may be extended by such further period, for reasons 
to be recorded in writing, but not exceeding six months at a time.  
3B. Composition of certain offences .—Where a person is prosecuted for committing an 
offence punishable under sub -section ( 2) of section 3, such offence may, with the permission 
of the Court, be compounded by the person against whom such act of violence is committed.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 34 of 2020, s. 5 (w.e.f. 22 -4-2020).  
2. Section 3 renumbered as sub -section (1) thereof by Act 34 of 2020, s. 6 (w.e.f. 22 -4-2020).  
3. Ins. by Act 34 of 2020, s. 6 (w.e.f. 22 -4-2020).  
4. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 22 -4-2020).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EPIDEMIC DISEASES ACT, 1897.pdf - page 5]
5 
 3C. Presumption as to certain offences .—Wher e a person is prosecuted for committing 
an offence punishable under sub -section ( 3) of section 3, the Court shall presume that such 
person has committed such offence, unless the contrary is proved.  
3D. Presumption of culpable mental state .—(1) In any prosecution for an offence under 
sub-section ( 3) of section 3 which requires a culpable mental state on the part of the accused, 
the Court shall presume the existence of such mental state, but it shall be a defenc e for the 
accused to prove the fact that he  had no such mental state with respect to the act charged as an 
offence in that prosecution.  
(2) For the purposes of this section, a fact is said to be proved only when the Court 
believes it to exist beyond reasonable doubt and not merely when its existenc e is established 
by a preponderance of probability.  
Explanation .—In this section, “culpable mental state” includes intention, motive, 
knowledge of a fact and the belief in, or reason to believe, a fact.  
3E. Compensation for acts of violence .—(1) In additio n to the punishment provided for 
an offence under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) of section 3, the person so convicted shall 
also be liable to pay, by way of compensation, such amount, as may be determined by the 
Court for causing hurt or grievous hurt  to any healthcare service personnel.  
(2) Notwithstanding the composition of an offence under section 3B, in case of damage to 
any property or loss caused, the compensation payable shall be twice the amount of fair 
market value of the damaged property or t he loss caused, as may be determined by the Court.  
(3) Upon failure to pay the compensation awarded under sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2), such 
amount shall be recovered as an arrear of land revenue under the Revenue Recovery Act, 1890 
(1 of 1890).]  
4. Protection  to persons acting under Act. —No suit or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against any person for anything done o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EPIDEMIC DISEASES ACT, 1897.pdf - page 5]
ting under Act. —No suit or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against any person for anything done or in good faith intended to be done under this 
Act.  
 
 
 
 
 
__________  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EQUAL REMUNERATION ACT, 1976.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE EQUAL REMUNERATION ACT, 1976  
________ ___ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Act to have overriding effect.  
CHAPTER II  
PAYMENT OF REMUNERATION AT EQUAL RATES TO MEN AND WOMEN WORKERS  
AND OTHER MATTERS  
4. Duty of employer to pay equal remuneration to men and women workers for same work or work 
of a similar nature.  
5. No discrimination to be made while recruiting men and women workers . 
6. Advisory Committee.  
7. Power of appropriate Gov ernment to appoint authorities for hearing and deciding claims and 
complaints.  
CHAPTER III  
MISCELLANEOUS  
8. Duty of employers to maintain registers.  
9. Inspectors.  
10. Penalties.  
11. Offences by companies.  
12. Cognizance and trial of offences.  
13. Power to make rules.  
14. Power of Central Government to give directions.  
15. Act not to apply in certain special cases.  
16. Power to make declaration.  
17. Power to remove difficulties.  
18. Repeal and saving.  
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EQUAL REMUNERATION ACT, 1976.pdf - page 2]
2 
 THE EQUAL REMUNERATION ACT, 1976  
ACT NO. 25 OF 1976  
[11th February, 1976 .] 
An Act to provide for the payment of equal remuneration to men and women workers and for the 
prevention of discrimination, on the ground of sex, against women in the matter of 
employment and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enac ted by Pa rliament in the Twenty -seventh Y ear of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Equal Remuneration 
Act, 1976 . 
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1, not being later than three years from the passing of this Act, 
as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint and different dates may be appointed for 
different establishments or employments.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appropriate Gov ernment ” means, — 
(i) in relation to any employment carried on by or under the authority of the Central 
Government or a railway administration, or in relation to a banking company, a mine,  oilfield or 
major port or any c orporation established by or under a Central Act, the Central Government, and  
(ii) in relation to any other employment, the State Government;  
(b) “commencement of this Act ” means, in relation to an establishment or empl oyment, the date 
on which this Act comes into force in respect of that establishment or employment;  
(c) “employer ” has the meaning assigned to it in clause ( f) of section 2 of the Payment of Gratuity 
Act, 1972 (39 of 1972);  
(d) “man” and “woman ” mean  male and female human beings, respectively, of any age;  
(e) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(f) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(g) “remuneration ” means the basic  wage or salary, and any a dditional emoluments whatsoever 
payable, either in cash or in kind, to 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EQUAL REMUNERATION ACT, 1976.pdf - page 2]
  wage or salary, and any a dditional emoluments whatsoever 
payable, either in cash or in kind, to a person employed in respect of employment or work done in 
such employment, if the terms of the contract of employment, express or implied, were fulfilled;  
(h) “same work or work of a s imilar nature ” means work in respect of which the skill, effort and 
responsibility required are the same, when performed under similar working conditions, by a man or a 
woman and the differences, if any, between the skill, effort and responsibility require d of a man and 
those required of a woman are not of practical importance in relation to the terms and conditions of 
employment;  
(i) “worker ” means a worker in any establishment or employment in respect of which this Act has 
come into force;  
(j) words and expressions used in this Act and not defined but defined in the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.  
                                                           
1. 8th March, 1976, vide notification No. S.O. 175(E), d ated 6 th March, 1976, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,       
sec. 3( ii). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EQUAL REMUNERATION ACT, 1976.pdf - page 3]
3 
 3. Act to have over riding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law or in the terms of any award, agreement or 
contract of service, whether made before or after the commencement of this Act, or in any instrument 
having effect under any law for the t ime being in force.  
CHAPTER II  
PAYMENT OF REMUNERATION AT EQUAL RATES TO MEN AND WOMEN WORKERS  
AND OTHER MATTERS  
4. Duty of employer to pay equal remuneration to men and women workers for same work or 
work of a similar nature .—(1) No employer shall pay to any worker, employed by him in an 
establishment or employment, remuneration, whether payable in cash or in kind, at rates less favourable 
than those at which remuneration is paid by him to the workers of the opposite sex in such establishment 
or employment for performing the same work or work of a similar nature.  
(2) No employer shall, for the purpose of complying with the provisions of sub -section ( 1), reduce the 
rate of remuneration of any worker.  
(3) Where, in an establishment or employment, the rates of remuneration payable before the 
commencement of this Act for men and women workers for the same work or work of a similar nature are 
different only on the ground of sex, then the higher (in cases where there are only two rates),  or, as the 
case may be, the highest (in cases where there are more than two rates), of such rates shall be the rate at 
which remuneration shall be payable, on and from such commencemen t, to such men and women 
workers:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall be deemed to entitle a worker to the revision of the rate 
of remuneration payable to him or her with reference to the service rendered by him or her before the 
commencement of this Act.  
5. No discrimination to be made while recruiting men and wo men workers .—On and from the 
commencement of this Act, no employer shall , while  making recruitment for the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EQUAL REMUNERATION ACT, 1976.pdf - page 3]
 .—On and from the 
commencement of this Act, no employer shall , while  making recruitment for the sam e wo rk or work of a 
similar nature, 1[or in any condition of service subsequent to recruitment such as promotions, training or 
transfer,] make any  discrimination against women except where the employment of women in such work 
is prohibited or restricted by or under any law for the time being in force:  
Provided that the provisions of this section shall not affect any priority or reservation for Sched uled 
Castes or Scheduled Tribes, ex -servicemen, retrenched employees or any other class or category of 
persons in the matter of recruitment to the posts in an establishment or employment.  
6. Advisory Committee .—(1) For the purpose of providing increasing e mployment opportunities for 
women, the appropriate Government shall constitute one or more Advisory Committees to advise it with 
regard to the extent to which women may be employed in such establishments or employments as the 
Central Government may, by not ification, specify in this behalf.  
(2) Every Advisory Committee shall consist of not less than ten persons, to be nominated by the 
appropriate Government, of which one -half shall be women.  
(3) In tendering its advice, the Advisory Committee shall have rega rd to the number of women 
employed in the concerned establishment or employment, the nature of work, hours of work, suitability of 
women for employment, as the case may be, the need for providing increasing employment opportunities 
for women, including par t-time employment, and such other relevant factors as the Committee may think 
fit. 
(4) The Advisory Committee shall regulate its own procedure.  
(5) The appropriate Government may, after considering the advice tendered to it by the Advisory 
Committee and af ter giving to the persons concerned in the establishment or employment an opportunity 
to make representations, issue such directions in respect of employment of women workers, a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EQUAL REMUNERATION ACT, 1976.pdf - page 3]
rtunity 
to make representations, issue such directions in respect of employment of women workers, as the 
appropriate Government may think fit.   
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 49 of  1987, s. 2 (w.e.f. 16 -12-1987).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EQUAL REMUNERATION ACT, 1976.pdf - page 4]
4 
 7. Power of appropriate Government  to appoint authorities for hearing and deciding claims and 
complaints .—(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification, appoint such officers, not below the 
rank of a Labour Officer, as it thinks fit to be the authorities for the p urpose of hearing and deciding — 
(a) complaints with regard to the contravention of any provision of this Act;  
(b) claims arising out of non -payment of wages at equal rates to men and women workers for the 
same w ork or work of a similar nature;  
and may, by the same or subsequent notification, define the local limits within which each such authority 
shall exercise its jurisdiction.  
(2) Every complaint or claim referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be made in such manner as may be 
prescribed.  
(3) If any question arises as to whether two or more works are of the same nature or of a similar 
nature, it shall be decided by the authority appointed under sub -section ( 1). 
(4) Where a complaint or claim is made to the authority appointed under sub -section ( 1), it may, after 
giving the applicant and the employer an opportunity of being heard, and after such inquiry as it m ay 
consider necessary, direct, — 
(i) in the case of a claim arising out of non -payment of wages at equal rates to men and women 
workers for the same work or work of a similar nature, that payment be made to the worker of the 
amount by which the wages payable to him exceed the amount actually paid;  
(ii) in the case of complaint, that adequate steps be taken by the employer so as to ensure that 
there is no contravention  of any provision of this Act.  
(5) Every authority appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall have all the powers of a Civil Court under 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), for the purpose of taking evidence and of enforcing the 
attendance of witness es and compelling the production of documents, and every such authority shall be 
deemed to be a Civil Court for all the purposes o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EQUAL REMUNERATION ACT, 1976.pdf - page 4]
n of documents, and every such authority shall be 
deemed to be a Civil Court for all the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
(6) Any employer or worker aggrieved by an y order made by an authority appointed under            
sub-section ( 1), on a complaint or claim may, within thirty days from the date of the order, prefer an 
appeal to such authority as the appropriate Government may, by notification, specify in this beha lf, and 
that authority may, after hearing the appeal, confirm, modify or reverse the order appealed against and no 
further appeal shall lie against the order made by such authority.  
(7) The authority referred to in sub -section ( 6) may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented 
by sufficient cause from preferring the appeal within the period specified in sub -section ( 6), allow the 
appeal to be preferred within a further period of thirty days but not thereafter.  
(8) The pr ovisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 33C of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), 
shall apply for the recovery of monies due from an employer arising out of the decision of an authority 
appointed under this section.  
CHAPTER III  
MISCELLANEOUS  
8. Duty of employers to maintain registers .—On and from the commencement of this Act, every 
employer shall maintain such registers and other documents in relation to the workers employed by him 
as may be prescribed.  
9. Inspectors .—(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification, appoint such persons as it may 
think fit to be Inspectors for the purpose of making an investigation as to whether the provisions of this 
Act, or the rules made thereunder, are being complied with by employers, and may defi ne the local limits 
within which an Inspector may make such investigation.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EQUAL REMUNERATION ACT, 1976.pdf - page 5]
5 
 (2) Every Inspector shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
(3) An Inspector may, at any place within the lo cal limits of his jurisdiction, — 
(a) enter, at any reasonable time, with such assistance as he thinks fit, any building, factory, 
premises or vessel;  
(b) require any employer to produce any register, muster -roll or other documents relating to the 
employment of workers, and examine such documents;  
(c) take, on the spot or otherwise, the evidence of any person for the purpose of ascertaining 
whether the provisions of this Act are being, or have been, complied with;  
(d) examine the employer, his agent  or servant or any other person found in charge of the 
establishment or any premises connected therewith or any person whom the Inspector has reasonable 
cause to believe to be, or to have been a worker in the establishment;  
(e) make copies, or take extract s from, any register or other document maintained in relation to 
the establishment under this Act.  
(4) Any person required by an Inspector to produce any register or other document or to give any 
information shall comply with such requisition.  
10. Penaltie s.—(1) If after the commencement of this Act, any employer, being required  by or under 
the Act, so to do — 
(a) omits or fails t o maintain any register or other document in relation to workers employed by 
him, or  
(b) omits or fails to produce any register, muster -roll or other document relating to the 
employment of workers, or  
(c) omits or refuses to give any evidence or prevents his agent, servant, or any other person in 
charge of the establishment, or any worker, from giving evidence, or  
(d) omits or refus es to give any information,  
he shall be punishable  1[with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month or with fine 
which may extend to ten thousand rupees or with both ]. 
(2) If, after the commencement of this Act, any emplo
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EQUAL REMUNERATION ACT, 1976.pdf - page 5]
extend to ten thousand rupees or with both ]. 
(2) If, after the commencement of this Act, any employer — 
(a) makes any recruitment in contravention of the provisions of this Act, or  
(b) makes any payment of remuneration at unequal rates to men and women workers, for the 
same work or work of a similar nature, or  
(c) makes any discrimination between men and women workers  in contravention of the 
provisions of this Act, or  
(d) omits or fails to carry out any direction made by the appropriate Government under            
sub-section ( 5) of section 6,  
he shall be punishable  2[with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand  rupees but which may extend 
to twenty thousand rupees or with imprisonment for a term which shall be not less than three months but 
which may extend to one year or with both for the first offence, and with imprisonment which may extend 
to two years for th e second and subsequent offences ]. 
(3) If any person being required so to do, omits or refuses to produce to an Inspector any register or 
other document or to give any information, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 49 of 1987, s. 3, for “with fine which may extend to  one thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 16 -12-1987).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for “with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 16 -12-1987) . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EQUAL REMUNERATION ACT, 1976.pdf - page 6]
6 
 11. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as  well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a c ompany and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such direct or, manager, secretary or  other of ficer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and incl udes a firm or other association of    
individuals; and  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Insertion of section 11 -A of Act No. 25 of 1976 .—After section 11 of the Equal Remuneration Act, 
1976 the following section shall be inserted, namely: - 
11A. Composition of offences .—(1) Any offence punishable under this Act with fine only or with 
imprisonment up to one month or with both shall be compoun ded on the application of accused before or 
after institution of persecution by a competent authority notified by the State Government, after imposing 
50% of the fine for the offence as compounding fee along with the prescribed fine;  
Provided t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EQUAL REMUNERATION ACT, 1976.pdf - page 6]
ing 
50% of the fine for the offence as compounding fee along with the prescribed fine;  
Provided that remedy f or compounding shall be available for the first offence only.  
(2) Every officer referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall exercise the power to compound an offence, 
subject to direction, control and supervision of the State Government.  
(3) Every application for  the compounding of an offence shall be made in such form and in such 
manner as may be prescribed.  
(4) Where any offence is co mpounded before the institution of any prosecution, no prosecution shall 
be instituted in relation to such offence, against the of fender in relation to whom the offence is so 
compounded.  
(5) Where the composition of any offence is made after the institution of any prosecution, such 
composition shall be brought by the officer referred to in sub -section ( 1) in writing to the notice of the 
court in which prosecution is pending and on such notice of the composition of the offence being given, 
the person against whom the offence is so compounded shall be discharged.”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 17 of 2018, s. 2]  
1[12. Cognizance and trial of o ffences .—(1) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or 
a Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence punishable under this Act.  
(2) No court shall take cognizance of an offence punisha ble under this Act except upon — 
(a) its own knowledge or upon a complaint made by the appropriate Government or an officer 
authorised by it in this behalf, or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 49 of 1987, s. 4, for section 12 (w.e.f. 16 -12-1987) . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EQUAL REMUNERATION ACT, 1976.pdf - page 7]
7 
 (b) a complaint made by the person aggrieved by the offence or by any recognised welfare 
institution or organisation.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub -section “recognised welfare institution or organisation ” 
means a social welfare institution or organisation recognised in this behalf by the Central or State 
Government.]  
13. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely :— 
(a) the manner in which complaint or claim referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 7 shall be 
made;  
(b) registers and other documents which an employer is required under section 8 to maintain in 
relation to the workers employed by him;  
(c) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or b oth Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of a nything previously done 
under that rule.  
14. Power of Central Government to give directions .—The Central Government may give 
directions to a State Government as to the carrying into execution of this Act in the State.  
1[15. Act not to apply in certain spec ial cases .—Nothing in this Act shall apply — 
(a) to cases aff
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EQUAL REMUNERATION ACT, 1976.pdf - page 7]
15. Act not to apply in certain spec ial cases .—Nothing in this Act shall apply — 
(a) to cases affecting the terms and conditions of a woman’ s employment in complying with the 
requirements of any law giving special treatment to women, or  
(b) to any special treatment accorded to women in connection with — 
(i) the birth or expected birth of a child, or  
(ii) the terms and conditions relating to retirement, marriage or death or to any provision 
made in connection with the retirement, marriage or death.]  
16. Power to make declaration .—Where the  appropriate Government is, on a consideration of all 
the circumstances of the case, satisfied that the differences in regard to the remuneration, or a particular 
species of remuneration, of men and women workers in any establishment or employment is based  on a 
factor other than sex, it may, by notification, make a declaration to that effect, and any act of the 
employer attributable to such a difference shall not be deemed to be a contravention of any provision of 
this Act.  
17. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by notification, make any order, not inconsistent with the provisions of 
this Act, which appears to it to be necessary for the purpose of removing the dif ficulty:  
Provided that every such order shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each House of 
Parliament.  
18. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Equal Remuneration Ordinance, 1975  (12 of 1975)  is hereby 
repealed.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 49 of 1987, s. 5, for section 1 5 (w.e.f. 16 -12-1987).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EQUAL REMUNERATION ACT, 1976.pdf - page 8]
8 
 (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Ordinance so repealed 
(including any notification, nomination, appointment, order or direction made thereunder) shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act as if this  Act were in 
force when such thing was done or action was taken.  
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EXPLOSIVES ACT, 1884.pdf - page 1]
 
1 
 s
e
a
r
c
h
, 
s
e
i
z
u
r
e
, 
dTHE EXPLOSIVES ACT, 1884  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTI ONS 
1. Short title.  
 Local extent.  
2. Commencement.  
3. [Repealed. ]. 
4. Definitions.  
5. Power to make rules as to licensing of the manufacture, possession, use, sale, transport and 
impor t and Export of explosives.  
5A. Persons already in business in respect of certain explosives to carry on such business without 
licence for a certain period.  
6. Power for Central Government to prohibit the manufacture, possession or importation of 
specially dangerous explosives.  
6A. Prohibition of manufacture, possession, sale or transport of explosives by young persons and 
certain other persons.  
6B. Grant of licences.  
6C. Refusal of licences.  
6D. Licensing authority competent to impose conditions in ad dition to prescribed condi -
tions.  
6E. Variation, suspension and revocation of licences.  
6F. Appeals.  
7. Power to make rules conferring powers of inspection, search, seizure, detention and removal.  
8. Notice of accidents.  
9. Inquiry into accidents.  
9A. Inquiry into more serious accidents.  
9B.    Punishment for certain offences . 
9C.    Offences by companies.  
10. Forfeiture of explosives.  
11. Distress of aircraft or vessel.  
12. Abetment and attempts.  
13. Power to arrest without warrant persons committing d angerous offences.  
14. Saving and power to exempt.  
15. Saving of Arms Act, 1959.  
16. Saving as to liability under other law.  
17. Extension of definition of “explosive ” to other explosive substances.  
17A.  Power to delegate.  
18. Procedure for making, publication and confirmation of rules.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EXPLOSIVES ACT, 1884.pdf - page 2]
 
2 
 THE EXPLOSIVES ACT, 1884  
ACT NO. 4 OF 18841 
[26th February , 1884.]  
An Act to regulate the manufacture, possession, use, sale, 2[transport, import and 
export] of explosives.  
WHEREAS  it is expedient to regulate the manufacture, possession, use, sale, 2[transport, import and 
export] of explosives; It  is hereby enacted as follows: — 
1. Short title. —(1) This Act may be called the 3*** Explosives Act, 1884; and  
(2) Local extent. —It extends to whole India 4** 
2.Commencement. —(1) This Act shall come into force on such day, 5as the Central Government, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoints.  
6*                  *                  *                  *                  * 
3. [Repeal of portions of Act 12 of 1875.] Rep. by the Indian Ports Act, 1889 (10 of 1889)7, s. 2 
and the Second Schedule . 
8[4. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “aircraft ” means any machine which can derive  support in the atmosphere from the reactions 
of the air, other than the reactions of the air against the earth's surface, and includes balloons, whether 
fixed or free, airships, kites, gliders and flying machines;  
(b) “carriage ” includes any carriage, wagon, cart, truck, vehicle or other means of conveying 
goods or passengers by land, in whatever manner the same may be propelled,  
(c) “District Magistrate ”, in relation to any area for which a Commissioner of Police has been 
appointed, means the Commissioner of Police thereof and includes —  
(a) any such Deputy Commissioner of Police, exercising jurisdiction over the whole or any 
part of such  area, as may be specified by the State Government in this behalf in relation to such 
area or part ; and 
(b) an Additional District Magistrate;  
(d) “explosive ” means gunpowder, nitoglycerine, nitroglycol, gun -cotton, di -nitro -toluene, 
tri-nitro -toluene, picric acid, di -nitro -phenol, tri -nitro -resorcinol (styphnic acid), cyclo -trime -
                            
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EXPLOSIVES ACT, 1884.pdf - page 2]
 -nitro -phenol, tri -nitro -resorcinol (styphnic acid), cyclo -trime -
                                                      
1. This Act has been declared, under s. 3 ( a)of the Scheduled Districts Act, 1874 (14 of 1874), to be in force in 
the D istricts of Hazaribagh, Lohardaga (now called the Ranchi Dis trict —see Calcutta Gazette, 1899, Pt, I, p.44) 
Palamau and Manbhum and in ParganaDhalbhum and the K.olhan in the Singhbhum District of the Chota 
Nagpur Division —See Gazette of India, 1896, Pt. I .p. 972.  
It has been applied to the SonthalParganas under s. 3 of the SonthalParganas Settlement Regulation (3 of 1872), 
as amended by the SonthalParganas Laws Regulation, 1886 (3 of 1886), and by s. 3 of Regulation 3 of 1899, and 
to Porahat  Estate by Bihar Regulation (2 of 1946).  
For the law relating to explosive substances, see also the Explosive Substances Act, 1908 (6 of 1908).  
The Act has been extended to Goa, Daman and Diu with modifications, by Reg. 12 of 1962, s. 3 and Sch.,  
(w.e.f. 1-2-1965) extended to and brought into force in Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6of 1963, s. 2 and Sch. 
(w.e.f. 1 -7-1965) and to the whole of the Union territory of Lakshadweep by Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 and Sch. I 
(w.e.f. 1 -10-1967).  
The Act comes into force in Pondicherry on 1 -10-1963 vide Reg. 7 of 1963, s. 3 and Sch. I.  
2. Subs. by Act 32 of 1978, s. 2, for “transport and importation ” (w.e.f. 2 -3-1983).  
3. The word “Indian ” omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 7-3-1983).  
4. The words and letter “except Part B States ” omitted by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule                     
(w.e.f. 1 -4-1951).  
5. 1st July, 1887 —see Gazette of India, 1887, Pt. I, p. 307  
6.Sub-section ( 2) rep. by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and  the First Schedule.  
7. Rep. by the Indian Ports Act, 1908 (15 of 1908).  
8. Subs. by Act 32 of 1978, s. 4. for section 4 (w.e.f. 2 -3-1983).   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EXPLOSIVES ACT, 1884.pdf - page 2]
   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EXPLOSIVES ACT, 1884.pdf - page 3]
 
3 
 thylene -trinitramine, penta -erythritol -tetranitrate, tetryl, nitro -guanidine, lead azide, lead 
styphynate, fulminate of mercury or any other metal, diazo -di-nitro -phenol, colour ed fires 
or any other substance whether a single chemical compound or a mixture of substances, 
whether solid or liquid or gaseous used or manufactured with a view to produce a practical 
effect by explosion or pyrotechnic effect; and includes fog -signals, f ireworks, fuses, 
rockets, percussion -caps, detonators, cartidg es, ammunition of all descrip tions and every 
adaptation or preparation of an explosive as defined in this clause;  
(e) “export ” means taking out of India to a place outside India by land, sea or  air; 
(f) “import ” means to bring into India from a place outside India by land, sea or air;  
(g) “master ”,— 
(a) in relation to any vessel or aircraft means any person, other than a pilot, harbour 
master, assistant harbour  master or berthing master, having for the time being the 
charge or control of such vessel or aircraft, as the ease may be; and  
(b) in relation to any boat belonging to a ship, means the master of that ship;  
(h) “manufacture ” in relation to an explosive includes the process of —  
(1) dividing the explosive into its component parts or otherwise breaking up or 
unmaking the explosive, or making fit for use any damaged explosive; and  
(2) re-making, altering or repairing the explosi ve; 
(i) “prescribed- means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(j) “vessel ” inclu des any ship, boat, sailing vessel, or other description of vessel used in 
navigation whether propelled by oars or otherwise and anything made for the conveyance, 
mainly by water, of human beings or of goods and a caisson.]  
5. Power to make rules as to licensing of the manufacture, possession, use, sale, 
transport, import and export of explosives. —(1) The Central Government may for any part of 
1[India],2*** make rules3 consistent with this Act to regulate or p
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EXPLOSIVES ACT, 1884.pdf - page 3]
 Government may for any part of 
1[India],2*** make rules3 consistent with this Act to regulate or prohibit, except under and in 
accordance with the conditions of a licence granted as provided by those rules, the manuf acture, 
possession, use, sale , 4[transport, import and export] of explosives, or any specified c lass of 
explosives. 
(2) Rules under this section may provide for all or any of the following, among other matters, that is 
to say: —  
(a) the authority by which licenses may be granted;  
(b) the fees to be charged for licenses, and the other sums (if any) to  be paid for expenses by 
applicants for licenses ; 
(c) the manner in which applications for licenses must be made, and the matters to be specified 
in such applications ; 
(d) the form in which, and the conditions on and subject to which, licenses must be 
granted;  
(e) the period for which licenses are to remain in force;5*** 
6[(ee) the authority to which appeals may be preferred under section 6F, the procedure to 
be followed by such authority and the period within which appeals shall be preferred, the fees 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951 , s. 3 and Sch edule,  for “Part A States and Part C States” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1951).  
2. The words “and each Local Government, with the previous sa nction of the Governor, General in Council, may for any part of 
the territories under its administration” omitted by the A.O. 1937.  
3. For the Explosive Rules, 1940, made under s. 5 and 7, see Gazette of India, Extra., 1940, p. 749.  
4. Subs. by Act 32 of 1978, s. 5, for “transport and importation”  (w.e.f. 2 -3-1983).  
5. The word “and” omitted by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -3-1983).  
6. Ins. by  Act 32 of 1978, s. 5. (w.e.f. 2 -3-1983).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EXPLOSIVES ACT, 1884.pdf - page 4]
 
4 
 to be paid in respect of such appeals and the circumstances under which such fees may be 
refunded ; 
(eea) the total quantity of explosives that a licensee can purchase in a given period of 
time;  
(eeb) the fees to be charged by the Chief Controller of Explosives or any officer authorised by 
him in this behalf, for services rendered in connection with the manufacture, transport, import or 
export of explosives;]  
(f) the exemption absolutely or subject to conditions of any explosives 1[or any person or class of 
persons] from the operation of the rules.  
2*         *         *         *         * 
3[5A. Persons already in business in respect of certain explosives to carry  on such 
business without licence for a certain period .—Notwithstanding anything in section 5 or in the 
rules made thereunder where, immediately before the commencement of the Indian Explosives 
(Amendment) Act, 1978 (32 of 1978), any person was carrying on  the business of manufacture, 
sale, transport, import or export of any explosive [for which no licence was required under this 
Act before its amendment by the Indian Explosives (Amendment) Act, 1978 ], then, such person 
shall be entitled to continue to carr y on such business without licence in respect of such 
explosive — 
(a) for a period of three months from the date of such commencement; or  
(b) if before the expiry of the said period of three months, such person has made an application 
for grant of licence  under this Act for such business in such explosive, until the final disposal of his 
application,  
whichever is later.]  
6. Power for Central Government to prohibit the manufacture, possession or importation of 
specially dangerous explosives. —(1) Notwithstan ding anything in the rules under the last foregoing 
section, the Central Government may, from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette, —  
(a) prohibit, either absolutely or subject to conditions, the manufacture, possession or 
importation of a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EXPLOSIVES ACT, 1884.pdf - page 4]
ohibit, either absolutely or subject to conditions, the manufacture, possession or 
importation of a ny explosive which is of so dangerous a character that, in the opinion of the 
Central Government, it is expedient for the public safety to issue the notification ; 4***. 
5*               *              *            *               * 
6[(2) The Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962) shall have effect in relation to any explosive with 
regard to the importation of which a notification has been issued under this section and the vessel, 
carriage or aircraft containing such explosive as that Act has in relation to any art icle the 
importa tion of which is prohibited or regulated thereunder and the vessel, carriage  or ai rcraft 
containing such article. ]. 
7*    *    *   *             * 
8[6A. Prohibition of manufacture, possession, sale or transport of explosives by young persons 
and certain other persons. —Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Act, —  
(a) no person, — 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 1978, s. 5 (w.e.f. 2 -3-1983).  
2. Sub-section ( 3) omitted by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f . 2-3-1983).  
3. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -3-1983).  
4. The word “and” and cl. ( b) rep. by Act 10 of 1914, s. 3 and II Schedule . 
5. Cl ( b) rep. by s. 3 and the Second Schedule, ibid.  
6. Subs. by Act 32 of 1978, s. 7, for sub -section ( 2)(w.e.f. 2 -3-1983).  
7. Sub-sectio n (3) omitted by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -3-1983). 
8. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -3-1983).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EXPLOSIVES ACT, 1884.pdf - page 5]
 
5 
 (i) who has not completed the age of eighteen years, or  
(ii) who has been sentenced on conviction of any offence involving violence or moral 
turpitude for a term not less than six months, at any time during a period of five years after the 
expiration of the sentence, or  
(iii) who has been ordered to execute under Chapter VIII of the Code of  
Criminal Procedure, 1973 ( 2 of 1974) , a bond for keeping the peace or for good 
behaviour, at an y time during the term of the bo nd., or  
(iv) whose licence under this Act has been cancelled, whether before Or  after the 
commencement of the Indian Explosives (Amendment) Act, 1978 (32 of 1978), for 
contravention of the provisions of this Act or of the rules made thereunder, at any time 
during a period of five years from the date of cancellation of such licence,  shall, — 
(1) manufacture, sell, transport, import or export any explosive, or  
(2) possess any such explosive as the Central Government may, having regard to 
the nature thereof, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify;  
(b) no person shall sell, deliver or despatch any explosive to a person whom he knows 
or has reason to believe at the time of such sale, delivery or despatch, — 
(i) to be prohibited under clause ( a) to manufacture, sell, transport, import, export or possess 
such explosive, or  
(ii) to be of unsound mind.  
6B. Grant of licences. —(1) Where a person makes an application for licence under                      
section 5, the authority prescribed in the rules made under that section for grant of licences  
(hereinafter referred to in this Act as the licensing authority), after making such inquiry, if any, 
as it may consider necessary, shall, subject to the other provisions of this Act, by order in writing 
either grant the licence or refuse to grant the same . 
(2) The licensing authority shall grant a licence — 
(a) where it is required for the purpose of manufacture. of explosives if the licensing 
authority is satisfi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EXPLOSIVES ACT, 1884.pdf - page 5]
 it is required for the purpose of manufacture. of explosives if the licensing 
authority is satisfied that the person by whom license is required — 
(i) possesses technical know -how and experience  in the manufacture of explosives; 
or 
(ii) has in his employment or undertakes to employ a person or persons possessing such 
technical know -how and experience; or  
(b) where it is required for any other purpose, if the licens ing authority is satisfied that the person 
by whom licence is required has a good reason for obtaining the same.  
6C. Refusal of licences. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 6B, the licensing 
authority shall refuse to grant a licence —  
(a) where such licence  is required in respect of any prohibited explosive; or  
(b) where such licence is required by a person whom the licensing authority has reason to 
believe —  
(i) to be prohibited by this Act or by any other law for the time being in force to  
manufacture, pos sess, sell, transport. import or export any explosive, or  
(ii) to be of unsound mind, or  
(iii) to be for any reason unfit for a licence under this Act; or  
(c) where the licensing authority deems it necessary for the security of the public peace or for 
public safety to refuse to grant such licence.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EXPLOSIVES ACT, 1884.pdf - page 6]
 
6 
 (2) Where the licensing authority refuses to grant a licence  to any person it shall record in 
writing the reasons for such refusal and furnish to that person on demand a brief statement of the 
same unless in any case the licensing authority is of opinion that it will not be in the public 
interest to furnish such st atement.  
6D. Licensing authority competent to impose condition s in addition to prescribed 
conditions. —A licence granted under section 6B may contain in addition to prescribed 
conditions such other conditions as may be considered necessary by the licensing authority in 
any particular case.  
6E. Variation, suspension and revocation of licences. —(1) The licensing authority may vary the 
conditions subject to which a licence  has been granted except such of them as have been prescribed and 
may for that purpose require the holder of licence by notice in writing to deliver -up the licence to it within 
such time asmay be specified in the notice.  
(2)The licensing authority may, on the application of the holder of a licence, also vary the conditions 
of the licence except such of them as have been prescribed.  
(3) The licensing authority may, by order in writing, suspend a licence for such period as it t hinks fit 
or revoke a licence, —  
(a) if the licensing authority is satisfied that the holder of the licence is prohibited by this Act or 
by any other law for the time being in force to manufacture, possess, sell, transport, import or export 
any explosive, or is of unsound mind, or is for any reason unfit for a licence under this Act; ot  
(b) if the licensing authority deems it necessary for the security of the public peace or for public 
safety to suspend or revoke the licence; or  
(c) if the licence was obtai ned by the suppression of material information or on the basis of 
wrong information provided by the holder of the licence or any other person on his behalf at the time 
of applying for the licence; or  
(d) if any of the condi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EXPLOSIVES ACT, 1884.pdf - page 6]
ny other person on his behalf at the time 
of applying for the licence; or  
(d) if any of the conditions of the licence has been con travened; or  
(e) if the holder of the licence has failed to comply with a notice under sub -section (1)requiring 
him to deliver -up the licence.  
(4) The licensing authority may also revoke a licence on the application of the holder thereof.  
(5) where the licensing authority makes an order varying the conditions of a licence under                              
sub-section (1) or an order suspending or revoking a licence under sub -section (3), it shall record in 
writing the reasons therefor and furn ish to the holder of the licence on demand a brief statement of the 
same unless in any case the licensing authority is of the opinion that it will not be in the public interest to 
furnish such statement.  
(6) A court convicting the holder of a licence of an y offence under this Act or the rules made 
thereunder may also suspend or revoke a licence:  
Provided that if the conviction is set aside on appeal or otherwise, the suspension or revocation shall 
become void.  
(7) An order of suspension or revocation under sub -section (6) may also be made by an appellate court 
or by the High Court when exercising its powers of revision.  
(8) The Central Government may, by order in the Official Gazette, suspend or revoke, or direct any  
licensing authority to suspend or revoke, all or any licences granted under this.  Act throughout India or 
any part thereof.  
(9) On the suspension or revocation of a licence under this section the holder thereof shall without 
delay surrender the licence to  the authority by whom it has been suspended or revoked or to such other 
authority as may be specified in this behalf in the order of suspension or revocation.  
6F. Appeals.—(1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the licensing authority refusing to grant a  
licence or varying the conditions of a licence or by an order of the licensing authorit
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EXPLOSIVES ACT, 1884.pdf - page 6]
to grant a  
licence or varying the conditions of a licence or by an order of the licensing authority suspending or 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EXPLOSIVES ACT, 1884.pdf - page 7]
 
7 
 revoking a licence may prefer an appeal against that order to such authority (hereinafter referred to as the 
appellate authority) and within such period  as may be prescribed:  
Provided that no appeal shall lie against an order made by, or under the direction of, the Central 
Government.  
(2) No appeal shall be admitted if it is preferred after the expiry of the period prescribed therefor:  
Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the period prescribed therefor if the 
appellant satisfies the appellate authority that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within 
that period.  
(3) The period prescribed for an ap peal shall be computed in accordance with the provisions of the 
Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963), with respect to the computation of periods of limitation thereunder.  
(4) Every appeal under this section shall be made by a petition in writing and shall be 
accompanied by a brief statement of the reasons for the order appealed agianst where such 
statement has been furnished to the appellant and by such fee as may be prescribed . 
(5) In disposing of an appeal the appellate authority shall follow such procedure as may be 
prescribed:  
Provided that no appeal shall be disposed of unless the appellant has been given a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard.  
(6) The order appealed again st shall, unless the appellate authority conditionally or 
unconditionally directs otherwise, be in force pending the disposal of the appeal against such order.  
(7) Every order of the appellate authority confirming, modifying or reversing the order appealed  
against shall be final.]  
7. Power to make rules conferring powers of inspection, search, seizure, detention and 
removal. —(1) The Central Government 1*** may make rules consistent with this Act authorising any 
officer, either by name or in virtue of his of fice.—  
(a) to enter, inspect and examine 2[any place, aircraft, carriage or vessel] in which an 
explosive is be
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EXPLOSIVES ACT, 1884.pdf - page 7]
o enter, inspect and examine 2[any place, aircraft, carriage or vessel] in which an 
explosive is being manufactured, possessed, used, sold, 3[transported, imported or exported] 
under a license granted under this Act, or in which he has reason to believe that an explosive has 
been or is being manufactured, possessed, used, sold, 3[transported, imported or exported] in 
contravention of this Act or of the rules made under this Act;  
(b) to search for explosives therein;  
(c)  to take samples of any explosive found therein on payment of the value thereof;  and   
4[(d) to seize, detain and remove any explosive or ingredient thereof found therein and, if 
necessary, also destroy such explosive or ingredient.] 
(2) The provisions of the 5[Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)] relating to searches under 
that Code shall, so far as the same are applicable, apply to searches by officers authorised by rules under 
this section.  
8. Notice of accidents . 6[(1)] Whenever there o ccurs in or a bout, or in connecti on with, any place 
in which an explosive is manufactured, possessed or used, or 7[any aircraft, carriage or vessel] either 
conveying an explosive or on or from which an explosive is being loaded or unloaded, any accident by 
explosion or  by fire attended with loss of human life or serious injury to person or property, or of a 
                                                      
1.The words “or the Local Government with the previous sanction of the Governor -General in Council” omitted by the A.O.  
1937. 
2. Subs. by Act 32 of 1978, s. 9, for “any place, carriage or vessel” (w.e.f. 2 -3-1983).  
3. Subs. by s. 9, ibid.,  for “transported or imported” (w.e.f. 2 -3-1983).  
4. Subs. by s. 9, ibid.,  for clause  (d) (w.e.f. 2 -3-1983).  
5. Subs. by s. 9, ibid.,  for “Code of Criminal Procedure (10 of 1882)” (w.e.f. 2 -3-1983).  
6. s. 8 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by  ord. No. 18 of 1945, s. 2.  
7. Subs. by Act 32 of 1978, s. 10, for “an
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EXPLOSIVES ACT, 1884.pdf - page 7]
ub -section ( 1) thereof by  ord. No. 18 of 1945, s. 2.  
7. Subs. by Act 32 of 1978, s. 10, for “any carriage or vessel” (w.e.f. 2 -3-1983).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EXPLOSIVES ACT, 1884.pdf - page 8]
 
8 
 description usually attended with such loss or injury,  the occupier of the place, or 1[the master of the 
aircraft or vessel], or the person in charge of the carriage , as the case may be, shall 2[within such time 
and in such manner as may be by rule prescribed give notice thereof and of the attendant loss of human 
life or personal injury, if any, to the 3[Chief Controller of Explosives] and] to the officer in charge of  the 
nearest police -station.  
4*             *             *             *             * 
5[9. Inquiry into accidents. —(1) Where any accident such as is referred to in section 8 occurs 
in or about or in connection with 6[any place, aircraft, carriage or vess el] under the control of any 
of 7[Armed Forces of the Union], an inquiry into the causes of the accident shall be held by the 
naval, military, or air force authority concerned, and where any such accident occurs in any other 
circumstances, the District Mag istrate 8* * *shall, in cases attended by loss of human life, or may, 
in any other case, hold or direct a Magistrate subordinate to him to hold, such an Inquiry.. 
(2) Any person holding an inquiry under this section shall have all the powers of a Magistrate in 
holding an inquiry into an offence under the 9[Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)], and 
may exercise such of the powers conferred on any officer by rule s under section 7 as he may think it 
necessary or expedient to exercise for the purposes of the inquiry.  
(3) The person holding an inquiry under this section shall make a report to the Central Government 
stating the causes of the accident and its circumsta nces.  
(4) The Central Government may make rules — 
(a) to regulate the procedure at inquiries under this section;  
(b) to enable the 10[Chief Controller of Explosives] to be present or represented at any such 
inquiry;  
(c) to permit the 10[Chief Controller of Explosives] or his representative to examine any 
witnesses at the inquiry;  
(d) to prov
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EXPLOSIVES ACT, 1884.pdf - page 8]
troller of Explosives] or his representative to examine any 
witnesses at the inquiry;  
(d) to provide that where the 10[Chief Controller of Explosives] is not present or represented at 
any such inquiry, a report of the proceedings thereof shall be sent to him;  
(e) to prescribe the manner in which and the time within which notices referred to in section 8 
shall be given.  
9A.  Inquiry into more serious accidents. —(1) The Central Government may, where it is of 
opinion, whether or not it has received the report of an inquiry under section 9, that an inquiry or more 
formal character should be held into the causes of an accident such as is referred to in section 8, appoint  
the 11[Chief Controller of Explosives] or any other competent person to hold such inquiry, and may a lso 
appoint one or more persons possess ing legal or special knowledge to act as assessors in such inquiry.  
(2) Where the Central Government orders an inquiry under this section, it may also direct that any 
inquiry under section 9 pending at the time shall be discontinued.  
(3) The person appointed to hold an inquiry under this section shall have all the pow ers of a Civil 
Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), for the purposes of enforcing the 
attendance of witnesses and compelling the pro duction of documents and material objects; and every 
                                                      
1. Subs. by  s. 10 , ibid., for “the master of vessel” (w.e.f. 2 -3-1983).  
2. Subs. by  Act 18 of 1945, s. 2, for “forthwith give notice thereof”.  
3. Subs. by Act 32 of 1978, s. 10, for “Chief Inspector of Explosives in India” (w.e.f. 2 -3-1983).  
4. Sub-section ( 2) omitted by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -3-1983).  
5. Subs. by Act 18 of 1945, s. 3, for s . 9. 
6. Subs. by Act 32 of 1978, s. 11, for “any place, carriage or vessel” (w.e.f. 2 -3-1983).  
7. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for “the Indian Forces” (w.e.f. 2 -3-1983).  
8. The brackets and words “(or in a Presidency -
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EXPLOSIVES ACT, 1884.pdf - page 8]
bid., for “the Indian Forces” (w.e.f. 2 -3-1983).  
8. The brackets and words “(or in a Presidency -town, the Commissioner of Police)” omitted by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -3-
1983).  
9. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for “Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898” (w.e.f. 2 -3-1983).  
10. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for “Chief Inspector of E xplosives in India” (w.e.f. 2 -3-1983).  
11. Subs. by s. 12, ibid.,for “Chief Inspector of Explosives in India” (w.e.f. 2 -3-1983).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EXPLOSIVES ACT, 1884.pdf - page 9]
 
9 
 person required by such person as aforesaid to furnish any information shall be deemed to be legally 
bound so to do within the meaning of section 176 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 18 60). 
(4) Any person  holding an inquiry under this section may exercise such of the powers conferred on 
any officer by rules under section 7 as he may think it necessary or expedient to exercise for the purposes 
of the inquiry.  
(5) The person holding an inquiry under this section shall make a report to the Central 
Government stating the causes of the accident and its circumstances, and adding any observations 
which he or any of the assessors may think fit to make; and the Central Gov ernment shall cause 
every report so made to be published at such time and in such manner as it may think fit.  
(6) The Central Government may make rules for regulating the procedure at inquiries under this 
section .] 
1[9B. P unishment for certain offences. —(1) Whoever, in contravention of rules made under section 
5 or of the conditions of a licence granted under the said rules —  
(a) manufactures, imports or exports any explosive shall he punishable with imprison ment for a 
term which may extend to three years,  or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with 
both;  
(b) possesses, uses, sells or transports any explosive shall be punishable with imprison ment for a 
term which may extend to two years or with fine which may extend to three thousand rup ees or with 
both; and  
(c) in any other case, with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.  
(2) Whoever in contravention of a notification issued under section 6 manufactures, possesses or 
imports any explosive shall be punishable with imprisonment for  a term which may extend to three 
years or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees or with both; and in the case of 
importation by water, the owner and master of the vessel or in the ease of importation by air, the 
owner, and the master of the a irc
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EXPLOSIVES ACT, 1884.pdf - page 9]
d master of the vessel or in the ease of importation by air, the 
owner, and the master of the a ircraft, in which the explosive is imported shall, in the absence of 
reasonable excuse, each be punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees.  
(3) Whoever, —  
(a) manufactures, sells, transports, imports, exports or possesses any explosive in contravention 
of the provisions of clause (a) of section 6A; or  
(b) sells, delivers or despatches any explosive in contravention of the provisions of clause (b) of 
that section ,shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with 
fine or with both; or  
(c) in contravention of the provisions of section 8 fails to give notice of any accident shall be 
punishable, —  
(i) with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or  
(ii) if the accident is attended by loss of human life, with-imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three months or with fine or with both.  
9C. Offences by companies. —(1) Whenever an offence under this Act has been committed  by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, or was responsible 
t6 the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liabl e to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment under this Act if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge and 
that he exerc ised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 1978, s. 13.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EXPLOSIVES ACT, 1884.pdf - page 10]
 
10 
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1),where an offence under this Act has been  
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the  conse nt or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or 
other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be 
deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liabl e to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly.  
Explanation. —Forthe purposes of this sec tion, — 
(a) “company ”means any body corporate, and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, Means a partner in the firm.]  
10.  Forfeiture of explosives .—When a person is convicted of an offence punishable under this Act, 
or the rules made under this Act, the court before which he is convicted may direct that the explosive, or 
ingredient of the explosive, or the sub stance (if any) in respect of which the offence has been committed, 
or any part of that explosive, ingredient or substance, shall, with the receptacles containing the same, be 
forfeited.  
1[11. Distress of aircraft or vessel .—Where the owner or Master of an y aircraft or vessel is 
adjudged under this Act to pay a fine for any offence committed with, or in relation to, that 
aircraft or vessel, the Court may, in addition to any power it may have for the purpose of 
compelling payment of the fine, direct it to be  levied  by distress and sale of, — 
(a) the aircraft and its furniture  or so much of the furniture, o r 
(b) the vessel and the tackle,  apparel and furniture of such vessel or so much of the tackle, 
apparel and furniture thereof,  
as is necessary for the payment of the  fine.]  
12. Abetment and attempts. —Whoever abets, within the meaning of the Indian Penal                    
Code  (45 of 1860), the commission of an offence punishable under this Act, or the rules made under 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EXPLOSIVES ACT, 1884.pdf - page 10]
Code  (45 of 1860), the commission of an offence punishable under this Act, or the rules made under this 
Act, or attempts to commit  any such offence and in such attempt does any act towards the commission of 
the same, shall be punished as if he had committed the offence.  
13. Power to a rrest without warrant persons committing dangerous offenc es.—Whoever is 
found committing any act for whic h he is punishable under this Ac t or the rules under this Act, and 
which tends to cause explosion or fire in or about any place where an explosive is manufactured or 
stored, or any railway or port, or any carriage, 2[aircraft or vessel], may be apprehended  without a 
warrant by a Police -officer, or by the occupier of, or the agent or servant  of, or other person 
authorised  by the occupier of, that place, or by any ag ent or servant of, or other pers on authorised 
by, the railway administration or 3[conservator of the port or officer in charge of the air port], and 
be removed from the place where he is arrested and conveyed as soon as conveniently may be 
before a Magistrate.  
4[14. Saving and power to exempt. —(1) Nothing in this Act, except sections 8, 9 and 9A shall apply 
to the manuf acture, possession, use, transpo rt or importation of any explosive —  
(a) by any of the 5[Armed Forces of the Union, and ordnance factories or other establishments of 
such Forces ] in accordance with rules or regulations made by 6***the Central Government;  
(b) by any person employed under 7[the Central Government or under a State Government] in 
execution of this Act.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 32 of 1978, s. 14, for s. 11 (w.e.f.2 -3-1983).  
2. Subs. by s, 15, ibid.,  for “ship or boat” (w.e.f. 2 -3-1983).  
3. Subs. by s. 15, ibid.,  for “conservator of the port” (w.e.f. 2 -3-1983).  
4. Subs. by  Act 18 of 194 5, s. 4, for s . 14. 
5. Subs. by Act 32 of 1978, s. 16, for “Indian Forces” (w.e.f. 2 -3-1983).  
6. The words “His M
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EXPLOSIVES ACT, 1884.pdf - page 10]
4. 
5. Subs. by Act 32 of 1978, s. 16, for “Indian Forces” (w.e.f. 2 -3-1983).  
6. The words “His Majesty's Gove rnment in the United Kingdom or”  omitted by the A.O. 1950.  
7. Subs. by the A.O. 1948, for “any Government in British India” . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EXPLOSIVES ACT, 1884.pdf - page 11]
 
11 
 (2) The  Central Government may b y notification in the Official Gazette exempt, abso lutely or subject 
to any such conditions as it may think fit to impose, 1[any explosive and any  person or class of 
persons from all or any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made  thereunder.]  
15. Saving of Arms Act, 1959. —Nothing in this Act shall affect the provisions o f 
the 2[Arms Act, 1959 (4 of 1959)]:  
Provided that an authority granting a license under th is Act for the manufacture, 
possession, sale, transport or importation of an explosive may, if empowered in this 
behalf by the rules under whi ch the license is granted, direct by an order written on the 
license that it shall have the effect of a like license granted under the said 3*** Arms 
Act, 1959  (4 of 1959) . 
16. Saving as to liability under other law. —Nothing in this Act or the rules under 
this Act shall prevent any person from being prosecuted under any other law for any 
act or omission which constitutes an offence against this Act or those rules, or from 
being liable under that other law to any other or higher punishment or penalty than th at 
provided by this Act or those rules:  
Provided that a person shall not be punished twice for the same offence.  
17. Extension of definition of “explosive ” to other explosive substances. —The 
Central Government may, from time to time, by notification in the  Official Gazette, 
declare that any substance which appears to the Central Government to be specially 
dangerous to life or property, by reason either of its explosive properties or of any 
process in the manufac ture thereof being liable to explosion, shall  be deemed to be an 
explosive within the meaning of this Act , and the provisions of this Act (subject to such 
exceptions, limita tions and restrictions as may be specified in the notification) shall 
accordingly extend to that substance in like manner as if it were included in the 
definition of the term “explo sive ” in this Ac
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EXPLOSIVES ACT, 1884.pdf - page 11]
stance in like manner as if it were included in the 
definition of the term “explo sive ” in this Act.  
4[17A. Power to delegate. —The Central Government may, b y notification in the 
Offi cial Gazette, d irect that any power or functio n which may be exercised or 
performed by it under this Act other than the power under sections 5, 6, 6A, 14 and 17 
may, in relation to such matters and subject to such conditions, if any, as it may 
specify in the notification, be exercised or performed also by — 
(a) such officer or authority subordinate to the Central Government, or  
(b) such State Government or such officer or authority subordinate to the State 
Government.]  
18. Procedure for making, publication and confirmation of rules. —(1) An 
authority making rules under this Act shall , before making the rules, publish a draft of 
the prop osed rules for the information of persons likely to be affected thereby.  
(2) The publicati on shall be made in such manner as th e Central Government, from 
time  to time, by notification in the Official Gazette prescribes.  
(3) There shall be published with the draft a notice specifying a date at or after 
which the draft will be taken into consideration.  
(4) The authority making the rules shall receive and consider any objection or 
suggesti on which may be made  by any person with respect to the draft before the date 
so spe cified.  
                                                      
1. Subs.  by Act 32 of 1978, s. 16, for certain words (w.e.f. 2 -2-1983).  
2. Subs. by s. 17, ibid.,for “Indian Arms Act, 1878” (w.e.f. 2 -3-1983).  
3. The word “Indian” omitted by s. 17, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -3-1983).  
4.Ins by s.  18,ibid.(w.e.f. 2 -3-1983).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE EXPLOSIVES ACT, 1884.pdf - page 12]
 
12 
 (5) A rule made under this Act shall not take effect 1*** until it has been 
published in the Official Gazette , 2***.  
(6) The publication in the Official Gazette of a rule purporting to be made under  
this Act shall be conclusive evidence that it  has been duly made, and, if it  requires sanction, that it has  
been duly sanctioned.  
(7)  All powers to make rules  conferred by this Act may he exercised from time to time as  
occasion requires.   
3[(8) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is  made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total  period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive  sessions, and if,  before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or  the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in maki ng 
any modification in the rule or both Houses agree  that the r ule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, how ever , 
that any such modification or annulment shall be  without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule.]   
                                                      
1. The words “if it is made by the Governor -General in Council” omitted by the A. O.1937.  
2. The words “and if  it is made by the Local Government until it has been published in the lo cal Official  
Gazette” omitted,  ibid. 
3. Ins. by Act 32 of 1978, s. 19 (w.e.f. 2 -3-1983).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948  
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                            
________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Interpretation.  
3. Reference s to time of day.  
4. Power to declare different departments to be separate factories or two or more factories to be a 
single factory.  
5. Power to exempt during public emergency.  
6. Approval, licensing and registration of factori es. 
7. Notice by occupier.  
CHAPTER II  
THE INSPECTING STAFF  
7A. General duties of the occupier.  
7B. General duties of manufacturers, etc., as regards articles and substances for use in factories.  
8. Inspectors.  
9. Powers of Inspectors.  
10. Certifying surgeo ns. 
CHAPTER III  
HEALTH  
11. Cleanliness.  
12. Disposal of wastes and effluents.  
13. Ventilation and temperature.  
14. Dust and fume.  
15. Artificial humidification.  
16. Overcrowding.  
17. Lighting.  
18. Drinking water.  
19. Latrines and urinals.  
20. Spittoons.  
CHAPTER IV  
SAFETY  
21. Fencing of machinery.  
22. Work on or near machinery in motion.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 2]
2 
 SECTIONS  
23. Employment of young persons on dangerous machines.  
24. Striking gear and devices for cutting off power.  
25. Self -acting machines.  
26. Casing of new machinery.  
27. Prohibition of employment of women and children near cotton -openers.  
28. Hoists and lifts.  
29. Lifting machines, chains, ropes and lifting tackles.  
30. Revolving machinery.  
31. Pressure plant.  
32. Floors, stairs and means of access.  
33. Pits, sumps openings in floors, etc.  
34. Excessive weights.  
35. Protection of eyes.  
36. Precautions against dangerous fumes, gases, etc . 
36A. Precautions regarding the use of portable electric light.  
37. Explosive or inflammable dust, gas, etc.  
38. Precautions in case  of fire.  
39. Power to require specifications of defective parts or tests of stability.  
40. Safety of buildings and machinery.  
40A. Maintenance of buildings.  
40B. Safety Officers.  
41. Power to make rules to supplement this Chapter.  
CHAPTER IVA  
PROVISION RE LATING TO HAZARDOUS PROCESSES  
41A. Constitution of Site Appraisal Committees.  
41B. Compulsory disclosure of information by the occupier.  
41C. Specific responsibility of the occupier in relation to hazardous processes.  
41D. Power of Central Government to appoint Inquiry Committee.  
41E. Emergency standards . 
41F. Permissible limits of exposure of chemical and toxic substances.  
41G. Workers’ participation in safety management.  
41H. Right of workers to warn about imminent danger.  
CHAPTER V  
WELFARE  
42. Washing facilities.  
43. Facilities for storing and drying clothing.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 3]
3 
 SECTIONS  
44. Facilities for sitting.  
45. First -aid appliances.  
46. Canteens.  
47. Shelters, rest rooms and lunch rooms.  
48. Creches.  
49. Welfare officers.  
50. Power to make rules to supplement this Chapter.  
CHAPTER VI  
WORKING HOURS OF ADULTS  
51. Weekly hours.  
52. Weekly holidays.  
53. Compensatory holidays.  
54. Daily hours.  
55. Intervals for rest.  
56. Spread over.  
57. Night shifts.  
58. Prohibition of overlapping shifts.  
59. Extra wages for overtime.  
60. Restriction on double employment.  
61. Notice of periods of work for adults.  
62. Register of adult workers.  
63. Hours of work to correspond with notice under section 61 and register under section 62.  
64. Power to make exempting rules.  
65. Powe r to make exempting orders.  
66. Further restrictions on employment of women.  
CHAPTER VII  
EMPLOYMENT OF YOUNG PERSONS  
67. Prohibition of employment of young children.  
68. Non -adult workers to carry tokens.  
69. Certificates of fitness.  
70. Effect of certificate of fitness granted to adolescent.  
71. Working hours for children.  
72. Notice of periods of work for children.  
73. Register of child workers.  
74. Hours of work to correspond with notice unde r section 72 and register under  section 73. — 
75. Power to require medical examination.  
76. Power to make rules.  
77. Certain other provisions of law not barred.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 4]
4 
 CHAPTER VIII  
ANNUAL LEAVE WITH WAGES  
SECTIONS  
78. Application of Chapter.  
79. Annual leave with wages.  
80. Wages during leave period.  
81. Payment in advance in certain cases.  
82. Mode of recovery of unpaid wages.  
83. Power to make rules.  
84. Power to exempt factories.  
CHAPTER IX  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS  
85. Power to apply the act to certain premises.  
86. Power to exempt public institutions.  
87. Dangerous ope rations.  
87A. Power to prohibit employment on account of serious hazard.  
88. Notice of certain accidents.  
88A. Notice of certain dangerous occurrences.  
89. Notice of certain diseases.  
90. Power to direct enquiry into cases of accident or disease.  
91. Power  to take samples.  
91A. Safety and occupational health surveys.  
CHAPTER X  
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE  
92. General penalty for offences.  
93. Liability of owner of premises in certain circumstances.  
94. Enhanced penalty after previous conviction.  
95. Penalty for obstructing Inspector.  
96. Penalty for wrongfully disclosing results of analysis under section 91.  
96A. Penalty for contravention of the provisions of sections 41B, 41 C and 41 H.  
97. Offences by workers.  
98. Penalty for using false certificate of fitness.  
99. Penalty for permitting double employment of child.  
100. [ Repealed .] 
101. Exemption of occupier or manager from liability in certain cases.  
102. Power of Court to make orders.  
103. Presumption as to employment.  
104. Onus as to age.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 5]
5 
 SECTIONS  
104A. Onus of proving limits of what is practicable, etc.  
105. Cognizance of offences.  
106. Limitation of prosecutions.  
106A. Jurisdiction of a court for entertaining proceedings, etc., for offence.  
CHAPTER XI  
SUPPLEMENTAL  
107. Appeals.  
108. Display of notices.  
109. Service of notices.  
110. Returns.  
111. Obligations of workers.  
111A. Right of workers, etc.  
112. General power to make rules.  
113. Powers of Centre to give directions.  
114. No charge for facilities and conveniences.  
115. Publication of rules.  
116. Application of Act to Government factories.  
117. Protection to persons acting under this Act.  
118. Restrictions on disclosure of information.  
118A. Restriction on disclosure of information.  
119. Act to have effect notwithstanding anything contained in Act 37 of 1970.  
120. Repeal and savings.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE . 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE . 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE . 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 6]
6 
 THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948  
ACT NO. 63 OF 19481 
[23rd September, 1948. ] 
An Act to consolidate and amend the law regulating labour in factories.  
WHEREAS  it is expedient to consolidate and amend the law regulating labour in factories;  
It is hereby enacted as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the  Factories Act,  1948.  
2[(2) It extends to the whole of India  3***. 
(3) It shall come into force on the  1st day of April  1949.  
2. Interpretation .—In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context, — 
(a) “adult ” means a person who has completed  his eighteenth year of age;  
(b) “adolescent ” means a person who has completed  his fifteenth year of age but has not 
completed  his eighteenth year;  
4[(bb) “calendar year ” means the period of twelve months beginning with the first day of January 
in any year;]  
(c) “child ” means a person who has not completed  his fifteenth year of age;  
5[(ca) “competent person ”, in relation to any provision of this Act,  means a person or an 
institution recognised as such by the Chief Inspector for the purposes of carrying out tests, 
examinations and inspection  required to be done  in a factory under the provisions of this Act having 
regard to— 
(i) the qualifications and experience of the person and facilities available at his disposal; or  
(ii) the qualifications and experience of the persons employed in such institution and facilities 
available therein,  
with regard to the conduct of such tests, examinations and inspections, and more than one person or 
institution can be recognised as a competent person in relation to a factory;  
(cb) “hazardous process ” means any process or activity in relation to an industry specified in the 
First Schedule where, unless special care is taken, raw materials used therein or the intermediate or 
finished products, bye -products, wastes or effluents thereof would — 
(i) cause mat
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 6]
ntermediate or 
finished products, bye -products, wastes or effluents thereof would — 
(i) cause material  impairment to the health of the persons engaged in or connected therewith, 
or 
(ii) result in the pollution or the general environment:  
Provided that the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the First 
Schedule by way of addi tion, omission or variation of any industry specified in the said Schedule;  
(d) “young person ” means a person who is either a child or an adolescent;  
                                                           
1. The Act has been extended to Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and the First Schedule; Pondicherry by Reg. 7 of 
1963, s. 3 and the First Schedule, Goa, Daman and Diu by Reg. 11 of 1963, s. 3 and the Schedule and Laccadive, Minicoy and 
Amindivi Islands by Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 and the Schedule.  
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for the former sub -section.  
3. The words “except the state of Jamm u and Kashmir” omitted by Act 51 of 1970, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 1 -9-1971).  
4. Ins. by Act 25 of 1954, s. 2. (w.e.f.  7-5-1954 ). 
5. Ins. by Act 20 of 1987, s. 2. (w.e.f.  1-12-1987).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 7]
7 
 (e) “day” means a period of twenty -four hours beginning at midnight:  
(f) “week ” means a period of seven da ys beginning at midnight on Saturday night or such other 
night as may be approved in writing for a particular area by the Chief Inspector of Factories;  
(g) “power ” means electrical energy or any other form of energy which is  mechanically 
transmitted and is  not generated by human or animal agency;  
(h) “prime mover ” means any engine, motor or other appliance which generates or otherwise 
provides power;  
(i) “transmission machinery ” means any shaft, wheel, drum, pulley, system of pulleys, coupling, 
clutch, driv ing belt or other appliance or device by which the motion of a prime mover is transmitted 
to or received by any machinery or appliance;  
(j) ”machinery ” includes prime movers, transmission machinery and all other appliances whereby 
power is generated, trans formed, transmitted or applied;  
(k) “manufacturing process ” means any process for — 
(i) making altering, repairing, ornamenting, finishing, packing, oiling, washing, cleaning, 
breaking up, demolishing, or otherwise treating or adapting any article or substance with a view 
to its use, sale, transport, delivery or disposal, or  
1[(ii) pumping  oil, water, sewage or any other substance; or]  
(iii) generating, transforming or transmitting power; or  
2[(iv) composing  types for printing, printing by letter press , lithography, photogravure or 
other similar process or book  binding;  3[or]] 
(v) constructing, reconstructing, repairing, refitting, finishing or breaking up ships or 
vessels;  3[or] 
3[(vi) preserving  or storing any article in cold storage;]  
(l) “worker ” means a person 4[employed, directly or by or through any agency (including a 
contractor) with or without the knowledge of the principal employer, whether for remuneration  or 
not], in any manufacturing process, or in cleaning any part of the machinery or p remises used for a 
manufacturing process, or in 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 7]
ess, or in cleaning any part of the machinery or p remises used for a 
manufacturing process, or in any other kind of work incidental to, or connected with, the 
manufacturing process, or the subject of the manufacturing process 3[but does not include any 
member of the armed forces of the Union];  
(m) “factory ” means any premises including the precincts thereof — 
(i) whereon ten or more workers are working, or were working on any day of the preceding 
twelve months, and in any part of which a manufacturing process is being carried on with the aid 
of power,  or is ordinarily so carried on, or  
(ii) whereon twenty or more workers are working, or were working on any day of the 
preceding twelve months, and in any part of which a manufacturing process is being carried on 
without the aid of power, or is ordinarily so carried on, — 
but does not include a mine subject to the operation of  5[the Mines Act,  1952  (35 of 1952)], or  6[a mobile 
unit belonging to the armed forces of the Union, railway running shed or a hotel), restaurant or eating 
place].  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 94 of 1976, s. 2, for sub -clause ( ii) (w.e.f. 26-10-1976).  
2. Subs. by Act 25 of 1954, s. 2, for sub -clause ( iv) (w.e.f. 7 -5-1954).  
3. Ins. by Act 94 of 1976, s. 2, (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
4. Subs. by s. 2, ibid.,  for “employed, directly or through any agency, whether for wages or not”  (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976 ). 
5. Subs. by Act  25 of 1954, s. 2, for “the Indian Mines Act, 1923 (4 of 1923)” (w.e.f. 7 -5-1954).  
6. Subs. by Act 94 of 1976, s. 2, for “a railway running shed” (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 8]
8 
 1[Explanation  2[I]—For computing the number of workers for the purposes of this clause all the 
workers in  3[different  groups and relays] in a day shall be taken into account;]  
4[Explanation  II.—For the purposes of this clause, the  mere  fact that an Electronic Data Processing  
Unit or a  Computer  Unit is installed in any premises or part thereof, shall not be construed to make it a 
factory if no manufacturing process is being carried on in such premises or part thereof;]  
(n) “occupier ” of a factory  means the person who has ultim ate control over the affairs of the 
factory  5***. 
4[Provided that — 
(i) in the case of a firm or other association of individuals, any one of the individual partners 
or members thereof shall be  deemed  to be the occupier;  
(ii) in the case of a company, any one of the directors shall be deemed to be the occupier;  
(iii) in the case of a factory owned or controlled by the Central Government or any State 
Government, or any local authority, the person or persons appointed to manage the affairs of the 
factory by t he Central Government, the Stale Government or the local authority, as the case may 
be, shall be deemed to be the occupier:]  
1[6[Provided further that] in the case of a ship which is being repaired, or on which maintenance 
work is being carried out, in a d ry dock which is available for  hire,— 
(1) the owner of the dock shall be deemed to be the occupier for the purposes of any matter 
provided for by  or under— 
(a) section  6, section  7, 4[section  7A, section  7B,] section  11 or section  12; 
(b) section  17, in so far as it relates to the providing and maintenance of sufficient and 
suitable lighting in or around  the dock;  
(c) section 18, section 19, section 42, section 46, section 47 or section 49, in relation to the 
workers employed on such repa ir or maintenance;  
(2) the owner of the ship or  his agent or master or other officer -in-charge of the ship or any 
person who contracts with su
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 8]
or  his agent or master or other officer -in-charge of the ship or any 
person who contracts with such owner, agent or master or other officer -in-charge to carry out the 
repair or maintenance work shall be  deemed  to be the occupier for the purposes of any matter 
provided for by or under section  13, section  14, section  16 or section  17 (save as otherwise provided 
in this proviso) or Chapter IV (except section  27) or section  43, section  44 or section  45, Chapter VI, 
Chapter VII, Chapter VIII or Chapter IX or section  108, section  109 or section  110, in relation to — 
(a) the workers  employed directly by  him, or by or through any agency; and  
(b) the machinery, plant or premises in use for the purpose of carrying out such r epair or 
maintenance work by such owner, agent, master or other officer -in-charge or person;  
7*                                   *                               *                       *   * 
(p) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made by the State Government under this Act;  
8*                                 *                                *  *  * 
(r) where work of the same kind is carried out by two or more sets of workers working during 
different periods of the day, each of such sets is called a  9[“group ” or “relay ”] and each of such 
periods is called a “shift”. 
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 94 of 1976, s. 2 (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
2. The Explanation  numbered as Explanation  I by Act 20 of 1987, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid.,  for “different relays” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
4. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
5. Certain words omitted by s. 2, ibid.,  (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
6. Subs. by s . 2, ibid.,  for “Provided that” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
7. Clause ( o) omitted by s. 2, ibid.,  (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
8. Clause ( q) omitted by Act A. O. 1950.  
9. Subs. by Act 20 of 1987, s. 2 , for “relay” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 8]
t A. O. 1950.  
9. Subs. by Act 20 of 1987, s. 2 , for “relay” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 9]
9 
 STATE AMENDMENTS  
Mahara shtra  
Amendment of section 2 of 63 of 1948 .—In section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948  (63 of 1948) , in its  
application to the State of Mahara shtra (hereinafter referred to as “the principal Act”), in clause ( m),— 
(a) in sub -clause ( i), after the words “whereon ten or more workers” the words “or such number of 
workers as may be specified by the State  Government by notification, from time to time” shall be inserted;  
(b) in sub -clause ( ii), after the words “whereon twenty or more workers” the words “or such number of 
workers as may be specified by the State Government by notification, from time to time”  shall be inserted;  
(c) after sub -clause ( ii), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely: — 
“Provided that, the number of workers to be specified by the State Government in sub -clauses ( i) and 
(ii) shall not exceed twenty and forty workers, respectively.”.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act 40 of 2015, s. 2].  
Ladakh (UT ) 
Section 2. —In clause (m),  
(i) in sub -clauses (i) for the words “ten or more workers ”, the words “twenty or more workers ” shall be 
substituted;  
(ii) in sub -clause(ii), for the words “twenty or more workers ”, the words “forty or more  workers” shall be 
substituted.  
[Vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification 
No. S.O.  3774(E), dated (23 -10-2020).]  
Jammu and Kashmir (UT ) 
Section 2. —In clause (m),  in sub -clauses (i)  and (ii), for “ten” and  “twenty” , substitute “twenty” and 
“forty” respectively.  
 [Vide Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir  Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, 
notification No. S.O. 3465(E), dated (5 -10-2020).]  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 63 of 1948 .—In section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948 as amended in its application 
to Uttar Pradesh, herein after referred to as principal Act, in clause (m), -- 
(i) in sub -clause (i), for the words "ten or more ", the words "twenty or
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 9]
l Act, in clause (m), -- 
(i) in sub -clause (i), for the words "ten or more ", the words "twenty or more" shall be 
substituted;  
(ii) in sub -clause (ii), for the words "twenty or more", the words "forty or more" shall be 
substituted.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 13 of 2018, s. 2]  
Arunachal Pradesh  
Amendment of section 2 .—In section 2  of the Factories Act, 1948 (Central Act 63 of 1948), as in 
force in the State of Arunachal Pradesh (hereinafter referred to as the “principal Act”), in clause (m), -- 
 (i) in sub -clause (i), for the words “ten or more workers” , the words “twenty or more wo rkers” 
shall be substituted.  
(ii) in sub -clause (ii), for the words “twenty or more workers” the words “forty or more workers” 
shall be substituted.  
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh Act 6 of 2020, s. 2]  
Rajasthan  
Amendment of section 2, Central Act No. 63 of    1948. - In section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948 
(Central Act No. 63 of 1948), in its application to  the  State  of  Rajasthan,   hereinafter referred to as the 
principal Act, - 
(i) in sub -clause (i) of clause  (m), for the existing word "ten",  the word "twent y" shall be 
substituted; and  
(ii) in sub -clause (ii) of clause  (m), for the existing word "twenty",  the word "forty"  shall be 
substituted.  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 20 of 2014, s. 2]  
3. Reference to  time of day .—In this Act references to time of day are references to Indian Standard 
Time, being five and a half hours ahead of Greenwich Mean Time:  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 10]
10 
 Provided that for any area in which Indian Standard Time is not ordinarily observed the State Government 
may make rules — 
(a) specifying the area,  
(b) defining the  local  mean time ordinarily observed therein, and  
(c) permitting such time to be observed in all or any of the factories situated in the area.  
1[4. Power to declare different departments to be separate factories or two or more factories to be a 
single factory .—The State Government may,  2[on its own or] on an application made in this behalf by an 
occupier, direct, by an order in writing  2[and subject to such conditions as it may deem fit], that for all or any  
of the purposes of this Act different departm ents or branches of a factory of the occupier specified in the 
application shall be treated as separate factories or that two or more factories of the occupier specified in the 
application shall be treated as a single factory:]  
3[Provided that no order und er this section shall be made by the  State Government on its own motion 
unless an opportunity of being heard is given to the occupier.]  
5. Power to exempt during public emergency .—In any case of public emergency the State Government 
may, by notification in  the Official Gazette, exempt any factory or class or description of factories from all or 
any of the provisions of this Act  4[except section  67] for such period and subject to such  conditions as it may 
think fit : 
Provided that no such notification shall b e made for a period exceeding three months at a time.  
5[Explanation. —For the purposes of this section “public emergency ” means a grave emergency whereby 
the security of India or of any part of the territory thereof is threatened, whether by war or external  aggression 
or internal disturbance.]  
Arunachal Pradesh  
Insertion of section 5A. —After section 5 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely: -- 
‘5A. Where the State Government is safisfied in the public interest that it i
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 10]
inserted, 
namely: -- 
‘5A. Where the State Government is safisfied in the public interest that it is necessa ry to create more 
economic activities and employment opportunities, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt, 
subject to such conditions as it may think fit, any new factory or class or description of new factories 
which are established and whose commercial production start, from or any of the provisions of this Act 
for a period of one thousand days from the date on which such commercial production start.’  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, the expression “new factory or class or description of 
new factories” means such factory or class or description of factories which are established and whose 
commercial production start within a period of one thousands days after the commencement of the 
Factories (Arunachal Pradesh Amendment) or dinance, 2020.  
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh Act 6 of 2020, s. 3]  
6. Approval, licensing and registration of factories .—(1) The State Government may make rules — 
6[(a) requiring, for the purposes of this Act, the submission of plans of any class or description of  
factories to the Chief Inspector or the State Government;]  
7[(aa) requiring  the previous permission in writing of the State Government or the Chief Inspector 
to be obtained for the site on which the factory is to be situated and for the construction or extension 
of any factory or class or description of factories;  
(b) requiring f or the purpose of considering applications for such permission the submission of 
plans and specifications;  
(c) prescribing the nature of such plans and specifications and by whom they shall be certified;  
(d) requiring the registration and licensing of fact ories or any class or description of factories, and 
prescribing the fees payable for such registration and licensing and for the renewal of licences;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 1954, s. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 10]
ences;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 1954, s. 3, for section 4 (w.e.f. 7 -5-1954).  
2. Ins. by Act 20 of 1987, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
3. Added by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
4. Ins. by the A.O. 1950.  
5. Ins. by Act 94 of 1976, s. 3 (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
6. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
7. Clause ( a) re-lettered as clause ( aa) by Act 94 of 1976 , s. 4 (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 11]
11 
 (e) requiring that no licence  shall be granted or renewed unless the notice specified in 
section  7 has been given.  
(2) If on an application for permission referred to in  1[clause ( aa)] of sub -section ( 1) accompanied by 
the plans and specifications required by the rules made under clau se (b) of that sub -section, sent to the 
Suite Government or Chief Inspector by registered post,  no order is communicated to the applicant within 
three months from the date on which it is so sent, the permission applied for in the said application shall 
be deemed to have been granted.  
(3) Where  a State Government or a Chief Inspector refuses to grant permission  to the site, 
construction or extension of a factory or to the registration and licensing  of a factory, the applicant may 
within thirty days of the da te of such refusal appeal  to the Central Government if the decision appealed 
from was of the State Government  and to  the State Government in any other case.  
Explanation. —A factory shall not be deemed to be extended within the  meaning of  this section by 
reason only of  the replacement of any plant or machinery or within such limits as may be prescribed, of 
the addition of any plant or machinery  2[if such replacement or addition does not reduce the minimum 
clear space required for safe working around the pl ant or machinery or adversely affect the environmental 
conditions from the evolution or emission of steam, heat or dust or fumes injurious to health].  
7. Notice by occupier .—(1) The occupier shall, at least fifteen days before he begins to occupy or 
use an y premises as a factory, send to the Chief Inspector a written notice containing — 
(a) the name and situation of  the factory;  
(b) the name and address of the occupier;  
3[(bb) the name and address of the owner of the premises or building (including the preci ncts 
thereof) referred to in section  93;] 
(c) the address to which communications relating to the factory may be sent;  

<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 11]
to in section  93;] 
(c) the address to which communications relating to the factory may be sent;  
(d) the nature of the manufacturing process — 
(i)carried on in  the factory during the last twelve months in the case of factories in existence 
on the date of  the commencement of this Act; and  
(ii) to be carried on in the factory during the next twelve months in the case of all factories;  
4[(e) the total rated horse power installed or to be installed in the factory, which shall not inclu de 
the rated horse power of any separate stand -by plant;]  
(f) the name of  the manager of the factory for the purposes of this Act;  
(g) the number of workers likely to be employed in the factory;  
(h) the average number of workers per day employed during the  last twelve months in the case of 
a factory in existence on the date of the commencement of this Act;  
(i) such  other  particulars as may be prescribed.  
(2) In respect of all establishments which come within the scope of the Act for the first lime, the 
occupier shall send a written notice to the Chief Inspector containing the particulars specified in sub -
section ( 1) within thirty days from the date of the co mmencement of this Act.  
(3) Before a factory engaged in a manufacturing process which is ordinarily carried on for less than 
one hundred and eighty working days in the year resumes working, the occupier shall send a written 
notice to the Chief Inspector co ntaining  the particulars specified in sub -section ( 1) 5[at least thirty days] 
before the date of the commencement of work.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 94 of 1976, s. 4, for “clause ( a)” (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
2. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
3. Ins. by Act 25 of 1954, s. 4 (w.e.f. 7 -5-1954).  
4. Subs. by Act 94 of 1976, s. 5, for “clause ( e)” (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
5. Subs. by Act 40 of 1949, s. 3 and the Second Schedule, for “within thirty days” (w.e.f. 1 -5-1949).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 11]
 Act 40 of 1949, s. 3 and the Second Schedule, for “within thirty days” (w.e.f. 1 -5-1949).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 12]
12 
 (4) Whenever a new manager is appointed, the occupier shall send to the  1[Inspector a written notice 
and to the Chief Inspector a cop y thereof] within seven days from the date on which such person takes 
over charge.  
(5) During any period for which no person has been designated as manager of a factory or during 
which the person designated does not manage the factory, any person found acting as manager, or if no 
such person is found, the occupier  himself, shall be deemed to be the manager of the factory for the 
purposes of this Act.  
CHAPTER II  
THE INSPECTING STAFF  
2[7A. General duties of the occupier .—(1) Every occupier shall ensure, so  far as is reasonably 
practicable, the health, safety and welfare of all workers while  they are at work in the factory.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the matters to which such 
duty extends, shall include — 
(a) the provision and maintenance of plant and systems of work in the factory that are safe and 
without risks to health:  
(b) the arrangements in the factory for ensuring safety and absence of risks to health in 
connection with the use, handling, storage and transport of articles and substances;  
(c) the provisions of such information, instruction, training and supervision as are necessary to 
ensure the health and safety of all workers at work:  
(d) the maintenance of all places of work in the factory in a condi tion that is safe and without 
risks to health and the provision and maintenance of such  means of access to, and egress from, such 
places as are safe and without such risks;  
(e) the provision, maintenance or monitoring of such working environment in the fac tory for the 
workers that is safe, without risks to health and adequate as regards facilities and arrangements for 
their welfare at work.  
(3) Except in such cases as may be prescribed, every occupier shall prepare, and, as often as may be 
appropriate, revi se, a written statement o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 12]
, every occupier shall prepare, and, as often as may be 
appropriate, revi se, a written statement of  his general policy with respect to the health and safely of the 
workers at work and the organisation and  arrangements for the time being in force for carrying out that 
policy, and to bring the statement and any revision thereof t o the notice of all the workers in such manner 
as may be prescribed.  
7B. General duties of manufacturers, etc., as regards articles and substances for use in 
factories .—(1) Every person who designs, manufactures, imports or supplies any article for use in any 
factory, shall — 
(a) ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that the article is so designed and constructed as to 
be safe and without risks to the health of the workers when properly used;  
(b) carry out  or arrange for  the carrying out of such tests and examination as may be considered 
necessary for the effective implementation of the provisions of clause ( a); 
(c) take such steps as may be necessary to ensure that adequate information will be available — 
(i) in connection with the use of the article in any factory;  
(ii) about the use for which it is designed and tested; and  
(iii) about any conditions necessary to ensure that the article, when put to such use, will be 
safe, and without risks to the health of  the workers:  
Provided that where an article is designed or manufactured outside India, it shall be obligatory on the 
part of the importer to see — 
(a) that the article conforms to the same standards if such article is manufactured in India, or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 1954, s. 4, for “Chief Inspector a written notice” (w.e.f. 7 -5-1954).  
2. Ins. by Act 20 of 1987, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 13]
13 
 (b) if the s tandards adopted in the country outside for the manufacture of such article is above the 
standards adopted in India, that the article conforms to such standards.  
(2) Every  person, who undertakes to design or manufacture any article for use in any factory m ay 
carry out or arrange for the carrying out of necessary research with a view to the discovery and, so far as 
is reasonably practicable, the elimination or minimisation of any risks to the health or safety of the 
workers to which the design  or article may  give rise.  
(3) Nothing  contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall be construed to require a person to repeat the 
testing, examination or research which has been carried out otherwise than by  him or at  his instance in so 
far as it is reasonable for  him to  rely on the results thereof for the purposes of the said sub -sections.  
(4) Any duty imposed on any person by sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall extend only to things done in 
the course of business carried on by  him and to matters within  his control.  
(5) Where  a person designs, manufactures, imports or supplies an article on the basis of a written 
undertaking by the user of such article to take the steps specified in such undertaking to ensure, so far as 
is reasonably practicable, that the article will be safe and without risks to the health of the workers when 
properly used, the undertaking shall have the effect of relieving the person designing, manufacturing, 
importing or supplying the article from the duty imposed by clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) to such ext ent as 
is reasonable having regard to the terms of the undertaking.  
(6) For the purposes of this section, an article is not to be regarded as properly used if it is used 
without regard to any information or advice relating to its use which has been made av ailable by the 
person who has designed, manufactured, imported or supplied the article.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section ”, “a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 13]
nufactured, imported or supplied the article.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section ”, “article ” shall include plant and machinery].  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Tamil Nadu  
Insertion of new section 7 -AA.—After section 7-A of the Factories Act, 1948 (Central Act LXIII of 
1948), the following section shall be inserted, namely: -- 
“7-AA. Occupier of Match or Fire Works Factory to insure workers. --(1) The occupier of 
every factory wherein the manufacture of match or fire works is carried on shall get every worker 
employed in the factory insured for a sum of not less than fifty thousand rupees and keep the 
insurance alive so long as the worker is employed in the factory. The payment of premium for such 
insurance shall be th e liability of the occupier.  
(2) The occupier shall send to the Chief Inspector a report containing the details of the insurance 
referred to in sub -section (1) at such intervals with such particulars, in  such form and in such manner 
as may be prescribed by the State Government.  
(3) If an occupier fails to comply with the provisions of sub -section (1), the Chief Inspector may, 
after giving the occupier an opportunity of being heard and after considering th e representation, if 
any, cancel the licence granted under this Act.".  
[Vide Tamil Nadu Act 29 of 2007, s. 2]  
8. Inspectors .—(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint such 
persons as possess the prescribed qualification  to be Inspectors for the purposes of this Act and may 
assign to them such local limits as it may think fit.  
(2) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint any person to be a 
Chief Inspector who shall, in addition to the pow ers conferred on a Chief Inspector under this Act, 
exercise the powers of an Inspector throughout the State.  
1[(2A) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint as many Additional 
Chief Inspectors, Joint Chief Inspectors and Depu
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 13]
 the Official Gazette, appoint as many Additional 
Chief Inspectors, Joint Chief Inspectors and Deputy Chief Inspectors and as many other officers as it 
thinks fit to assist the Chief Inspector and to exercise such of the powers of the Chief Inspector as may be 
specified in such notification.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 94 of 1976, s. 6 (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 14]
14 
 (2B) Every Additional Chief Inspector, Joint Chief Inspect or, Deputy Chief Inspector and every other 
officer appointed under sub -section ( 2A) shall, in addition to the powers of a Chief Inspector specified in 
the notification by which he is appointed, exercise the power of an Inspector throughout the State].  
(3) No person shall be appointed under sub -section ( 1), sub -section ( 2)1[,sub-section ( 2A)] or sub -
section ( 5) or, having been so appointed, shall continue to hold office, who is or becomes directly or 
indirectly interested in a factory or in any process or b usiness carried on therein or in any patent or 
machinery connected therewith.  
(4) Every District Magistrate shal l be an Inspector for hi s district.  
(5) The State  Government may also, by notification as aforesaid, appoint such public officers as it 
thinks f it to be additional Inspectors for all or any of the purposes of this Act, within such local limits as it 
may assign to them respectively.  
(6) In any area where there are more Inspectors than one the State Government may, by notification 
as aforesaid, decl are the powers which such Inspectors shall respectively exercise and the Inspector to 
whom the prescribed notices are to be sent.  
(7)1[Every Chief Inspector, Additional Chief Inspector, Joint Chief Inspector, Deputy Chief Inspector 
and every other officer appointed under this section] shall be deemed to be a public servant within the 
meaning of the Indian Penal C ode ( 45 of 1860), and shall be officially subordinate to such authority as the 
State Government may specify in this behalf.  
9. Powers of  Inspectors .—Subject to any rules made in this behalf, an Inspector may within the local 
limits for which he is appointed, — 
(a) enter, with such assistants, being persons in the service of the Government or any local or 
other public authority,  2[or with an expert] as  he thinks fit, any place which is used, or which he has 
reason to believe is used, as a factor
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 14]
 as  he thinks fit, any place which is used, or which he has 
reason to believe is used, as a factory;  
3[(b) make examination of the premises, plant, machinery, article or substance;  
(c) inquire into any accident or dangerous occurrence, whether resulting in bo dily injury, 
disability or not, and take on the spot or otherwise statements of any person which he may consider 
necessary for such inquiry;  
(d) require the production of any prescribed register or any other document relating to the factory;  
(e) seize, or take copies of, any register, record or other document or any portion thereof as he 
may consider necessary in respect of any offence under this Act , which he has reason to believe, has 
been committed;  
(f) direct the occupier that any premises or any part thereof, or anything lying therein, shall be left 
undisturbed (whether generally or  in particular respects) for so  long as is necessary for the purpose of 
any examination under clause ( b); 
(g) take measurements and photographs and make such recordings as h e considers necessary for 
the purpose of any examination u nder clause ( b), taking with hi m any necessary instrument or 
equipment;  
(h) in case of any article or substance found in any premises, being an article or substance which 
appears to hi m as having c aused or is likely to cause danger to the health or safety of the workers, 
direct it to be dismantled or subject it to any process or test (but not so as to damage or destroy it 
unless the same is, in the circumstances necessary, for carrying out the purpo ses of this Act), and take 
possession of any such article or substance or a part thereof, and detain it for so long as is necessary 
for such examination;  
(i) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed:]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 94 of 1976 , s. 6 ,for “every Chief Inspector and Inspector” (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
2. Ins. by Act 20 of 1987, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1-12-1987
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 14]
f Inspector and Inspector” (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
2. Ins. by Act 20 of 1987, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1-12-1987).  
3. Subs. by s. 5, ibid.,  for clause ( b) and ( c) (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987 ).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 15]
15 
 10. Certifying surgeons .—(1) The State Government may appoint qualified medical practitioners to 
be certifying surgeons for the purposes of this Act within such local limits or for such factory or class or 
description of factories as it may assign to them respectively.  
(2) A certifying surgeon may, with the approval of the State Government, authorise any 
qualified  medical practitioner to exercise any of  his powers under this Act for such period as the 
certifying surgeon may specify and subject to such conditions as the State Government may think  fit to 
impose, and references in this Act to a certifying surgeon  shall be deemed to include references to any 
qualified  medical practitioner when so authorised.  
(3) No person  shall be appointed to be, or authorised to exercise the powers of, a certifying  surgeon, 
or having been so appointed or authorised, continue to exercise such powers, who is or becomes the 
occupier of a factory or is or becomes directly or indirectly interested therein or in any process or business 
carried on therein on in any process  or machinery connected therewith or is otherwise in the employ of 
the factory:  
1[Provided that the State Government may, by order in writing and subject to such conditions as may 
be specified in the order, exempt any person or class of persons from the pr ovisions of this sub -section in 
respect of any factory or class or description of factories.]  
(4) The certifying surgeon shall carry out such duties as may be prescribed in connection with — 
(a) the examination and certification of young persons this Act;  
(b) the examination  of person engaged in factories in such dangerous occupations or processes as 
may be prescribed;  
(c) the exercising of such  medical supervision as may be prescribed for any factory or class or 
description of factories where — 
(i) cases of illness have occurred which it is reasonable to believe are due to the nature of the 
manufacturing process carried on, o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 15]
 which it is reasonable to believe are due to the nature of the 
manufacturing process carried on, or other conditions of work prevailing, therein;  
(ii) by reason of any change in the manufacturing process carried on or in the substance s used 
therein or by reason of the adoption of any new manufacturing process or of any new substance for 
use in a manufacturing process, there is a likelihood of injury to the health of workers employed in 
that manufacturing process;  
(iii) young persons are, or are about to be, employed in any work which is likely to cause injury 
to their health.  
Explanation. —In this section “qualified  medical practitioner ” means a person holding a qualification 
granted by an authority specified in the Schedule to the Ind ian Medical Degrees Act,  1916  (7 of 1916), or 
in the Schedules to the Indian Medical Council Act,  1933  (27 of 1933)2. 
CHAPTER III  
HEALTH  
11. Cleanliness .—(1) Every factory shall be kept clean and free from effluvia arising from any drain, 
privy or other nuisance, and in particular — 
(a) accumulation of dirt and refuse shall be removed daily by sweeping or by any other 
effective  method from the floors and benches of workrooms and from staircases and passages, and 
disposed of in a suitable manner;  
(b) the fl oor of every workroom shall be cleaned at least once in every week by washing, using 
disinfectant, where necessary, or by some other effective  method;  
(c) where a floor is liable to become wet in the course of any manufacturing process to such 
extent as is  capable of being drained, effective  means of drainage shall be provided and maintained;  
(d) all inside walls and partitions, all ceilings or tops of rooms and all walls, sides and tops of 
passages and staircases shall — 
(i) where they are  3[painted otherwi se than with washable water -paint] or varnished, be re -
painted or re -varnished at least once in every period of five years;  
                                                    
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 15]
 at least once in every period of five years;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 94 of 1976, s. 7 (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
2. See now  the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956).  
3. Subs. by Act 94 of 1976, s. 8, for “painted” (w.e.f. 26-10-1976).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 16]
16 
 1[(ia) where they are painted with washable water -paint, be re -painted with at least one coat 
of such paint at least once in every p eriod of three years and washed at least once in every period 
of six months;]  
(ii) where they are painted or varnished or where they have smooth impervious surfaces be 
cleaned at least once in every period of fourteen months by such  method as may be prescr ibed;  
(iii) in any other case, be kept white washed or colour  washed, and the white washing or 
colour  washing shall be carried out at least once in every period of fourteen months;  
2[(dd) all doors and window frames and other wooden or  metallic framework and shutters shall be 
kept painted or varnished and the painting or varnishing shall be carried out at least once in every 
period of five years;]  
(e) the dates on which the processes required by clause ( d) are carried out shall be entered in the 
prescribed  register.  
(2) If, in  view of the nature of the operations carried on  3[in a factory or class or description of 
factories or any part of a factory or class or description of factories], it is not possible for the occupier to 
comply with all or any of the p rovisions of sub section ( 1), the State Government may by order exempt 
such factory or class or description of factories  4[or part] from any of the provisions of that sub -section 
and specify alternative  methods for keeping the factory in a clean stale.  
12. Disposal of wastes and effluents .—5[(1) Effective arrangements shall be made in every factory 
for the treatment of wastes and effluents due to the manufacturing process carried on therein, so as to 
render them innocuous, and for their disposal.]  
(2) The S tate Government may make rules prescribing the arrangements  to be made under sub -section 
(1) or requiring that the arrangements made in  accordance with sub -section ( 1) shall be approved by such 
authority as may be prescribed.  
13. Ventilation and temperature .—(1) Effective
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 16]
 approved by such 
authority as may be prescribed.  
13. Ventilation and temperature .—(1) Effective and suitable provision shall be made in ever 
factory for securing and maintaining in every workroom — 
(a) adequate ventilation by the circulation of fresh air, and  
(b) such a temperature as will secure to workers therein reasonable conditions of comfort and 
prevent injury to health;  
and in particular, — 
(i) walls and roofs shall be of such material and so designed that such temperature shall not be 
exceeded bill kept as tow as practicable;  
(ii) where the nature of t he work carried on in the factory involves, or is likely to involve the 
production of excessively high temperatures, such adequate measures as are practicable shall be taken 
to protect the workers therefrom, by separating the process which produces such te mperatures from 
the workroom, by insulating the hot parts or by other effective means.  
(2) The State Government may prescribe a standard of adequate ventilation and reasonable 
temperature for any factory or class or description of factories or parts thereo f and direct that6[proper me 
assuring instruments, at such places and in such position as may be specified, shall be provided and such 
records, as may be prescribed, shall be maintained.]  
7[(3) If it appears to the Chief Inspector that excessively high tem peratures in any factory can be 
reduced by the adoption of suitable me assures, he may, without prejudice to the  rules made under  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 94 of 1976, s. 8 (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
2. Ins. by s. 8 , ibid.  (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
3. Subs. by s. 8,ibid.,for “in a factory” (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
4. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
5. Subs. by s. 9, ibid.,  for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
6. Subs. by Act 20 of 1987, s. 6, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
7. Subs. by s. 6, ibid.,  for “sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 16]
(w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
7. Subs. by s. 6, ibid.,  for “sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 17]
17 
 sub-section ( 2), serve on the occupier, an order in writing specify ing the me assures which, in hi s opinion, 
should be adopted, and requiring them to be carried out before a specified date.]  
14. Dust and fume .—(1) In every factory in which, by reason of the manufacturing process carried 
on, there is given off any dust or fume or other impurity of such a nature and to such an extent as is likely 
to be injurious or offensive to the workers employed therein, or any dust in substantial quantities, 
effective measures shall be taken to prevent its inhalation and accumulation in any workroom, and if any 
exhaust appliance is necess ary for this purpose, it shall be applied as near as possible to the point of origin 
of the dust, fume or other impurity, and such point shall be enclosed so far as possible.  
(2) In any factory no stationary internal combustion engine shall be operated unl ess the exhaust is 
conducted into the open air, and no other internal combustion engine shall be operated in any room unless 
effective  measures have been taken to prevent such accumulation of fumes therefrom as are likely to be 
injurious to workers employe d in the room.  
15. Artificial humidification .—(1) In respect of all factories in which the humidity  of the air is 
artificially increased, the State Government may make rules, — 
(a) prescribing standards of humidification;  
(b) regulating the methods used for  artificially increasing the humidity of the air;  
(c) directing prescribed tests for determining the humidity of the air to be correctly carried out 
and recorded;  
(d) prescribing  methods to be adopted for securing adequate ventilation and cooling of the air in 
the workrooms.  
(2) In any factory in which the humidity of the air is artificially increased, the water used for the 
purpose shall be taken from a public supply, or other source of drinking water, or shall be effectively 
purified before it is so use d. 
(3) If it appears to an Inspector that 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 17]
r, or shall be effectively 
purified before it is so use d. 
(3) If it appears to an Inspector that the water used in a factory for increasing humidity which is 
required to be effectively purified under sub -section ( 2) is not effectively purified he may serve on the 
manager of the factory an order in writing, spe cifying the  measures which in  his opinion should be 
adopted, and requiring them to be carried out before specified date.  
16. Overcrowding .—(1) No room in any factory shall be overcrowded to an extent injurious to the 
health of the workers employed therein.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub -section ( 1) there shall be in every workroom of a 
factory in existence on the date of the commencement of this Act at least1[9.9 cubic meters] and of a 
factory built after the commencement of this Act at leas t2[14.2 cubic meters] of space for every worker 
employed therein, and for the purposes of this sub -section no account shall be taken of any space which is 
more than3[4.2 meters] above the level of the floor of the room.  
(3) If the Chief Inspector by order in writ ing so requires, the re shall be posted in each workroom of a 
factory a notice specifying the maximum number of workers who may, in compliance with the provisions 
of this section, be employed in the room.  
(4) The Chief Inspector may by order in writing exempt, subject to such conditions, if any, as he may 
think fit to impose, any workroom from the provisions of this section, if he is satisfied that compliance 
therewith in respect of the room is unnecessary in the interest of the health of the wor kers employed 
therein.  
17. Lighting .—(1) In every pan of a factory where workers are working of passing there shall be 
provided and maintained sufficient and suitable lighting, natural or artificial, or both.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 20 of 1987, s. 7 for “three hundred and fifty cubic feet” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
2. Su
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 17]
 Subs. by Act 20 of 1987, s. 7 for “three hundred and fifty cubic feet” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
2. Subs. by s. 7, ibid.,  for “five hundred cubic feet” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
3. Subs. by s. 7, ibid.,  for “fourteen feet” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 18]
18 
 (2) In every factory all glazed windows and sky lights used for the lighting of the workrooms shall be 
kept clean on both the inner and outer surfaces and, so far as compliance with the provisions of any rules 
made under sub -section ( 3) of section 13 will allow, free from obstruction.  
(3) In even factor y effective provision shall, so far as is practicable, be made for the prevention of — 
(a) glare, either directly from a source of light or by reflection from a smooth or polished surface:  
(b) the formation of shadows to such an extent as to cause eye -strain or the risk of accident to any 
worker.  
(4) The  State Government may prescribe  standards of sufficient and suitable lighting for factories or 
for any class or description of factories or for any manufacturing process.  
18. Drinking water .—(1) In every factory effective arrangements shall be made to provide and 
maintain at suitable points conveniently situated for all workers employed therein a sufficient supply of 
wholesome drinking water.  
(2) All such  points shall be legibly marked “drinking  water ” in a language understood by a majority 
of the workers employed in the factory, and no such point shall be situated within  1[six meters of any 
washing place, urinal, latrine, spittoon, open drain carrying sull  age or effluent or any other source of 
contamination] unless a shorter distance is approved in writing by the Chief Inspector.  
(3) In every factory wherein more than two hundred and fifty workers are ordinarily employed, 
provision shall be made for cool drinking water during hot weather by effe ctive means and for 
distribution thereof.  
(4) In respect of all factories or any class or description of factories the State Government may make 
rules for securing compliance with the provisions of sub -sections ( 1), (2) and ( 3) and for the examination 
by prescribed authorities of the supply and distribution of drinking water in factories.  
19. Latrines and urinals .—(1) In ever
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 18]
the supply and distribution of drinking water in factories.  
19. Latrines and urinals .—(1) In every factory — 
(a) sufficient latrine and urinal accommodation of prescribed types shall be provided 
conveniently situated and accessible  to workers at all times while they are at factory;  
(b) separate enclosed accommodation shall be provided for male and female workers;  
(c) such accommodation shall be adequately lighted and ventilated, and no latrine or urinal shall, 
unless specially exempted in writing by the Chief Inspector, communicate with any work room except 
through an intervening open space or ventilated passage;  
(d) all such accommodation shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all times;  
(e) sweepers shall be employed whose primary duty it would be to keep clean latrines, urinals and 
washing places.  
(2) In every factory wherein more than two hundred and fifty workers are ordinarily employed — 
(a) all latrine and urinal accommodation shall be of prescribed sanita ry types;  
(b) the floors and internal walls, up to a height of2[ninety centimeters], of the latrines and urinals 
and the sanitary blocks shall be laid in glazed tiles or otherwise finished to provide a smooth polished 
impervious surface;  
(c) without prejud ice to the provisions of clauses ( d) and ( e) of sub -section ( 1), the floors, 
portions of the walls and blocks so laid or finished and the sanitary pans of latrines and urinals shall 
be thoroughly washed and cleaned at least once in every seven days with su itable detergents or 
disinfectants or with both.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 20 of 1987, s.  8, for “twenty feet of any washing place, urinal or latrine” (w.e .f. 1-12-1987).  
2. Subs. Act 20 of 1987, by s. 9, “three feet” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 19]
19 
 (3) The State Government may prescribe the number of latrines and urinals to be provided in any 
factory in proportion to the numbers of male and female workers ordinarily employed therein, and 
provide for su ch further mailers in respect of sanitation in factories, including the obligation of workers in 
this regard, as it considers necessary in the interest of the health of the workers employed therein.  
20. Spittoons .—(1) In every factory there shall be provid ed a sufficient number of spittoons in 
convenient places and they shall be maintained in a clean and hygienic condition.  
(2) The State Government may make rules prescribing the type and the number of spittoons to be 
provided and their location in any factory and provide for such further matters relating to their 
maintenance in a clean and hygienic condition.  
(3) No person  shall spit within the premises of a factory except in the spittoons provided for the 
purpose and a notice containing this provision and the penalty for its violation shall be prominently 
displayed at suitable places in the premises.  
(4) Whoever spits in contravention of sub -section ( 3) shall be punishable with fine not exceeding five 
rupees.  
CHAPTER IV  
SAFETY  
21. Fencing of machinery .—(1) In every factory the following, namely: — 
(i) every moving part of a prime mover and every flywheel connected to a prime mover, whether 
the prime mover or flywheel is in the engine house or not;  
(ii) the headrace and tailrace of every water -wheel and wa ter turbine:  
(iii) any part of a stock -bar which projects beyond the head stock of a lathe; and  
(iv) unless they are in such position or of such construction as to be safe to every person 
employed in the factory as they would be if they were securel y fenced, the following, namely :— 
(a) every part of an electric generator, a motor or rotary converter;  
(b) every part of transmission machinery; and  
(c) ever dangerous part of any other machinery;  
shall be secur
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 19]
rt of transmission machinery; and  
(c) ever dangerous part of any other machinery;  
shall be securely fenced by safeguards of substantial constr uction which  1[shall be constantly maintained 
and kept in position] while the parts of machinery the y are fencing are in motion or in use:  
2[Provided that for the purpose of determining whether any part of machinery is in such position or is 
of such const ruction as to be safe as aforesaid, account shall not be taken of any occasion when — 
(i) it is necessary to make an examination of any part of the machinery afo resaid while it is in 
motion or , a s a result of such examination, to carry out lubrication or o ther adjusting operation while 
the machinery is in motion, being an examination or operation which it is necessary to be carried out 
while that part of the machinery is in motion, or  
(ii) in the case of any part of a transmission machinery used in such pro cess as may be prescribed 
(being a process of a continuous nature the currying on of which shall be, or is likely to be , 
substantially interfered with by the stoppage of that part of the machinery), it is necessary to make an 
examination of such part of t he machinery while it is in motion or, a s a result of such examination, to 
carry out any mounting or shipping of belts or lubrication or other adjusting operation while the 
machinery is in motion,  
and such examination or operation is made or carried out i n accordance with the provisions of sub -section 
(1) of section 22.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 94 of 1976, s. 10, for “shall be kept in position” (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
2. Subs. by s. 10, ibid.,  for the proviso (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 20]
20 
 (2) The State Government may by rules prescribe such further precautions as it may consider 
necessary in respect of any particular machinery  or part thereof, or exempt, subject to such condition as 
may be prescribed, for securing the safety of the workers, any particular machinery or part thereof from 
the provisions of this section.  
22. Work on or near machinery in motion .—(1) 1[Where in any f actory it becomes necessary to 
examine any part of machinery referred  to in section  21, while the machinery is in motion, or, as a result 
of such examination, to carry out — 
(a) in case referred  to in clause ( i) of the proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section  21, lubrication or 
other adjusting operation; or  
(b) in a case  referred to in clause ( ii) of the proviso aforesaid, any mounting or shipping of belts 
or lubrication or other adjusting operation,  
while the machinery is in motion, such examination or  operation shall be made or carried out  only by a 
specially trained adult male worker wearing tight fitting clothing (which shall be supplied by the 
occupier) whose name has been recorded in the register prescribed in this behalf and who has been 
furnished  with a certificate of  this appointment, and while he is so engaged, — 
(a) such worker shall not handle a belt at a  moving pulley unless — 
(i) the belt is not more than fifteen centimeters in width;  
(ii) the pulley is normally for the purpose of drive and no t merely a fly -wheel or balance 
wheel (in which case a belt is not permissible);  
(iii) the belt joint is either laced or flush with the belt;  
(iv) the belt, including the joint and the pulley rim, are in good repair;  
(v) there is reasonable clearance betwe en the pulley and any fixed plant or structure;  
(vi) secure foothold and, where necessary, secure handhold, are provided for the operator;  and 
(vii) any ladder in use for carrying out any examination or operation aforesaid is securely 
fixed or lashed or is  firmly held b
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 20]
arrying out any examination or operation aforesaid is securely 
fixed or lashed or is  firmly held by a second person;]  
(b) without prejudice to any other provision of this Act relating to the fencing of machinery, 
every set  screw, bolt and key on any revolving shaft, spindle, wheel or pinion, and all spur, worm and 
other toothed or frictio n gearing in motion with which such worker would otherwise be liable to come 
into contact, shall be securely fenced to prevent such contact.  
2[(2) No woman or young person shall be allowed to clean, lubricate or adjust any part of a prime 
mover or of any t ransmission machinery while the prime mover or transmission machinery is in motion, 
or to clean, lubricate or adjust any part of any machine if the cleaning, lubrication or adjustment thereof 
would expose the woman or young person to risk of injury from an y moving part either of that machine or 
of any adjacent machinery.]  
(3) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazelle, prohibit, in any specified 
factory or class or description of factories, the cleaning, lubricating or adjusting by an y person of 
specified parts of machinery when those parts are in motion.  
23. Employment of young persons on dangerous machines .—(1) No young person  3[shall be 
required or allowed to work] at any machine to which this section applies, unless he has been fully 
instructed as to  the dangers arising in connection with the ma chine and the precautions to be observed 
and— 
(a) has received sufficient training in work at the machine, or  
(b) is under adequate supervision by a person who has a thorough knowledge and  experience of 
the machine.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 94 of 1976, s. 10, for the opening paragraph and clause ( a) (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
2. Subs. by Act 25 of 1954, s. 6, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 7 -5-1954).  
3. Subs. by Act 20 of 1987, s. 10, for “shall work” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 20]
(w.e.f. 7 -5-1954).  
3. Subs. by Act 20 of 1987, s. 10, for “shall work” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 21]
21 
 (2) Sub -section ( 1) shall apply to such machines as may be prescribed by the State Government, being 
machines which in its opinion are of such a dangerous character that young persons ought no t to work at 
them unless the foregoing requirements are complied with.  
24. Striking gear and devices for cutting off power .—(1) In every factory — 
(a) suitable striking gear or other efficient me chemical appliance shall be provided and 
maintained and used to move driving belts to and from fast and loose pulleys which form part of the 
transmission machinery, and such gear or appliances shall be so constructed, placed and maintained 
as to prevent the belt from creeping back on the fast pulley;  
(b) driving bel ts when not in use shall not be allowed to rest or ride upon shafting in motion.  
(2) In every  factory suitable devices for cutting off power in emergencies from running machinery 
shall be provided a nd maintained in every workroom : 
Provided that in respect of factories in operation before the commencement of this Act, the provisions 
of this sub -section shall apply only to workrooms in which electricity is used as power.  
1[(3) When a device, which can inadvertently shift from “off “ to “on” position, is provi ded in a 
factory to cut off power, arrangements shall be provided for locking the device in safe position to prevent 
accidental starting of the transmission machinery or other machines to which the device is fitted].  
25. Self-acting machines .—No traversing  part of a self -acting machine in any factory and no 
material carried thereon shall, if the space over which it runs is a space over which any person is liable to 
pass, whether in the course of hi s employment or otherwise, be allowed to run on its outward or inward 
traverse within a distance of  2[forty -five centimeters] from any fixed structure which is not part of the 
machine:  
Provided that the Chief Inspector may permit the continued use of a machine installed before the 

<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 21]
 
Provided that the Chief Inspector may permit the continued use of a machine installed before the 
commencement of this Act which does not comply with the requirements of this section on such 
conditions for ensuring safety as he may think fit to impose.  
26. Casing of new machinery .—(1) In all machinery driven by power and installed in any factory 
after the commencement of this Act, — 
(a) every set screw, bolt or key on any revolving shaft, spindle, wheel or pinion shall be so sunk, 
encased or otherwise effective ly guarded as to prevent danger ; 
(b) all spur, worm and other toothed or friction gearing which does not require frequent 
adjustment while in motion shall be completely encased, unless it is so situated as to be as safe as it 
would be if it were completely encased.  
(2) Whoever sells or lets on hi re or, as agent of a seller or hirer, causes or procures to be sold or let 
on hi re,  for use in a factory any machinery driven by power which does not comply with the provisions 
of 3[sub-section ( 1) or any  rules made under sub -section ( 3)], shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to three months or with fine which may extend to f ive hundred rupees or with 
both.  
4[(3) The State Government may make rules specifying further safeguards to be provided in respect of 
any other dangerous part of any particular machine or class or description of machines.]  
27. Prohibit ion of employment of women and children near cotton -openers .—No woman or child 
shall be employed in any part of a factory for pressing cotton in which a cotton opener is at work:  
Provided that if the feed -end of a cotton -opener is in a room separated from the delivery end by a 
partition extending to the roof or  to such height as the Inspector may  in any particular case specify in 
writing, women and children may be employed on the side of the partition where the feed -end is situated.  
                                                           

<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 21]
tion where the feed -end is situated.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 94 of 1976,  s. 12 (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
2. Subs. by Act 20 of 1987, s. 11, for “eighteen inches” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
3. Subs. by Act 25 of 1954, s. 7, for “sub -section ( 1)” (w.e.f. 7 -5-1954).  
4. Subs. by s. 7, ibid.,  for “sub -section ( 3)” (w.e.f. 7 -5-1954).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 22]
22 
 28. Hoists and lifts .—(1) In every factory — 
(a) every hoist and lift shall be — 
(i) of good  mechanical construction, sound material and adequate strength;  
(ii) properly maintained, and shall be thoroughly examined by a competent person at least once in 
every period of six months, and a register shall be kept containing the prescribed particulars of very such 
examination;  
(b) every hoistway and lift way shall be sufficiently protected by an enclosure fitted with gates, and the 
hoist or lift and every such enclosure shall be so const ructed as to prevent any person or thing from being 
trapped between any part of the hoist or lift and any fixed structure or moving part;  
(c) the maximum safe working  load shall be plainly marked on every hoist or lift, and no  load greater than 
such toad s hall be carried thereon;  
(d) the cage of every hoist or lift used for carrying persons shall be fitted with a gate on each side from 
which access is afforded to a landing;  
(e) every gate referred to in clause ( b) or clause ( d) shall be fitted with interloc king or other efficient device 
to secure that the gate cannot be opened except when the cage is at the landing and that the cage cannot be 
moved unless the gate is closed.  
(2) The following additional requirement shall apply to hoists and lifts used for ca rrying persons and installed or 
reconstructed in a factory after the commencement of  this Act, namely: — 
(a) where the cage is supported by rope or chain, there shall be at least two ropes of chains separately 
connected with the cage and balance weight, and  each rope or chain with its attachments shall be capable of 
carrying the whole weight of the cage together with its maximum  load;  
(b) efficient devices shall be provided and maintained capable of supporting the cage together with its 
maximum  load in the e vent of breakage of the ropes, chains or attachments;  
(c) an efficient automatic device shall be provided and maintained to preven
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 22]
hains or attachments;  
(c) an efficient automatic device shall be provided and maintained to prevent the cage from over -running.  
(3) The Chief Inspector may permit the continued, use of a hoist of lift installed in a factory before the 
commencement of  this Act which does not fully comply with the provisions of sub -section ( 1) upon such conditions 
for ensuring safely as he may think fit to impose.  
(4) The State Government may, if in respect of any class or description of hoist or lift, it is of opinion that it 
would be unreasonable to enforce any requirement of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), by order direct that such requirement 
shall not apply to such class or description of hoist or lift.  
1[Explanation. —For the purposes of this sec tion, no lifting machine or appliance shall be deemed to be a hoist 
or lift unless it has a platform or cage, the direction or movement of which is restricted by a guide or guides.]  
2[29. Lifting machines, chains, ropes and lifting tackles .—(1) In any factor the following provisions shall be 
complied with in respect of every lifting machine (other than a hoist and lift) and every chain, rope and lifting tackle 
for the purpose of raising or  lower ing persons, goods or materials :— 
(a) all parts, i ncluding the working gear, whether fixed or movable, of every lifting machine and every 
chain, rope or lifting tackle shall be — 
(i) of good construction, ” sound material and adequate strength and free from defects;  
(ii) properly maintained; and  
(iii) thoro ughly examined by a competent person at least once in every period of twelve months, or at 
such intervals as the Chief Inspector may specify in writing; and a register shall be kept containing the 
prescribed particulars of every such examination;  
(b) no li fting machine and no chain, rope or lifting tackle shall, except for the purpose of test be loaded 
beyond the safe working toad which shall be plainly marked thereon together with an identification mark and
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 22]
the safe working toad which shall be plainly marked thereon together with an identification mark and 
duly entered in the prescribed register; and wher e this is not practicable, a table showing the safe working  loads 
of every kind and size of lifting machine or chain, rope or lifting tackle in use shall be displayed in prominent 
positions on the premises;  
(c) while any  person is employed or working on or  near the wheel track of a travelling crane in any place 
where he would be liable to be struck by the crane, effective  measures shall be taken to ensure  that the crane 
does not approach within  3[six meters] of that place.  
(2) The State Government may make rules in respect of any lifting machine or any chain, rope or 
lifting tackle used in factories — 
(a) prescribing further requirements to be complied with in addition  to those set out in  this 
section;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 20 of 1987, s. 12 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
2. Subs. by Act 25 of 1954, s. 8, for section 29 (w.e.f. 7 -5-1954).  
3. Subs. by Act 20 of 1987, s. 13, for “twenty feet” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 23]
23 
 (b) providing for exemption from compliance with all or a ny of the requirements of this section, 
where in its opinion, such compliance is unnecessary or impracticable.  
(3) For the purposes of  this section a lifting machine or a chain, rope or lifting tackle shall be deemed 
to have been thoroughly examined if a v isual examination supplemented,  if necessary, by other  means 
and by  the dismantling of parts of the gear, has been carried out as carefully as the conditions permit in 
order  to arrive at a reliable conclusion as to the safely of the parts examined.  
Explana tion.—In this section. — 
(a) “lifting machine ” means a crane, crab, winch, teagle, pulley block, gin wheel, transporter or 
runway;  
1[(b) “lifting tackle ” means any chain sling, rope sling, hook, shackle, swivel, coupling, socket, 
clamp, tray or similar appliance, whether fixed or movable,  used in connection with the raising 
or lowering of persons, or  loads by use of lifting machines.]  
30. Revolving machinery .—(1)2[In every factory] in which the process of grinding is carried on 
there  shall be permanently  affixed t o or placed near each machine in use a notice indicating the maximum 
safe working peripheral speed of every grindstone or abrasive wheel, the speed of the shaft or spindle 
upon which the wheel is mounted, and the diameter of the pulley upon such shaft or spindle necessary to 
secure such safe working peripheral speed.  
(2) The speeds indicated in notices un der sub -section ( 1) shall not be exceeded.  
(3) Effective me assures shall be taken in every factory to ensure that the safe working peripheral 
speed of every revolving vessel, cage, basket, fly -wheel, pulley, disc or similar appliance driven by power 
is not exceeded.  
31. Pressure plant .—3[(1) If in any factory, any plant or machinery or any part thereof is operated at 
a pressure above atmospheric pressure, effective measures shall be taken to ensure that the safe working 
pressure of such plant 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 23]
pressure, effective measures shall be taken to ensure that the safe working 
pressure of such plant or machinery or part is not exceeded.]  
(2) The State Government may make rules providing for the examination and testing of any plant or 
machinery such as is referred to in sub -section ( 1) and prescribing such other safety me assures in relation 
thereto as may in its opinion be necessary in any factory or class or description of factories.  
4[(3) The State Government may, by rules, exempt, subject to such condi tions as may be specified 
therein, any part of any plant or machine ry referred to in sub -section ( 1) from the provisions of this 
section.]  
32. Floors, stairs and means of access .—In every factory — 
(a) all floors, steps, stairs, passages and gangways shall be of sound construction and properly 
maintained5[and shall be kept free from obstructions and substances likely to cause persons to slip], 
and where it is necessary to ensure safety, steps, stairs, passages and gangways shall be prov ided with 
substantial handrails ; 
(b) there  shall, so far as is reasonably practicable, be provided and maintained safe means of 
access to every place at which any person is at any time required to work.  
6[(c) when any person has to  work at a height from where he is likely to fall, provision shall be 
made, so far as is reasonably practicable, by fencing or otherwise, to ensure the safety of the person 
so working.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 20 of 1987 , s. 13, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
2. Subs. by s. 14, ibid.,  for “in every room in a factory” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
3. Subs. by s. 15, ibid.,  for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
4. Ins. by Act 94 of 1976, s. 13 (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
5. Ins. by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
6. Subs. by  Act 20 of 1987 ,  s. 16, for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 23]
c) (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 24]
24 
 33. Pits, sumps openings in floors, etc .—(1) In every factory every fixed vessel, sump, tank, pit or 
opening in the ground or in a floor which, by reason of its depth, situation, construction or contents, is or 
may be a source of danger, shall  be either securely covered or securely fenced.  
(2) The State Government may, by order in writing, exempt, subject to such conditions as may be 
prescribed, any factory or class or description of factories in respect of any vessel, sump, tank, pit or 
opening from compliance with the provisions of this section.  
34. Excessive weights .—(1) No person shall be employed in any factory to lift, carry or move any 
load so heavy as to be likely to cause  him injury.  
(2) The State Government may make rules prescribing the maximum weights which may be lifted, 
carried or moved by adult  men, adult wome n, adolescents and children employed in factories or in any 
class or description of factories or in carrying or any specified process.  
35. Protection of eyes .—In respect of any such manufacturing process carried on in any factory as 
may be prescribed, bein g a process which involves — 
(a) risk of injury to the eyes from particles or fragments thrown off in the course of the process, 
or 
(b) risk  to the eyes by reason of exposure to excessive light,  the State Government may by rules 
require that effective screens or suitable goggles shall be provided for the protection of persons 
employed on, or in the immediately vicinity of, the process.  
1[36. Precautions against dangerous fumes, gases, etc .—(1) No person shall be required or allowed 
to enter any chamber,  tank, vat, pit, pipe, flue or other confined space in any factory in which any gas, 
fume vapour or dust is likely to be present to such an extent as to involve risk to persons being overcome 
thereby, unless it is provided with a manhole of adequate size o r other effective means of egress.  
(2) No person shall be required or allowed to enter any confine
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 24]
r other effective means of egress.  
(2) No person shall be required or allowed to enter any confined space as is referred to in                
sub-section ( 1), until all practicable me assures have been taken to remove any gas, fume, vapour or dust, 
which m ay be present so as to bring its level within the permissible limits and t o prevent any ingress of 
such g as, fume, vapour or dust and unless — 
(a) a certificate in writing has been given by a competent person, based on a test carried out by 
himself that the  space is reasonably free from dangerous gas , fume, vapour or dust; or  
(b) such person is wearing suitable breathing apparatus and a belt securely attached to a rope the 
free end of which is held by a person outside the confined space.]  
2[36A. Precautions regarding the use of portable electric light .—In any factory — 
(a) no portable electric light or any other electric appliance of voltage exceeding twenty -four 
volts shall be permitted for use inside any chamber, tank, vat, pit, pipe, flue or ot her confined 
space3[unless adequate safety devices are provided]; and  
(b) if any inflammable gas, fume or dust is likely to be present in such chamber, tank, vat, pit, 
pipe, flue or other confined space, no lamp or light other than that flame -proof constru ction shall be 
permitted to be used therein.]  
37. Explosive  or inflammable dust, gas, etc .—(1) Where in any factory any manufacturing process 
produces dust, gas, fume or vapour of such character and to such extent as to be likely to explode on 
ignition, al l practicable measure shall be taken to prevent any such explosion by — 
(a) effective enclosure of the plant or machinery used in the process;  
(b) removal or prevention of the accumulation of such dust, gas, fume or vapour;  
(c) exclusion or effective enclosure of all possible sources of ignition.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 20 of 1987 ,  s. 17, for section 36 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 24]
                          
1. Subs. by Act 20 of 1987 ,  s. 17, for section 36 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
2. Ins. by Act 94 of 1976, s. 16 (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
3. Ins. by Act 20 of 1987, s. 18 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 25]
25 
 (2) Where in any factory the plant or machinery used in a process such as is referred to in sub -section ( 1) is not 
so constructed as to withstand the probable pressure which such an explosion as aforesaid woul d produce, all 
practicable  measures shall be taken to restrict the spread and effects of the explosion by the provision in the plant or 
machinery of chokes, baffles, vents or other effective appliances.  
(3) Where any part of  the plant or machinery in a fac tory contains any explosive or inflammable gas or vapour 
under pressure greater than atmospheric pressure, that part shall not be opened except in accordance with the 
following provisions, namely: — 
(a) before the fastening of any joint of any pipe connecte d with the part or the fastening of the cover of any 
opening into the part is loosened, any flow of the gas or vapour into the part of any such pipe shall be 
effectively stopped by a stop -valve or other  means;  
(b) before any such fastening as aforesaid is removed, all practicable  measures shall be taken  to reduce the 
pressure of the gas or vapour in the part or pipe to atmospheric pressure;  
(c) where any such fastening as aforesaid has been loosened or removed effective  measures shall be taken 
or prevent any explosive or inflammable gas or vapour from entering the part or pipe until the fastening has 
been secured, or the case may be, securely r eplaced;  
Provided that the provisions of this sub -section shall not apply in the case of plant or machinery installed in the 
open air.  
(4) No plant, tank or vessel which contains or has contained any explosive or inflammable substance shall be 
subjected in  any factory to any welding, brazing, soldering or cutting operation which involves the application of 
heat unless adequate  measures have first been taken to remove such substance and any fumes arising therefrom or to 
render such substance and fumes non -explosive or non -inflammable, and  no such substance shall be allowe
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 25]
 such substance and fumes non -explosive or non -inflammable, and  no such substance shall be allowed to enter 
such plant, tank or vessel after any such operation until the  metal has cooled sufficiently to prevent any risk of 
igniting the substance.  
(5) The State Government may by rules exe mpt, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, any factory or 
class or description of factories from compliance with all or any of the provisions of this section.   
1[38. Precautions in case of fire .—(1) In every factory, all practicable me assures s hall he taken to prevent 
outbreak of fire and its spread, both internally and externally, and to provide and maintain — 
(a) safe means of escape for all persons in the event of a fire, and  
(b) the necessary equipment and facilities for extinguishing fire.  
(2) Effective me assures shall be taken to ensure that in every factory all the workers are familiar with the 
means of escape in case of fire and have been adequately trained in the routine to be f ollowed in such cases.  
(3) The State Government may make rul es, in respect of any factory or class or descript ion of factories, 
requiring the meassures to be adopted to give effect to the provisions of sub -section ( 1) and ( 2). 
(4) Notwithstanding  anything contained  in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), if the Chief 
Inspector, having regard to the nature of the work carried on in any factory, the construction of such factory, special 
risk to life or safety, or any other circumstances, is of the opinion that the me assures provided in the factory, 
wheth er as prescribed or not, for the purposes  of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) or sub -section  (2), are inadequate, he 
may, by order in writing, require that such additional me assures as he may consider reasonable and necessary, be 
provided in the factory befo re such date as is specified in the order.]  
39. Power to require specifications of defective parts or tests of stability .
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 25]
fied in the order.]  
39. Power to require specifications of defective parts or tests of stability .—If it appears to the Inspector that 
any building or part of a building or any part of the ways, machinery or plant in a factory is in such a condition that 
it may be dangerous to human life or safe ty, he may serve on  2[the occupier or manger or both] of th e factory an 
order in writing requiring hi m before a specified date — 
(a) to furnish such drawings, specifications and other particulars as may be necessary to determine whether 
such building, ways, machinery or plant can be used with safety, or  
(b) to car ry out such tests in such manner as may be specified in the order, and to inform the Inspector of 
the results thereof.  
40. Safety of buildings and machinery .—(1) If it appears to the Inspector that any building or part of a 
building or any part of the ways, machinery or plant in a factory is in such a condition that it is dangerous to human 
life or safety, he may serve on  1[the occupier or manager or both] of the factory an order in writing specif ying the 
me assures which in hi s opinion should be adopte d, and requiring them to be carried out before a specified date.  
(2) If it appears to the Inspector that the use of any building or part of a building or any part of the ways, 
machinery or plant in a factory involves imminent danger to human life or safety, he may serve on  1[the occupier or 
manager or both] of the factory an order in writing prohibiting its use until it has been properly repaired or altered.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 20 of 1987, s. 19, for section 38 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
2. Subs. by Act 94 of 1976, s. 18, for “the manager” (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 26]
26 
 1[40A. Maintenance of buildings .—If it appears to the Inspector that any building or part of a  
building in a factory is in such a state of disrepair as is likely to lead to conditions detrimental to the 
health and welfare of the workers, he may serve on the occupier or manager or both of the factory an 
order in writing specifying the me assures whi ch in his opinion should be taken and requiring the same to 
be carried out before such dat e as is specified in the order. ] 
40B. Safety Officers .—(1) In every factory — 
(i) wherein one thousand or more workers arc ordinarily employed, or  
(ii) wherein, in the  opinion of the State Government, any manufacturing process or operation is 
carried on, which process or operation involves any risk of bodily injury, poisoning or disease, or any 
other hazard to health, to the persons employed in the factory,  
the occupier  shall, if so, required by the State Government by notification in the Official Gazette, employ 
such number of Safety Officers as may be specified in that notification.  
(2) The duties, qualifications and conditions of service of Safety Officer shall be suc h as may be 
prescribed by the State Government.]  
41. Power to make rules to supplement this Chapter .—The State Government may make rules 
requiring the provision in any factory or in any class or description of factories of such further2[devices 
and me assu res] for securing the safely of persons employed therein as it may deem necessary.  
3[CHAPTER IVA  
PROVISION RELATING TO HAZARDOUS PROCESSES  
41A. Constitution of Site Appraisal Committees .—(1) The State Government may,  for purposes of 
advising it to consider  applications for grant of permission for the initial location of a factory involving a 
hazardous process or for the expansion of an such factory, appoint a Site Appraisal Committee consisting 
of— 
(a) the Chief Inspector of the State who shall be its Chair man;  
(b) a representative of the Central  Board for the Preve
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 26]
 of the State who shall be its Chair man;  
(b) a representative of the Central  Board for the Prevention and Control of Water Pollution 
appointed by the Central Government under section  3 of the Water (Prevention and Control of 
Pollution) Act,  1974  (6 of 1974);  
(c) a representative of the Centr al Board for the Prevention and Control of Air Pollution referred 
to in section  3 of the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act,  1981  (14 of 1981);  
(d) a representative of the State  Board appointed under section  4 of the Water (Prevention and 
Control of Pollution) Act,  1974  (6 of 1974);  
(e) a representative of the State  Board for the Prevention and Control of Air Pollution referred to 
in section  5 of the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act,  1981  (14 of 1981);  
(f) a representative of t he Department of Environment in the State;  
(g) a representative of the Meteorological Department of the Government of India;  
(h) an expert in the field of occupational health; and  
(i) a representative of the Town Planning Department of the State Government , 
and not more than five other  members who may be co -opted by the Slate Government who shall be — 
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 94 of 1976,  s. 19 (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
2. Subs. by s. 20, ibid.,  for “devices” (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
3. Ins. by Act 20 of 1987, s. 20 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 27]
27 
 (i) a scientist having specialised knowledge of the hazardous process which will be involved in 
the factory,  
(ii) a representative of the local authority within whose jurisdiction the factory is to be 
established, and  
(iii) not more than three other persons as deemed fit by the State Government.  
(2) The Site Appraisal Committee shall examine an application for the establishment of a factory 
involving hazard ous process and make its recommendation to the State Government within a period of 
ninety days of the receipt of such application in the prescribed form.  
(3) Where any process relates to a factory owned or controlled by the Central Government or to a 
corpo ration or a company owned or controlled by the Central Government, the State Government shall 
co-opt in the Site Appraisal Committee a representative nominated by the Central Government as 
a member of that Committee.  
(4) The Site Appraisal Committee shall have power to call for any information from  the person 
making an application for the establishment or expansion of a factory involving a hazardous process.  
(5) Where the State Government has granted approval to an application for the establishment or 
expan sion of a factory involving a hazardous process, it shall not be necessary for an applicant  to obtain a 
further approval from the Central  Board or the State  Board established under the Water (Prevention and 
Control of Pollution) Act , 1974  (6 of 1974) and t he Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) 
Act, 1981  (14 of 1981).  
41B. Compulsory  disclosure of information by the occupier .—(1) The occupier of every factory 
involving a hazardous process shall disclose in the manner prescribed all information regardin g dangers, 
including health hazards and the  measures to overcome such hazards arising from the exposure to or 
handling of the materials or substances in the manufacture, transportation, storage and other processes, to 
the workers employed in the factory, t he 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 27]
facture, transportation, storage and other processes, to 
the workers employed in the factory, t he Chief Inspector, the local authority within whose jurisdiction the 
factory is situate and the general public in the vicinity.  
(2) The occupier shall, at the time of registering the factory involving a hazardous process, lay down a 
detailed policy with r espect to the health and safety of the workers employed therein and intimate such 
policy to the Chief Inspector and the local authority and, thereafter, at such intervals as may be 
prescribed, inform the Chief Inspector and the local authority of any chang e made in the said policy.  
(3) The information furnished under sub -section ( 1) shall include accurate information as to the 
quantity, specifications and other characteristics of wastes and the manner of their disposal.  
(4) Every occupier shall, with the approval of the Chief Inspector, draw up an on -site emergency plan 
and detailed disaster control  measures for  his factory and make known to the workers employed therein 
and to the general public living in the vicinity of th e factory the safety  measures required to be taken in 
the event of an accident taking place.  
(5) Every occupier of a factory shall, — 
(a) if such factory engaged in a hazardous process on the commencement of the Factories 
(Amendment) Act,  1987, within a period of thirty days of such commencement;  and 
(b) if such factory engaged in a hazardous process at any time after such commencement, within a 
period of thirty days before the commencement of such process,  
inform the Chief Inspector of the nature and det ails of the process in such form and in such manner as 
may be prescribed.  
(6) Where any occupier of a factory contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 5), the licence issued 
under section  6 to such factory shall, notwithstanding any penalty to which the occupier or factory shall 
be subjected to under the provisions of this Act, be liable for cancellation.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 27]
r or factory shall 
be subjected to under the provisions of this Act, be liable for cancellation.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 28]
28 
 (7) The occupier of a factory involving a hazardous process shall, with the previous approval of the 
Chief Inspector,  lay down  measures for the handling , usage, transportation and storage of hazardous 
substances inside the factory premises and the disposal of such substances outside the factory premises 
and publicise them in the manner prescribed among the workers and the general public living in the 
vicinity.  
41C. Specific responsibility of the occupier in relation to hazardous processes .—Every occupier 
of a factory involving any hazardous process shall — 
(a) maintain accurate and up -to-date health records or, as the case may be,  medical records, of the 
workers in the factory who are exposed to any chemical, toxic or any other harmful substances which 
are manufactured, stored, handled or transported and such records shall be accessible to the workers 
subject to such conditions as may be prescribed;  
(b) appoint persons who possess qualifications and experience in handling hazardous substances 
and arc competent to supervise such handling within the factory and to provide at the working place 
all the necessary facilities for protecting the workers in the manne r prescribed:  
Provided that where any question arises as to the qualifications and experience of a person so 
appointed, the decision of the Chief Inspector shall be final;  
(c) provide for  medical examination of every worker — 
(a) before such worker is assigned to a job involving the handling of,  or working with, a 
hazardous substance, and  
(b) while continuing in such job, and after he has ceased to work in such job, at intervals not 
exceeding twelve months, in such manner as may be prescribed.  
41D. Powe r of Central Government to appoint Inquiry Committee .—(1) The Central 
Government may, in the event of the occurrence of an extraordinary situation involving a factory engaged 
in a hazardous process, appoint an Inquiry Committee to inquire into the standard s of health an
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 28]
ed 
in a hazardous process, appoint an Inquiry Committee to inquire into the standard s of health and safety 
observed in the factory with a view to finding out the causes of any failure or neglect in the adoption of 
any measures or standards prescribed for the health and safety of the workers employed in the factory or 
the general public af fected, or likely to be affected, due to such failure or neglect and for the prevention 
and recurrence of such extraordinary situations in future in such factory or elsewhere.  
(2) The Committee appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall consist of a Chairman an d two 
other  members and the terms of reference of the Committee and the tenure of office of its  members shall 
be such as may be determined by the Central Government according to the requirements of the situation.  
(3) The recommendations of the Committee sh all be advisory in the nature.  
41E. Emergency standards .—(1) Where  the Central Government is satisfied that no standards of 
safety have been prescribed in respect of a hazardous process or class of hazardous processes, or where 
the standards so prescribed are inadequate, it may direct the Director -General of Facto ry Advice Service 
and Labour Institutes or any institution specialised  in matters relating to standards of safety in hazardous 
processes, to lay down emergency standards for enforcement of  suitable standards in respect of such 
hazardous processes.  
(2) The emergency standards laid down under sub -section ( 1) shall, until they ar e incorporated in the 
rules made under this Act, be enforceable and have the same effect as if they had been incorporated in the 
rules made under this Act.  
41F. Permissible limits of e xposure of chemical and toxic substances .—(1) The maximum 
permissible threshold limits of exposure of chemical and toxic substances in  manufacturing processes 
(whether hazardous or otherwise) in any factory shall be of the value indicated in the Second Schedule.  
(2) The Ce
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 28]
us or otherwise) in any factory shall be of the value indicated in the Second Schedule.  
(2) The Central Government may, at any time, for the purpose of giving effect to any scientific proof 
obtained from specialised institutions or experts in the field by notification in the Official Gazelle, make 
suitable changes in  the said Schedu le. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 29]
29 
 41G. Workers ’ participation in safety management .—(1) The occupier shall, in every factory 
where a hazardous process takes place, or where hazardous substances are used or handled, set up a 
Safety Committee consisting of equal number of represen tative s of workers and management to promote 
co-operation between the workers and the management in maintaining proper safety and health at work 
and to review periodical the  measures taken in that behalf:  
Provided that the State Government may, by order in writi ng and for reasons to be recorded exempt 
the occupier of any factory  or class of factories from setting up such Committee.  
(2) The composition of the Safety Committee, the tenure of office of its  members and their right and 
duties shall be such as may be p rescribed.  
41H. Right of workers to warn about imminent danger .—(1) Where the workers employed in any 
factory engaged in a hazardous process have reasonable apprehension that there is a likelihood of 
imminent danger to their lives or health due to any acci dent, they may bring the same to the notice of the 
occupier, agent, manager or any other person who is in charge of the factory or the process concerned 
directly or through their representatives in the Safety Committee and simultaneously bring the same to the 
notice of the Inspector.  
(2) It shall be the duty of such occupier, agent, manager or the person in charge of the factory or 
process  to take immediate remedial action if he is satisfied about the existence of such imminent danger 
and send a report fort hwith of the action taken to the nearest Inspector.  
(3) If the occupier, agent, manager or the person in charge referred to in sub -section ( 2) is not 
satisfied about the existence of any imminent danger as apprehended by the workers, he shall, 
nevertheless , refer the matter forthwith  to the nearest Inspector whose decision on the question of the 
existence of such imminent danger shall be final.]  
CHAPTER V  
WELFARE 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 29]
on on the question of the 
existence of such imminent danger shall be final.]  
CHAPTER V  
WELFARE  
42. Washing facilities .—(1) In every factory — 
(a) adequate and suitable facilities for washing shall be provided and maintained for the use of the 
workers therein;  
(b) separate and adequately screened facilities shall be provided for the use of male and female 
workers;  
(c) such facilities shall be conveniently accessible and shall be kept clean.  
(2) The State Government may, in respect of any factory or class or description of factories or of any 
manufacturing process, prescribe standards of adequate and suitable facilities for washing.  
43. Facilities for storing and drying clothing .—The State Govern ment may, in respect of any 
factory or class or description of factories, make rules requiring the provision therein of suitable places 
for keeping clothing not worn daring working hours and for the drying of wet clothing.  
44. Facilities for sitting .—(1) In every factory suitable arrangements for sitting shall be provided and 
maintained for all workers obliged to work in a standing position, in order that they may  take advantage 
of any opportunities for rest which may occur in the course of their work.  
(2) If, in the opinion of the Chief Inspector, the workers in any factory engaged in a particular 
manufacturing process or working in a particular room are able to do their work efficiently in a sitting 
position, he may, by order in writing, require the occ upier of the factory to provide before a specified date 
such seating arrangements as may be practicable for all workers so engaged or working.  
(3) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazelle, declare that the provisions of 
sub-section  (1) shall not apply to any specified factory or class or description of factories or  to any 
specified manufacturing process.  
45. First -aid appliances .—(1) There shall in every factory be provided and maintained so as  to be 
read
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 29]
rst -aid appliances .—(1) There shall in every factory be provided and maintained so as  to be 
readily accessible during all wo rking hours first -aid boxes or cupboards equipped with the prescribed 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 30]
30 
 contents, and the number of such boxes or cupboards  to be provided and maintained shall not be less than 
one for every  one hundred and fifty workers ordinarily employed  1[at any one time] in the factory.  
2[(2) Nothing except the prescribed contents shall be kept in a first -aid box or cupboard.  
(3) Each first -aid box or cupboard shall be kept in the charge of a separate responsible person  3[who 
holds a certificate in first -aid treatmen t recognised by the State Government] and who shall always be 
readily available during the working hours of the factory.]  
4[(4) In every factory wherein more than five hundred workers are  5[ordinarily employed] there shall 
be provided and maintained an amb ulance room of the prescribed size, containing the prescribed 
equipment and in the charge of such  medical and nursing staff as may be prescribed  6[and those facilities 
shall always be made readily available during the working hours of the factory].  
STATE A MENDMENTS  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 45 .—In section 45 of the Factories Act, 1948 (Central Act LXIII of 1948) 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in sub -section (4), for the words “five hundred” the words 
“two hundred” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Karnataka Act 1 o f 2003, s. 2 ]. 
46. Canteens .—(1) The State Government may make rules requiring that in any specified factory 
wherein more than two hundred and fifty workers are ordinarily employed, a canteen or canteens shall be 
provided and maintained by the occupier for the use of the workers.]  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such r u les may provide for — 
(a) the date by which  such canteen shall be provided ; 
(b) the standards in respect of construction, accommodation, furniture and  other equipment of the 
canteen ; 
(c) the foodstuffs to be served therein and the charges which may be made therefore;  
(d) the constitution of a managing committee for the canteen and representation of the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 30]
therefore;  
(d) the constitution of a managing committee for the canteen and representation of the workers in 
the manageme nt of the canteen;  
7[(dd) the items of expenditure in the running of the canteen which are not to be taken into 
account in fixing the cost of foodstuffs and which shall be borne by the employer;]  
(e) the delegation to the Chief Inspector, subject to such c onditions as may be prescribed, of the 
power to make rules under clause ( c). 
47. Shelters, rest rooms and lunch rooms .—(1) In every factory wherein more than one hundred 
and fifty workers are ordinarily employed, adequate and suitable shelters or rest room s and a suitable 
lunch room, with provision for drinking water, where workers can eat  meals brought by them, shall be 
provided and maintained for the use of the workers;  
Provided  that any canteen maintained in accordance with the provisions of section  46 shall be 
regarded as part of the requirements of this sub -section:  
Provided further that where a lunch room exists no worker shall eat any food in the work room.  
(2) The shelters or rest rooms or lunch rooms  to be provided under sub -section ( 1) shall be 
sufficiently lighted aid ventilated and shall be maintained in a cool and clean condition.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 1954, s. 9 (w.e.f. 7 -5-1954).  
2. Subs. by s. 9, ibid.,  for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 7 -5-1954).  
3. Subs. by Act 94 of 1976, s. 21, for “who is trained in first -aid treatment” (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
4. Sub-section ( 3) re-numbered as sub -section ( 4) by Act 25 of 1954, s. 9 (w.e.f. 7 -5-1954).  
5. Subs. by Act 94 of 1976, s. 21, for “employed” (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
6. Ins. by s. 21, ibid. (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
7. Ins. by Act 94 of 1976, s. 22 (w.e.f. 26-10-1976).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 31]
31 
 (3) The State Government may — 
(a) prescribe the standards in respect of construction, accommodation, furniture and other 
equipment of shelters, rest rooms and lunch rooms to be provided under this section;  
(b) by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt any factory or class or description of factories 
from the requirements of this section.  
48. Creches .—(1) In every factory wherein more than1[thirty women workers] are ordinarily 
employed there shall be provided and maintained a suitable room or rooms for the use of children under 
the age of six years of such women.  
(2) Such rooms shall provide adequate accommodation, shall be adequately lighted and ventilated, 
shall  be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be under the charge of women trained in 
the care of children and infants.  
(3) The State Government may make rules — 
(a) prescribing the location and the standards in respect of construction, accommo dation, 
furniture and other equipment of rooms to be provided under this section;  
(b) requiring the provision in factories to which this section applies of additional facilities for the 
care of children belonging to women workers, including suitable provis ion of facilities for washing 
and changing their clothing;  
(c) requiring the provision i n any factory of free milk or refreshment or both for such children;  
(d) requiringthat facilities shall be given in any factory for the mothers of such children to fee d 
them at the necessary intervals.  
49. Welfare officers .—(1) In every factory wherein five hundred or more workers are ordinarily 
employed the occupier shall employ in the factory such number of welfare officers as may be prescribed.  
(2) The State Governme nt may prescribe the duties, qualifications and conditions of service of 
officers employed under sub -section ( 1). 
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 49 .—In section 49 of the principal Act, — 
(1) in sub -section (1), for the words “
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 31]
ment of section 49 .—In section 49 of the principal Act, — 
(1) in sub -section (1), for the words “five hundred” the words “two hundred” shall be substituted;  
(2) after sub -section (1), the following shall be inserted, namely: — 
“(1A) In every factory where two hundred or more women workers are ordinarily employed the 
occupier shall employ in the factory, such number of female supervisors, as may be prescribed.”  
[Vide Karnataka Act 1 of 2003, s. 3].  
50. Power to make rules to supplement this Chapter .—The State Government may make rules — 
(a) exempting, subject to compliance with such alternative arrangements for the wel fare of 
workers as may be prescribed, any factory or class or description of factories from compliance with 
any of the provisions of this Chapter;  
(b) requiring in any factory or class or description of factories that representatives of the workers 
employe d in the factory shall be associated with the management of the welfare arrangements of the 
workers.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 94 of 1976, s. 23, for “fifty women workers” (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 32]
32 
 CHAPTER VI  
WORKING HOURS OF ADULTS  
51. Weekly hours .—No adult worker shall be required or allowed to work in a factory for more than 
forty -eight hours in  any week.  
52. Weekly holidays .—(1) No adult worker shall be required or allowed to work in a factory on  the 
first day of the week  (hereinafter referred to as the said day), unless — 
(a) he has or will have a holiday for a whole day on one of the three days  immediately before or 
after the said day, and  
(b) the manager of the factory has, before the said day or the substituted day under clause ( a), 
whichever is earlier, — 
(i) delivered a notice at  the office of the Inspector of  his intention  to require the worker to 
work on the said day and of the day which is to be substituted, and  
(ii) displayed a notice  to that effect in the factory:  
Provided that no substitution shall be made which will result in any worker working for more than ten 
days consecutively wi thout a holiday for a whole day.  
(2) Notices given under sub -section ( 1) may be cancelled by a notice delivered at the office of the 
Inspector and a notice displayed in the factory not later than the day before the said day or the holiday to 
be cancelled, whichever is earlier.  
(3) Where, in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 1), any worker works on the said day 
and has had a holiday on one of the t hree days immediately before it  that said day shall, for the purpose of 
calculating  his weekly hour s of work, be included in the preceding week.  
53. Compensatory holidays .—(1) Where, as a result of the passing of an order or the making of a 
rule under the provisions of this Act exempting a factory or the workers therein from the provisions of 
section  52,a worker is deprived of any of the weekly holidays for which provision is made in sub -section 
(1) of that section, he shall be allowed, within the month in which the holidays were due to  him or within 
the two months immediately following that mont
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 32]
nth in which the holidays were due to  him or within 
the two months immediately following that month, compe nsatory holidays of equal number to the 
holidays so lost.  
(2) The State Government may prescribe the manner in which the holidays for which provision is 
made in sub -section ( 1) shall be allowed.  
54. Daily hours .—Subject to the provisions of section 51, not  adult worker shall be required or 
allowed to work in a factory for more than nine hours in any day:  
1[Provided that, subject to the previous approval of the Chief Inspector, the daily maximum specified 
in this section may be exceeded in order to facilitat e the change of shifts.]  
55. Intervals for rest .—2[(1)]3[The periods of work] of adult workers in a factory each day shall be 
so fixed that no period shall exceed five hours and that no worker shall work for more than five hours 
before he has had an interv al for rest of at least half an hour.  
4[(2) The State Government or, subject to the control of the State Government, the Chief Inspector, 
may, by written order and for the reasons specified therein, exempt any factory from the provisions of 
sub-section ( 1) so however that the total number of hours worked by a worker without an interval does 
not exceed six.]  
56. Spread over .—The periods of work of an adult worker in a factory shall be s o arranged that 
inclusive of hi s inte rvals for rest under section 55 , they shall not spread over more than ten and a half 
hours in any day:  
                                                           
1. Added by Act 25 of 1954, s. 10 (w.e.f. 7 -5-1954).  
2. Section 55 re -numbered as sub -section ( 1) of that section by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 7 -5-1954).  
3. Subs. by act 40 of 1949, s. 3 and the Second Schedule, for “The period” (w.e.f. 1 -5-1949).  
4. Added by Act 25 of 1954, s. 11 (w.e.f. 7 -5-1954).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 33]
33 
 Provided that the Chief Inspector may, for reasons to be specified in writing increase the1[spreadover 
up to twelve hours].  
57. Night shifts .—Where a worker in a factory works on a shift wh ich extends beyond midnight, — 
(a) for the purposes of sections  52 and 53, a holiday for a whole day shall  mean in  his case a 
period of twenty -four consecutive hours beginning when  his shift ends;  
(b) the following day for  him shall be deemed to be the period of twenty -four hours beginning 
when such shift ends, and the hours he has worked after midnight shall be counted in the previous 
day. 
58. Prohibition of overlapping shifts .—(1) Work shall not be carried on in any factory by means of 
a system of shif ts so arranged that more than one relay of workers is engaged in work of the same kind at 
the same time.  
2[(2) The S tate Government or subject to the control of the State Government, the Chief Inspector, 
may, by written order and for the reasons specified therein, exempt on such conditions as may be deemed 
expedient, any factory or class or description of factories or a ny department or section of a factory or any 
category or description of workers therein from the provisions of sub -section ( 1).] 
59. Extra wages for overtime .—(1) Where a worker works in a factory for more than nine hours in 
any day or for more than forty -eight hours in any week, he shall, in respect of overtime work, be entitled 
to wages at the rate of twice hi s ordinary rate of wages.  
3[(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), “ordinary rate of wages ” means the basic wages plus such 
allowances, including the cash equivalent of the advantage accruing through the concessional sale to 
workers of food grains and other articles, as the worker is for the time being entitled to, but does not 
include a bonus and wages for overtime work.  
(3) Where any  workers in a factory are paid on a piece rate basis, the time rate shall be deemed to be 
equivalent to the daily average
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 33]
are paid on a piece rate basis, the time rate shall be deemed to be 
equivalent to the daily average of their full -time earnings for the days on which they actually worked on 
the same or identical job during the month immediately preceding the calen dar month during which the 
overtime work was done, and such time rates shall be deemed to be ordinary rates of wages of those 
workers:  
Provided that in the case of a worker who has not worked in the immediately preceding calendar 
month on the same or ident ical job, the time rate shall be deemed to be equivalent to the daily average of 
the earning of the worker for the days on which he actually worked in the week in which the overtime 
work was done.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub -section in comput ing the earnings for the days on which 
the worker actually worked such allowances, including the cash equivalent of the advantage accruing 
through the concessional sale to workers of food grains and other articles, as the worker is  for the time 
being entit led to , shall be included but any bonus or wages for overtime work payable in relation to the 
period with reference to which the earnings are being computed shall be excluded.]  
4[(4) The cash equivalent of the advantage accruing through the concessional sa le to a worker of food 
grains and other articles shall be computed as often as may be prescribed on the basis of the maximum 
quantity of food grains and other articles admissible to a standard family.  
Explanation  1.—“Standard family ” means a family consist ing of the worker, his or her spouse and 
two children below the age of fourteen years requiring in all three adult consumption units.  
Explanation 2.—“Adult consumption unit ” means the consumption unit of a male above the age of 
fourteen y ears; and the consu mption unit of a female above the age of fourteen years and that of a child 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 94 of 1976, s. 24, fo
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 33]
d 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 94 of 1976, s. 24, for “spread over to twelve hours” (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
2. Subs. by Act 25 of 1954, s. 12, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 7 -5-1954).  
3. Subs. by Act 94 of 1976, s. 25, for sub -section ( 2) and ( 3) (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
4. Subs. by Act 25 of 1954, s. 13, for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 7 -5-1954).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 34]
34 
 below the age of fourteen years shall be calcula ted at the rates of 8 and 6 respectively of one adult 
consumption unit.  
(5) The State Government may make rules prescribing — 
(a) the manner in which the cash equivalent of the advantage accruing through the concessional 
sale to a worker of food grains and o ther articles shall be computed ; and  
(b) the registers that shall be maintained in a factory for the purpose of  securing compliance with 
the provisions of this section.]  
60. Restriction on double employment .—No adult worker shall be required or allowed to work in 
any factory on any day on which  he has already been working in any other factory, save in such 
circumst ances as may be prescribed.  
61. Notice of periods of work for adults .—(1) There shall be displayed and correctly maintained in 
every factory in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 108 , a notice of periods of 
work for adults, showi ng clearly for every day the periods during which adult workers may be required to 
work.  
(2) The periods shown in the n otice required by sub -section ( 1) shall be fixed beforehand in 
accordance with the following provisions of this section, and shall be suc h that workers working for those 
periods would not be working in contravention of any of the prov isions of sections 51, 52, 54 ,1[ 55, 56 
and 58].  
(3) Where all the adult workers in a factory are required to work during the same periods, the 
manager of the factory shall fix those periods for such workers generally.  
(4) Where all the adult workers in a factory are not required to work during the same periods, the 
manager of the factory shall classify them into groups according to the nature of their work indicating the 
number of workers in each group.  
(5) For each  group which is not required to work on a system of shifts, the manager of the factory 
shall fix the periods during which the group may be required to work.  
(6) Where any group is required t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 34]
 fix the periods during which the group may be required to work.  
(6) Where any group is required to work  on a system of shifts and the relays are not to be subject to 
predetermined periodical changes of shifts, the manager of the factory shall fix the periods during which 
each relay of the group may be required to work.  
(7) Where any group is to work on a sy stem of shifts and the relays are to be subject to predetermined 
periodical changes of shifts, the manager of the factory shall draw up a scheme of shifts where under the 
periods during which any relay of the group may be required to work and the relay whi ch will be working 
at any time of the day shall be known for any day.  
(8) The State Government may prescribe forms of the n otice required by sub -section ( 1) and the 
manner in which it shall be maintained.  
(9) In the case of a factory beginning work after t he commencement of this Act, a copy of the noti ce 
referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be sent in duplicate to the Inspector before the day on which work is 
begun in the factory . 
(10) Any proposed change in the system of work in any factory which will nece ssitate a change in the 
notice referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be notified to the Inspector in duplicate before the change is 
made, and except with the previous sanction of the Inspector, no such change shall be made until one 
week has elapsed since t he last change.  
62. Register of adult workers .—(1) The manager of every factory shall maintain a register of adult 
workers, to be available to the Inspector at all times during working hours, or when any work is being 
carried on in the factory, showing — 
(a) the name of each adult worker in the factory;  
(b) the nature of hi s work;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 25 of 1954,  s.14, for “55 and 56” (w.e.f. 7 -5-1954).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 35]
35 
 (c) the group, if any, in which he is included;  
(d) where his group works on shifts, the relay to which he is allotted;  
(e) such other p articulars as may be prescribed : 
Provided th at, if the Inspector is of opinion that any muster roll or register maintained as part of the 
routine of a factory gives in respect of any or all the workers in the factory the particulars required under 
this section, he may, by order in writing, direct th at such muster roll or register shall to the corresponding 
extent be maintained i n place of, and be treated as t he register of adult workers in that factory.  
1[(1A) No adult worker shall be required or allowed to work in any factor y unless hi s name and oth er 
particulars have been entered in the register of adult workers.]  
(2) The State Government may prescribe the form of t he register of adult workers, t he manner in 
which  it shall be  maintained and the period for which it shall be preserved.  
63. Hours of wo rk to correspond with notice under section 61 and register under section 62 .—
No adult worker shall be required or allowed to work in any factory otherwise than in accordance with the 
notice of periods of work for adults displayed in the factory and the ent ries made beforehand against his 
name in the register of adult workers of the factory.  
64. Power to make exempting rules .—(1) The State Government may make rules defining the 
persons who hold positions of supervision or management or are employed in a confidential position in a 
factory  2[or empowering the Chief Inspector to declare any person, other than a person defined by such 
rules, as a person holding position of supervision or management or employed in a confidential position 
in a factory if, in th e opinion of the Chief Inspector, such person holds such position or is so employed], 
and the provisions of this Chapter, other than the provisions of clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 66 
and of the proviso to that sub -section
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 35]
rovisions of clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 66 
and of the proviso to that sub -section, shall not apply to an y person so defined  2[or declared]:  
2[Provided that any person so defined or declared shall, where  the ordinary rate of wages of such 
person  3[does not exceed the wage limit specified in sub -section ( 6) of section  1 of the Payment of Wages 
Act, 1936  (4 of 1936),  as amended from time to time], be entitled to extra wages in respect of, overtime 
work under section  59.] 
(2) The State Government may make rules in respect of adult workers in factories providing for the 
exemption, to such extent and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed — 
(a) of workers engaged on urgent repairs, from the provisions of sections  51, 52, 54, 55 and 56; 
(b) of workers engaged in work in the nature of preparatory  or complementary work which must 
necessarily be carried on outside the limits laid down for the general working of the factory, from the 
provisions of sections  51, 54, 55 and 56; 
(c) of workers engaged in work which is necessarily so intermittent that the  intervals during 
which they do not work while on duty ordinarily amount to more than the intervals for rest required 
by or under section  55, from the provisions of sections  51, 54, 55 and 56; 
(d) of workers engaged in any work which for technical reasons must be carried on 
continuously  4*** from the provisions of sections  51, 52, 54, 55 and 56; 
(e) of workers engaged in making or supplying articles of prime necessity which must be made or 
supplied every day, from the provisions of  5[section  51 and section  52]; 
(f) of workers engaged in a manufacturing process which cannot be carried on except during fixed 
sections, from the provisions of  5[section  51, section  52 and section  54]; 
(g) of workers engaged in a manufacturing process which cannot be carried on ex cept at times 
dependent on the irregular action of natural forces, from the provisions of sections  5
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 35]
pt at times 
dependent on the irregular action of natural forces, from the provisions of sections  52 and 55; 
(h) of workers engaged in engine -rooms or boiler -houses or in attending to power -plant or 
transmission ma chinery, from the provisions of 5[section  51 and section  52]; 
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 94 of 1976, s. 26 (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
2. Ins. by s. 27, ibid. (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
3. Subs. by Act 20 of 1987, s. 21, for  “does not exceed rupees seven hundred and fifty per month” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
4. The words  “throughout the day” omitted by Act 25 of 1954, s. 15 (w.e.f. 7 -5-1954).  
5. Subs. by Act 94 of 1976, s. 27, for section 52 (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 36]
36 
 1[(i) of workers engaged in the printing of newspapers, who arc held up on account of the 
breakdown of machinery, from the provisions of sections  51, 54 and 56. 
Explanation. —In this clause the expression “newspapers'' has the  meaning  assigned to it in the 
Press and Registration of  Books Act,  1867  (25 of 1867);  
(j) of workers engaged in the loading or unloading of railway wagons,  2[or lorries or trucks] from 
the provisions of sections  51, 52, 54, 55 and 56]; 
4[(k) of workers engaged in  any work, which is notified by the State Government in the Official 
Gazette as a work of national importance, from the provisions of section  51, section  52, section  54, 
section  55 and section  56.] 
(3) Rules made under sub -section ( 2) providing for any exe mption may also provide for any 
consequential exemption from the provisions of section  61 which the State Government may deem to be 
expedient, subject to such conditions as it may prescribe.  
3(4) In making rules under this section, the State Government sha ll not exceed, except in respect of 
exemption under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) the following limit s of work inclusive of overtime :— 
(i) the total number of hours of work in any day shall not exceed ten;  
(ii) the spread over, inclusive of intervals for rest, shall not exceed twelve hours in any one day:  
Provided that the State Government may, in respect of any or all of the categories of workers 
referred to in clause ( d) of sub -section ( 2), make rules prescribing the circumstances in which, and the 
condi tions subject to which, the restrictions imposed by clause ( i) and clause ( ii) shall not apply in 
order to enable a shift worker to work the whole or part of a subsequent shift in the absence of a 
worker who has failed to report for duty;  
4[(iii) the, tota l number of hours of work in a week, including overtime, shall not exceed sixty;]  
4[(iv)] the total number of hours of overtime shall not exceed fifty for any one quar
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 36]
ceed sixty;]  
4[(iv)] the total number of hours of overtime shall not exceed fifty for any one quarter,  
Explanation. —“Quarter ” means a period of three consecutive months beginning on the 1st of 
January, the  1st of April, the  1st of July or the  1st of October.]  
(5) Rules made under this section shall remain in force for not more than  5[five years].  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 64. --In Section 64 of the principal Act, in sub -section (4), in clause (iv) for 
the word "fifty", the words "one hundred" shall be substituted."  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 13 of 2018, s. 3]  
65. Power to make exempting orders .—(1) Where the State Government is satisfied that, owing to 
the nature  of the work carried on or to other circumstances, it is unreasonable to require that the periods of 
work of any adult workers in any factory or class or description of factories should be fixed beforehand, it 
may, by written order, relax or modify the pro visions of section 61 in respect of such workers therein, to 
such extent and in such manner as it may think fit, and subject to such conditions as it may deem 
expedient to ensure control over periods of work.  
(2) The State Government or, subject to the control of the Stale Government, the Chief Inspector may 
by written order exempt, on such conditions as it or he may deem expedient, any or all of the adult 
workers in any factory or group or class or description of factories from any or all of the provisi ons of 
sections 51, 52, 54 and 56 on Ike ground that the exemption is required to enable the factory or factories 
to deal with an exceptional press of work.  
6[(3) Any exempt ion granted under sub -section ( 2) shall be subject to t he following conditions, 
namely:— 
(i) the total number of hours of work in any day shall not exceed twelve;  
(ii) the spread over, inclusive of intervals for rest, shall not exceed thirteen hours in any one day;  
                                                   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 36]
hall not exceed thirteen hours in any one day;  
                                                           
1. Added by Act 25 of 1954, s. 15  (w.e.f. 7 -5-194).  
2. Ins. by Act 94 of 1976, s. 27 (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976). 
3. Subs. by Act 25 of 1954, s. 15, for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 7 -5-1954).  
4. Clause ( iii) re-numbered as clause ( iv) by Act 94 of 1976, s. 27  (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
5. Subs. by  Act 94 of 1976, s. 27, for “three years” (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
6. Subs. by Act 94 of 1976, s. 28, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 37]
37 
 (iii) the total number of hours of work in any week, including overtime, shall not exceed sixty;  
(iv) no worker shall be allowed to work overtime, for more than seven days at a stretch and the 
total number of hours of overtime work in any quarter shall not exceed seventy -five. 
Explanation. —In this sub -section “quarter ” has the same meaning as in sub -section ( 4) of section 64 .] 
1*                    *                          *             ** 
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of Section 65 of 63 of 1948 .—In section 65 of the principal Act, — 
(a) for sub -section (2), the following sub -section shall be substituted, namely: — 
“(2) On such terms and conditions as may be prescribed, any or all of the adult male workers in any 
factory or group or class or description of factories may be exempted from any or all of the provisions  of 
sections 51, 52, 54 and 56 on the ground that the exemption is required to enable the factory or factories 
to deal with an exceptional press of work.”;  
(b) in sub -section (3), in clause (iv), for the words “shall not exceed seventy -five” the words “sha ll 
not exceed one hundred and fifteen” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act 40 of 2015, s. 3]  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 65 .--In Section 65 of the principal Act, in sub -section (3), in clause (iv) for 
the words "seventy -five" the words "one hundred fifteen " shall be substituted.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 13 of 201 8, s. 4]  
66. Further restrictions on employment of women .—(1)The provisions of this Chapter shall, in 
their application to women in factories, be supplemented by the following further  restrictions, namely: — 
(a) no exemption from the provisions of section  54 may be granted in respect of any woman;  
(b) no woman shall be  2[required or allowed to work in any factory] except between the hours 
of 6 A.M. and  7 P.M.:  
Provided that the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, in respect of  3[a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 37]

Provided that the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, in respect of  3[any 
factory or group or class or description of factories,] very the limits laid down in clause ( b), but so that no 
such variation shall authorize the employment of any woman between the hours of 10 P.M. and 5 A.M. : 
4[(c) there shall be no change of shifts except after a weekly holiday or any other holiday.]  
(2) The State Government may make rules providing for the exemption from the restrictions set out in 
sub-section ( 1), to such extent and subject to such conditions as it  may prescribe, of women working in 
fish-curing or fish -canning factories, where the employment of women beyond the hours specified in the 
said restrictions is necessary to prevent damage to, or deterioration in, any raw material.  
(3) The rules made under sub -section ( 2) shall remain in force for not more than three years at a time.  
 
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 66 of 63 of 1948 .—In section 66 of the principal Act, in sub -section ( 1), in 
clause  (b), for the existing proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted, namely: — 
“Provided that, the women workers may be required or allowed to work even between the hours of 
7.00 p.m. and 6.00 a.m. in any factory in which adequate safety and security  measures or safeguards as 
may be prescribed are provided;”.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act 40 of 2015, s. 4].  
  
                                                           
1. Omitted by Act 94 of 1976, s. 28 (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
2. Subs. by s. 29, ibid.,  for “employed in any factory” (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
3. Subs. by s. 29, ibid.,  for “any class or description of factories” (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
4. Ins. by Act 25 of 1954, s. 17 (w.e.f.  7-5-1954).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 38]
38 
 Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh (UTs)  
Section 66. — In sub -section (1), for clause (b),  the following clause shall be  substitute d— 
“(b) women shall be entitled to be employed in all establishments for all types of work and they may 
also be employed, with their consent before 6 a.m. and beyond 7 p.m. subject to such conditions relating 
to safety, holidays and working hours or any other condition, to be ob served by the em ployer, as may be 
prescribed;”.  
[Vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification 
No. S.O.  3774(E), dated (23 -10-2020) and Vide Union Territory  of Jammu and Kashmir  Reorganisation  
(Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification No. S.O.  3465 (E), dated ( 5-10-2020). ] 
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 66. —In section 66 of the principal Act, in sub -section (1), in clause (b) for 
the existing proviso, the following proviso shall  be substituted, namely: -- 
“Provided that the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, in respect of 
any factory or group or class or description of factories vary the limits laid down in this clause and 
such variation may authorise  the employment of any woman between the hours of 7 p.m. and 6 a.m. 
mentioning therein the provisions for the safety and facilities of the woman to be given to her."  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 13 of 2018, s. 5]  
CHAPTER VII  
EMPLOYMENT OF YOUNG PERSONS  
67. Prohibition of employment of young children .—No child who has not completed  his fourteenth 
year shall be required or allowed to work in any factory.  
68. Non-adult workers to carry tokens .—A child who has completed  his fourteenth year or an 
adolescent shal l not be required or allowed to work in any factory  unless — 
(a) a certificate of fitness granted with reference to  him under section  69 is in the custody of the 
manager of the factory, and  
(b) such  child or adolescent carries while he is at work a token gi ving a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 38]
er of the factory, and  
(b) such  child or adolescent carries while he is at work a token gi ving a reference to such 
certificate.  
69. Certificates of fitness .—(1) A certifying surgeon shall, on the application of any young person 
or his parent or guardian accompanied by a document signed by the manager of a factory that such person 
will be employ ed therein if certified to be fit for work in a factory, or on the application of the manager of 
the factory in which any young person wishes  to work, examine such person and ascertain  his fitness for 
work in a factory.  
(2) The certifying surgeon, after ex amination, may grant  to such young person, in the prescribed 
form, or may renew — 
(a) a certificate of fitness  to work in a factory as a child, if he is satisfied that  the young person 
has completed  his fourteenth year, that he has attained the prescribed p hysical standards and that he is 
fit for such work;  
(b) a certificate of fitness to work in a factory as an adult, if he is satisfied that the young person 
has completed  his fifteenth year, and is fit for a full day's work in a factory:  
Provided that unles s the certifying surgeon has personal knowledge of the place where the young 
person proposes to work and of the manufacturing process in which he will be employed, he shall not 
grant or renew a certificate under this sub -section until he has examined such place.  
(3) A certificate of fitness granted or renewed under sub -section ( 2)— 
(a) shall be valid only for a period of twelve months from the date thereof:  
(b) may be made subject  to conditions in regard to the nature of the work in which the young 
person may be employed, or requiring re -examination of the young person before the expiry of the 
period of twelve months.  
(4) A certifying surgeon shall revoke any certif icate granted or renewed under sub -section ( 2) if in  his 
opinion the holder of it is no longer fit to work in the capacity stated therein in a factory.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 38]

opinion the holder of it is no longer fit to work in the capacity stated therein in a factory.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 39]
39 
 (5) Where a certifying surgeon refuses to grant or renew a certificate or a certificate of the kind 
requested or revokes a certificate, he shall, if so requested by any person who could have applied for the 
certificate or the renewal thereof, state  his reasons in writing for so doing.  
(6) Where a certificate under this section with reference to any young pe rson is granted or renewed 
subject to such conditions as are referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 3), the young person shall not be 
required or allowed to work in any factory except in accordance with those conditions.  
(7) Any fee payable for a certif icate under this section shall be paid by the occupier and shall not be 
recoverable from the young person,  his parents or guardian.  
70. Effect of certificate of fitness granted to adolescent .—(1) An adolescent who has been granted 
a certificate of fitness to work in a factory as an adult under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of section  69, 
and who while at work in a factory carries a token giving reference to the certificate, shall be deemed to 
be an adult for all the purposes of Chapter VI and VIII.  
1***                                 *                                   *  
2[(1A) No female adolescent or a male adolescent who has not attained the age of seventeen years but 
who has been granted a certificate of fitness to work in a factory as an adult, shall be  required or allowed 
to work in any factory e xcept between  6 A.M. and  7 P.M. : 
Provided that the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazelle, in respect of any 
factory or group or class or description of factories, — 
(i) vary the limits lai d down in this sub -section so, however, that no such section shall authorise 
the employment of any female adolescent between  10 P.M. and  5 A.M.  
(ii) grant  exemption from the provisions of this sub -section in case of serious emergency where 
national interes t is involved.]  
(2) An adolescent who has not 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 39]
n case of serious emergency where 
national interes t is involved.]  
(2) An adolescent who has not been granted a certificate of fitness to work in a factory as an adult 
under the aforesaid clause ( b) shall, notwithstanding  his age, be deemed to be a child for all the purposes 
of this Act.  
71. Working hours for children .—(1) No child shall be employed or permitted to work, in any 
factory— 
(a) for more than four and a half hours in any day;  
3[(b) during the night.  
Explanation. —For the purpose of this sub -section “night ” shall  mean a period of at least twelve 
consecutive hours which shall include the interval between  10 P.M. and  6 A.M.]  
(2) The period of work of all children employed in a factory shall be limited to two shifts which shall 
not overlap or spread over more t han five hours each; and each child shall be employed in only one of the 
relays which shall not, except with the previous permission in writing of the Chief Inspector, be changed 
more frequently than once in a period of thirty days.  
(3) The provisions of s ection  52 shall apply also to child workers and no exemption from the 
provisions of that section may be granted in respect of any child.  
(4) No child shall be required or allowed to work in any factory on any day on which he has already 
been working in ano ther factory.  
4[(5) No  female child shall be required or allowed to work in any factory except between  8 A.M. 
and 7 P.M.]  
72. Notice of periods of work for children .—(1) There shall be displayed and correctly maintained 
in every factory in which children are employed, in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 2) of 
                                                           
1. The proviso and the Explanation  omitted by Act 20 of 1987, s. 22 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
2. Ins. by Act 20 of 1957, s. 22 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987 ). 
3. Subs. by Act 25 of 1954, s. 19, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 7 -5-1954).  
4. Ins. by Act 20 of 1957, s. 23 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 39]
 s. 19, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 7 -5-1954).  
4. Ins. by Act 20 of 1957, s. 23 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 40]
40 
 section  108 a notice of periods of work for children, showing clearly for every day the periods during 
which children may be required or allowed to work.  
(2) The periods shown in the not ice required by sub -section ( 1) shall be fixed beforehand in 
accordance with the  method laid down for adult workers in section  61, and shall be such that children 
working for those periods would not be working in contravention of any of the provisions of s ection  71. 
(3) The provisions of sub -sections ( 8), (9) and ( 10) of section  61 shall apply also to the notice 
required by sub -section ( 1) of this section.  
73. Register of child workers .—(1) The manager of every factory in which children are employed 
shall m aintain a register of child workers, to be available to the Inspector at all  times during working 
hours or when any work is being carried on in a factory, showing — 
(a) the name of each child worker in the factory,  
(b) the nature of  his work,  
(c) the group,  if any,  in which he is included,  
(d) where  his group works on shifts, the relay to which he is allotted, and  
(e) the number of  his certificate of fitness granted under section  69. 
1[(1A) No child worker shall be required or allowed to work in any factory unless  his name and other 
particulars have been entered in the register of child workers.]  
(2) The State Government may prescribe the form of the register of child workers, the manner in 
which it shall be maintained and the period for which it shall be pre served.  
74. Hours of work to correspond with notice under section 72 and register under section 73 .—
No child worker shall be employed in any factory otherwise than in accordance with the notice of periods 
of work for children   displayed in the factory and the entries made beforehand against his name in the 
register of child workers of the factory.  
75. Power to require medical examination .—Where an Inspector is of opinion — 
(a) that any person working in a factory
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 40]
e medical examination .—Where an Inspector is of opinion — 
(a) that any person working in a factory without a certificate of fitness is a young person, or  
(b) that a young person working in a factory with a certificate of fitness is no longer  fit to work in 
the capacity stated therein,  
he may serve on the manager of the factory a notice requiring that such person or young person, as the 
case may be, shall be examined by a certifying surgeon, and such person or young person shall not, if the 
Inspector so directs, be employed, or permitted to work, in any factory until he has been so examined and 
has been granted a certificate of fitness or a fresh certificate of fitness, as the case may be, under 
section  69, or has been certified by the certifying surgeon examining  him not to be a young person.  
76. Power to make rules .—The State Government may make rules — 
(a)  prescribing the forms of certificates o f fitness  to be granted under section 69, providing for 
the grant of duplicates in the event of toss of the original certificates, and fixing the fees which may 
be charged for such certificates and renewals thereof and such duplicates;  
(b) prescribing the physical standards to be attained by children and adolescents working in 
factories;  
(c) regulating the procedure of certifying  surgeons under this Chapter;  
(d) specifying other duties which certifying surgeons may be required to perform in connection 
with the employment of young persons in factories, and fixing the fees which may be charged for 
such duties and the persons by whom they shall be payable.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 94 of 1976, s. 30 (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 41]
41 
 77. Certain other provisions of law not barred .—The provisions of this Chapter shall be in 
addition to, an d not in derogation of, the provisions of the Employment of Children 
Act, 1938  (26 of 1938).  
1[CHAPTER V III 
ANNUAL LEAVE WITH WAGES  
78. Application of Chapter .—(1) The provisions of this Chapter shall not operate to the prejudice of 
any right to which a worker may be entitled under any other law or under the terms of any 
award,  2[agreement (including settlement)] or contract of service:  
3[Provided that if such award, agreement (including settlement) or contract of service provides for a 
longer annual leav e with wages than provided in this Chapter, the quantum  of leave, which the worker 
shall be entitled  to, shall be in accordance with such award, agreement or contract of service, but in 
relation to matters not provided for in such award, agreement or contr act of service or matters which are 
provided for less favourably therein, the provisions of sections  79 to 82, so far as may be, shall apply.]  
(2) The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to workers  4[in any factory] of any railway 
administered by th e Government, who are governed by leave rules approved by the Central Government.  
79. Annual leave with wages .—(1) Every worker who has worked for a period of  240 days or more 
in a factory during a calendar year shall be allowed during the subsequent calendar year, leave with wages 
for a number of days calculated at the rate of — 
(i) if an adult, one day for every twe nty days of work performed by  him during the previous 
calendar year;  
(ii) if a child, one day for every fifteen days of work performed by  him during the previous 
calendar year.  
Explanation  1.—For the purpose of this sub -section— 
(a) any days of lay off, by  agreement or contract or as permissible under the standing orders;  
(b) in the case of a female worker, maternity leave for any number of days not exceeding twelve 
weeks; and  
(c) the le
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 41]
 female worker, maternity leave for any number of days not exceeding twelve 
weeks; and  
(c) the leave earned in the year prior to that in which the leave is enjoyed,  
shall be deemed to be days on which the worker has worked in a factory for the purpose of computation 
of the period of  240 days or more, but he shall not earn leave for these days.  
Explanation  2.—The leave admissible under this sub -section shall be exclusive of all holidays 
whether occurring during or at either end of the period of leave.  
(2) A worker whose service commences otherwise than on the first day of January shall be entitled to 
leave with wages at the rate laid down in clause ( i) or, as the case may be, clause ( ii) of sub -section ( 1) if 
he has worked for two -thirds of the total number of days in the remainder of the calendar year.  
5[(3) If a worker is discharged or dismissed from service or quits  his employment or is superannuated 
or dies while in ser vice, during the course of the calendar year, he or  his heir or nominee, as the case may 
be, shall be entitled to wages in lieu of the quantum  of leave to which he was entitled immediately 
before  his discharge, dismissal, quitting of employment, superannua ting or death calculated at the rates 
specified in sub -section ( 1) even if he had not worked for  the entire period specified in sub-section ( 1) or 
sub-section ( 2) making  him eligible to avail of such leave, and such payment shall be made — 
(i) where the worker is discharged or dismissed or quits employment, before the expiry of the 
second working day from the date of such discharge, dismissal or quitting; and  
(ii) where the worker is superannuated or dies while in service, before the expiry of two months 
from the date of such superannuating or death.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 1954, s. 20 for Chapter VIII (w.e.f. 7 -5-1954).  
2. Subs. by Act 94 of 1976, s. 31, for “agreement” (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 41]
er VIII (w.e.f. 7 -5-1954).  
2. Subs. by Act 94 of 1976, s. 31, for “agreement” (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
3. Subs. by s. 31, ibid.,  for the proviso (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
4. Subs. by  Act 94 of 1976 , s. 31, for “in any workshop” (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
5. Subs. by s. 32,  ibid., for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 42]
42 
 (4) In calculating leave under this section, fraction of leave of half a day or more shall be treated as 
one full day ’s leave, and fraction of less than half a day shall be omitted.  
(5) If a worker does not i n any one calendar year take the whole of the leave allowed to  him under 
sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), as the case may be, any leave not taken by  him shall be added to the 
leave to be allowed to  him in the succeeding calendar year : 
Provided that the total number of days of leave that may be carried forward to a succeeding year shall 
not exceed thirty in the case of an adult or forty in the case of a child : 
Provided further that a worker, who has applied for leave with wages but has not been given such  
leave in accordance with any scheme laid down in sub -sections ( 8) and ( 9) 1[or in contravention of sub -
section ( 10)] shall be entitled to carry forward the  2[leave refused] without any limit.  
(6) A worker  may at any time apply in writing to the manager of  a factory not less than fifteen days 
before the date on which he wishes  his leave to begin, to take all the leave or any portion  thereof 
allowable to him during the calendar year : 
Provided that the application shall be made not less than thirty days before the date on which the 
worker wishes  his leave to begin, if he is employed in a public utility service as defined in clause ( n) of 
section  2 of the Industrial Disputes Act.  1947  (14 of 1947):  
Provided further that the number of times in which leave m ay be taken during any year shall not 
exceed three.  
(7) If a worker wants to avail  himself of the leave with wages due to  him to cover a period of illness, 
he shall be granted such leave even if the application for leave is not made within the time specifi ed in 
sub-section ( 6); and in such a case wages as admissible under section  81 shall be paid not later than 
fifteen days, or in the case of a public utility service not later than thirty days from t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 42]
ter than 
fifteen days, or in the case of a public utility service not later than thirty days from the date of the 
application for leave.  
(8) For the purpose of ensuring the continuity of work, the occupier or manager of the factory, in 
agreement with the Works Committee of the factory constituted under section  3 of the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 1947  (14 of 1947), or a similar Committee constituted under any oth er Act or if there is no such 
Works Committee or a similar Committee in the factory, in agreement with the representatives of the 
workers therein chosen in the prescribed manner, may lodge with the Chief Inspector a scheme in writing 
whereby the grant of l eave allowable under this section may be regulated.  
(9) A scheme lodged under sub -section ( 8) shall be displayed at some conspicuous and convenient 
places in the factory and shall be in force for a period of twelve months from the date on which it comes 
into force, and may thereafter be renewed with or without modification for a further period of twelve 
months at a time, by the manager in agreement with the Works Committee or a similar Committee, or as 
the case may be, in agreement with the representatives of the workers as specified in sub -section ( 8), and 
a notice of renewal shall be sent to the Chief Inspector before it is renewed.  
(10) An application for leave which does not contravene the provisions of sub -section ( 6) shall not be 
refused, unless refus al is in accordance with the scheme for the time being in operation under sub -sections 
(8) and ( 9). 
(11) If the employment of a worker who is entitled to leave under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), 
as the case may be, is terminated by the occupier befo re he has taken the entire leave to which he is 
entitled, or if having applied for and having not been granted such leave, the worker quits  his 
employment, before he has taken the leave, the occupier of the factory shall pay  him the amount payable 
under se ction 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 42]
 has taken the leave, the occupier of the factory shall pay  him the amount payable 
under se ction  80 in respect of the leave not taken, and such payment shall be made, where the 
employment of the worker is terminated by the occupier, before the expiry of the second working day 
after such termination, and where a worker who quits  his employment, o n or before the next pay day.  
(12) The unavailed leave of a worker shall not be taken into consideration in computing the period of 
any notice required to be given before discharge or dismissal.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 94 of 1976 , s. 32. (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
2. Subs. by s. 32, ibid.,  for “unavailed leave” (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 43]
43 
 STATE AMENDMENTS  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 79 of 63 of  1948 .—In section 79 of the principal Act, in sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) for the figures and word “240 days” the figures and word “90 days” shall be substituted;  
(b) in  Explanation 1 , for the figures and word “240 days” the figures  and word “90 days” shall be 
substituted.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act 40 of 2015, s. 5].  
80. Wages during leave period .—(1) For the leave allowed to  him under  1[section  78 or section  79, 
as the case may be,] a worker  2[shall be entitled to wages] at a rate equal  to the daily average of  his total 
full time earnings for the days on which  3[he actually worked] during the month immediately 
preceding  his leave, exclusive of any overtime and bonus but inclusive of dearness allowance and the 
cash equivalent of the advan tage accruing through the concessional sale to the worker of food grains and 
other articles:  
4[Provided that in the case of a worker who has not worked on any day during the calendar month 
immediately preceding  his leave, he shall be paid at a rate equal t o the daily average of  his total full time 
earnings for the days on which he actually worked during the last calendar month preceding  his leave, in 
which he actually  worked, exclusive of any overtime and bonus but inclusive of dearness allowance and 
the ca sh equivalent of the advantage accruing through the concessional sale to the workers of food grains 
and other articles.]  
(2) The cash equivalent of the advantage accruing through the concessional sale to the worker of food 
grains and other articles shall b e computed as often as may be prescribed, on the basis of the maximum 
quantity of food grains and other articles admissible  to a standard family.  
Explanation  1.—“Standard family ” means a family consisting of a worker,  his or her spouse and two 
children bel ow the age of fourteen years requiring in all three adult consumption units.  
Explanation  2.—“Adult consumpti
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 43]
of fourteen years requiring in all three adult consumption units.  
Explanation  2.—“Adult consumption unit ” means the consumption unit of a male above the age of 
fourteen years;  and the consumption unit of a female above the age of fourteen years and that of a child 
below the age of fourteen years shall b e calculated at the rates of  8 and 6 respectively of one adult 
consumption unit.  
(3) The State Government may make rules prescribing — 
(a) the manner in which  the cash equivalent of the advantage accruing through the concessional 
sale to a worker of food grains and other articles shall be computed; and  
(b) the registers that shall be maintained in a factory for the purpose of securing compliance with 
the provis ions of this section.  
81. Payment in advance in certain cases .—A worker who has been allowed leave for not less than 
four days, in the case of an adult, and five days, in the case of a child, shall, before his leave begins be 
paid the wages due for the per iod of the leave allowed.  
82. Mode of recovery of unpaid wages .—Any sum required to be paid by an employer, under  his 
Chapter but not paid by  him shall be recoverable as delayed wages under the provisions of the Payment of 
Wages Act,  1936  (4 of 1936).  
83. Power to make rules .—The State Government may make rules directing man agers of factories to 
keep registers containing such particulars as may be prescribed and requiring the registers to be made 
available for examination by Inspectors.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 94 of 1976, s. 33, for “section 79”  (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
2. Subs. by Act 20 of 1987, s. 24, for “shall be paid” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
3. Subs. by Act 94 of 1976, s. 33, for “he worked”  (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
4. Ins. by Act 20 of 1987, s. 24 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 44]
44 
 84. Power to exempt  factories .—Where the State Government is satisfied that the leave rules 
applicable to workers in a factory provide benefits which in its opinion are not less favourable than those 
for which this Chapter makes provision it may, by written order; exempt the  factory from all or any of the 
provisions of this Chapter subject to such conditions as may be specified in the order.]  
1[Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, in deciding whether the benefits which are provided 
for by any leave rules are less fa vourable than those for which this Chapter makes provision, or not, the 
totality of the benefits shall be taken into account.]  
CHAPTER IX  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS  
85. Power to apply the act to certain premises .—(1) The State Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, declare that all or any of the provisions of this Act shall apply to any place wherein a 
manufacturing process is carried on with or without the aid of power or is so ordinarily carried on, 
notwithstanding that — 
(i) the number of pers ons employed therein is less than ten, if working with the aid of power and 
less than twenty if working without the aid of power, or  
(ii) the persons working therein are not employed by the owner thereof but are working with the 
permission of, or under agr eement with, such owner:  
Provided that the manufacturing process is not being carried on by the owner only with the aid of  his 
family.  
(2) After a place  is so declared, it shall be deemed to be a factory for the purposes of this Act, and the 
owner shall be  deemed to be the occupier, and any person working therein, a worker.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, “owner ” shall include a lessee or mortgage with 
possession of the premises.  
STATE AMENDMENT S 
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 85 of 63 of 1948 .—In section 85 of the principal Act, in sub -section ( 1), in 
clause (i), — 
(a) after the words “less than ten” the words “or suc
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 44]
 Act, in sub -section ( 1), in 
clause (i), — 
(a) after the words “less than ten” the words “or such number of workers as may be specified by 
the State Government under sub -clause (i) of clause (m) of section 2” shall be inserted;  
(b) after the words “less than twenty” the words “or such number of workers as may be specified 
by the State Government under sub -clause ( ii) of  clause (m) of section 2,” shall be inserted.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act 40 of 2015, s. 6]  
Arunachal Prade sh  
Amendment of section 85. —In section 85 of the principal Act, in sub -section (1), in clause (i), for 
the words “ten” and “twenty”, the words “twenty” and “forty” shall be respectively substituted.  
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh Act 6 of 2020, s. 4]  
Rajasthan  
Amendment of section 85, Central Act No. 63 of 1948. - In clause (i) of sub -section (1) of 
section 85 of the principal Act, for the existing words "ten" and "twenty", the words  "twenty" 
and "forty"  shall be substituted respectively.  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 20 of 2014, s. 3]  
86. Power to exempt public institutions .—The State Government may exempt, subject to such 
conditions as it may consider necessary, any workshop or workplace where a manufacturing process is 
carried on and which is attached to a public institution maintained for the purposes of 
education,2[training, research] or reformation, from all or any of the provisions of this Act:  
Provided that no exemption shall be granted from the provisions relating to hours of work and 
holidays, unless the per sons having the control of the institution submit, for the approval of the State 
Government, a scheme for the regulation of the hours of employment, intervals for meals, and holidays of 
the persons employed in or attending the institution or who are inmate s of the institution, and the State 
Government is satisfied that the provisions of the scheme are not less favourable than the corresponding 
provisions of this Act.  
                                      
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 44]
 favourable than the corresponding 
provisions of this Act.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 94 of 1976, s. 34 (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
2. Subs. by  Act 94 of 1976  s. 35, for “training” (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 45]
45 
 87. Dangerous operations .—Where the State Government is of opinion that any  1[manufacturing  
process or operation] carried on in a factory exposes any persons employed in it to a serious risk of bodily 
injury, poisoning or disease, it may make rules applicable to any factory or class or description of 
factories in which the  1[manufacturing proces s or operation] is carried on — 
(a) specifying the  1[manufacturing process or operation] and declaring it to be dangerous;  
(b) prohibiting or restricting the employment of women, adolescents or children in 
the 1[manufacturing process or operation];  
(c) providing for the periodical  medical examination of persons employed, or seeking to be 
employed, in the  1[manufacturing process or operation], and prohibiting the employment or persons 
not certified as fit for such employment  2[and requiring the payment by the occupier of the factory of 
fees for such  medical examination];  
(d) providing for the protection of all persons employed in the1[manufacturing process or 
operation] or in the vicinity of the places where it is carried on;  
(e) prohibiting, restricting  or controlling the use of any specified materials or processes in 
connection with the  1[manufacturing process or operation];  
2[(f) requiring the provision of additional welfare amenities and sanitary facilities and the supply 
of protective equipment and c lothing, and laying down the standards thereof, having regard to the 
dangerous nature of the manufacturing process or operation.  
3***                                      *                                    *  
4[87A. Power to prohibit employment on account  of serious hazard .—(1) Where it appears to the 
Inspector that conditions in a factory or part thereof are such that they may cause serious hazard by way 
of injury or death to the persons employed therein or to the general public in the vicinity, he may, b y 
order in writing to the occupier of the factory, state the particulars
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 45]
in the vicinity, he may, b y 
order in writing to the occupier of the factory, state the particulars in respect of which he considers the 
factory or part thereof to be the cause of such serious hazard and prohibit such occupier from employing 
any person in the factory or any part the reof other than the minimum number of persons necessary to 
attend to the minimum tasks till the hazard is removed.  
(2) Any order issued by the Inspector under sub -section ( 1) shall have effect for a period of three days 
until extended by the Chief Inspecto r by a subsequent order.  
(3) Any person  aggrieved by an order of the Inspector under sub -section ( 1), and the Chief Inspector 
under sub -section ( 2), shall have the right to appeal to the High Court.  
(4) Any person whose employment has been affected by an order issued under sub -section ( 1), shall 
be entitled to wages and other benefits and it shall be the duty of the occupier to provide alternative 
employment to  him wherever possible and in the manner prescribed.  
(5) The provisions of sub -section ( 4) shall  be without prejudice to the rights of the parties under the 
Industrial Disputes Act,  1947  (14 of 1947).]  
88. Notice of certain accidents .—5[(1)] Where in any factory an accident occurs which causes death, 
or which causes any bodily injury by reason of whi ch the person injured is prevented from working for a 
period of forty -eight hours or more immediately following the accident, or which is of such nature as may 
be prescribed in this behalf, the manager of the factory shall send notice thereof to such autho rities, and in 
such form and within such time, as may be prescribed.  
6[(2) Where a n otice given under sub -section ( 1) relates to an accident causing death, the authority to 
whom the notice is sent shall make an inquiry into the occurrence within one month of the receipt of the 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 94 of 1976 s. 36,  ibid.,  for “op
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 45]
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 94 of 1976 s. 36,  ibid.,  for “operation” (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
2. Ins. by  Act 94 of 1976, s. 36  (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
3. Omitted by Act of 20 of 1987, s. 25  (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
4. Ins. by s. 26, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
5. Section 88 re -numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 94 of 1976, s. 37 (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
6. Ins. by s. 37, ibid. (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 46]
46 
 notice or, if such authority is not the Inspector, cause the Inspector to make an inquiry within the said 
period.  
(3) The State Government may make rules for regulating the procedure at inquiries under this 
section.]  
1[88A. Notice of certain dangerous occurrences .—Where in a factory any dangerous occurrence of 
such nature as may be prescribed occurs, whether causing any bodily injury or disability or not, the 
manager of the factory shall send notice thereof to such authorities, and in such form and within such 
lime, as may be prescribed.]  
89. Notice of certain diseases .—(1) Where any worker in a factory contracts any disease specified 
in2[the Third Schedule], the manager of the factory shall send notice thereof to such authorities, and in 
such form and within such time, as may be prescribed.  
(2) If any medical practitioner attends on a person who is or has been employed in a factory, and who 
is, or is believed by the medical practitioner to be, suffering from any disease specified in2[the Third 
Schedule], the medical practitioner shall without delay send a report in writing to the office of the Chief 
Inspector stating — 
(a) the name and full postal address of the patient,  
(b) the disease from which he believes the patient to be suffering, and 
(c) the name and address of the factory in which the patient is, or was last, employed.  
(3) Where  the report under sub -section ( 2) is confirmed to the satisfaction of the Chief Inspector, by 
the certificate of a certifying surgeon or otherwise, that th e person is suffering from a disease specified 
in2[the Third Schedule], he shall pay to the medical practitioner such fee as may be prescribed, and the fee 
so paid shall be recoverable as an arrear of land -revenue from the occupier of the factory in which the 
person contracted the disease.  
(4) If any medical practitioner fails to comply with the provisions of sub -section ( 2), he shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend to3[one tho
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 46]
 the provisions of sub -section ( 2), he shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend to3[one thousand rupees].  
4[(5) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, add to or alter the Third 
Schedule and any such addition or alteration shall have effect as if it had been made by this Act.]  
90. Power to direct enquiry into cases of accident or disease .—(1) The State Government may, if it 
considers it expedient so to do, appoint a competent person to inquire into the causes of any accident 
occurring in a factory or into any case where a disease specified in  5[the Third Schedule] has been, or is 
suspected to have been  contracted in a factory, and may als o appoint one or more persons possessing legal 
or special knowledge to act as assessors in such inquiry.  
(2) The person appointed to hold an inquiry under this section shall have all the powers of a Civil 
Court under the Code of Civil Procedure,  1908  (5 of 1908), for the purposes of enforcing the attendance 
of witnesses and compelling the production of documents and material objects, and may also, so far as 
may be necessary for the purposes of the inquiry, exercise any of the powers of an Inspector under th is 
Act; and every person required by the person making the inquiry to furnish any information shall be 
deemed to be legally bound so to do within the  meaning of section  176 of the Indian Penal Code 
(45 of 1860).  
(3) The person holding an inquiry under this  section shall make a report to the State Government 
stating the causes of the accident, or as the case may be, disease, and any attendant circumstances, and 
addition any observations which he or any of the assessors may think fit to make.  
(4) The State Go vernment may, if it thinks fit, cause to be published any report made under this 
section or any extracts therefrom.  
(5) The State Government may make rules for regulating the procedure at inquiries under this section.  
                                   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 46]
 for regulating the procedure at inquiries under this section.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 94 of 1976 , s. 38 (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
2. Subs. by Act 20 of 1987, s. 27, for “the Schedule” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
3. Subs. by s. 27, ibid.,  for “fifty rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
4. Added by s. 27, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
5. Subs. by s. 28, ibid.,  for “the Schedule” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 47]
47 
 91. Power to take samples .—(1) An Insp ector may at any time during the normal working hours of a 
factory, after informing the occupier or manager of the factory or other person for the time being 
purporting to be in charge of the factory, take in the manner hereinafter provided a sufficient sa mple of 
any substances used or intended to be used in the factory, such use being — 
(a) in the belief of the Inspector in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or the rules 
made thereunder, or  
(b) in the opinion of the Inspector likely to cause  bodily injury to, or injury to the health of, 
workers in the factory.  
(2) Where the Inspector  takes a sample under sub -section ( 1), he shall, in the presence of the person 
informed under that sub -section unless such person willfully absents  himself, divid e the sample into three 
portions and effectively seal and suitably mark them, and shall permit such person to add  his own seal and 
mark thereto.  
(3) The person informed as aforesaid shall, if the Inspector so requires, provide the appliances for 
dividing, sealing and marking the sample taken under this section.  
(4) The Inspector shall — 
(a) forthwith give one portion of the sample to the person informed under sub -section ( 1); 
(b) forthwith send the second portion to a Government Analyst for analysis and rep ort thereon;  
(c) retain the third portion for production to the Court before which proceedings, if any, are 
instituted in respect of the substance.  
(5) Any document purporting to be a report under the hand of any Government Analyst upon any 
substance submitted to  him for analysis and report under this section, may be used as evidence in any 
proceedings instituted in respect of the substance.  
1[91A. Safety and occupational health surveys .—(1) The Chief Inspector, or the Director General 
of Factory Advic e Service and Labour Institutes, or the Director General of Health Services  , to the 
Government of India, or such other 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 47]
nstitutes, or the Director General of Health Services  , to the 
Government of India, or such other officer as may be authorised in this behalf by the State Government or 
the Chief Inspector or the Director General of Factory Advice Ser vice and Labour Institutes or the 
Director General of Health Services may, at any time during the normal working hours of a factory, or at 
any other time as is found by  him to be necessary, after giving notice in writing to the occupier or 
manager of the f actory or any other person who for the time being purports to be in charge of the factory, 
undertake safety and occupational health surveys, and such occupier or manager or other person shall 
afford all facilities for such every, including facilities for t he examination and testing of plant and 
machinery and collection of samples and other data relevant to the survey.  
(2) For the purpose  of facilitating surveys under sub -section ( 1) every worker shall, if so required by 
the person conducting the survey, present  himself to undergo such  medical examination as may be 
considered necessary by such person and furnish all information in  his possession and relevant to the 
survey.  
(3) Any time spent by a worker for undergoing  medical examination or furnishing info rmation under 
sub-section ( 2) shall, for the purpose of calculating wages and extra wages for overtime work, be deemed 
to be time during which such worker worked in  the factory.]  
2[Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, the report, if any, submitte d to the State 
Government by the person conducting the survey under sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to be a report 
submitted by an Inspector under this Act.]  
CHAPTER X  
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE  
92. General penalty for offences .—Save as is otherwise expressly  provided in this Act and subject 
to the provisions of sec tion 93 , if in, o r in respect of, any factor there is any contravention of any of the 
                                    
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 47]
espect of, any factor there is any contravention of any of the 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 94 o f 1976, s. 39 (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
2. Ins. by Act 20 of 1987, s. 29  (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 48]
48 
 provisions of this Act or of any rules made thereunder or of any order in writing given thereunder, the 
occupie r and manager of the factory shall each be guilty of an offence and punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to  1[two years] or with fine which may extend to  2[one lakh rupees] or with 
both, and if the contravention is continued after conviction, with a further fine which may extend to3[one 
thousand rupees] for each day on which the contravention is so continued:  
4[Provided that where contravention of any of the provisions of Chapter IV or any rule made 
thereunder or under section 87 ha s resulted in an accident causing death or serious bodily injury, the fine 
shall not be less than  5[twenty -five thousand rupees] in the case of an accident causing death, and  6[five 
thousand rupees] in the case of an accident causing serious bodily injury.  
Explanation. —In this section and in section 94 “serious bodily injury ” means an injury which 
involves, or in all probability will involve, the permanent loss of the use of, or permanent injury to, any 
limb or the permanent loss of, or injury to, sight or hearing, or the fracture of any bone, but shall not 
include, the fracture of bone or joint (not being fracture of more than one bone or joint) of any phalanges 
of the hand or foot.]  
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Maharashtra  
Insertion of section 92A in 63 of 1948 .—After  section 92 of the principal Act, the following section 
shall be inserted, namely: — 
92A. Compounding of certain offences .—(1) The State Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette , prescribe in respect of the offences specified in the Fourth Sc hedule, which may before 
the institution of the prosecution, be compounded by such officer not below the rank of Deputy Chief 
Inspector of Factories and for such amount as may be prescribed but the amount of fine shall not be more 
than the fine prescribed under section 92:  
Provided that, the State Government
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 48]
 shall not be more 
than the fine prescribed under section 92:  
Provided that, the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette , amend the Fourth 
Schedule by way of addition, omission or variation of any offence specified in the said Schedule.  
(2) Where an offence has been compounded under sub -section (1), no further proceedings shall be 
taken against the offender in respect of such offence.”.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act 40 of 2015, s. 7].  
7[93. Liability of owner of premises in certain circumstances .—(1) Where in any premises 
separate buildings are leased to different occupiers for use as separate factories, the owner of the premises 
shall be responsible for the provision and maintenance of common facilities and services, such as 
approach roads, drainage, water supply, lighting and sani tation.  
(2) The Chief Inspector shall have, subject to the control of the State Government, power to issue 
orders to the owner of the premises in respect of the carrying out of the provisions of sub -section ( 1). 
(3) Where is any premises, independent or se lf-contained, floors or flats are leased to different 
occupiers for use as separate factories, the owner of the premises shall be liable as if he were the occupier 
or manager of a factory, for any contravention of the provisions of this Act in respect of — 
(i) latrines, urinals and washing facilities in so far as the maintenance of the common supply of 
water for these purposes is concerned;  
(ii) fencing of machinery and plant belonging to the owner and not specifically entrusted to the 
custody or user of an occupier;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 20 of 1987 , s. 30, for “three months” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
2. Subs. by s. 30, ibid.,  for “two thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
3. Subs. by s. 30, ibid.,  for “seventy -five rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
4. Ins. by Act 94 of 1976, s. 40 (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
5. Subs. by Act 20 of 1987, s. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 48]
12-1987).  
4. Ins. by Act 94 of 1976, s. 40 (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
5. Subs. by Act 20 of 1987, s. 30, for “one thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
6. Subs. by s. 30, ibid.,  for “five thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987). 
7. Subs. by Act 25 of 1954, s. 21, for section 93 (w.e.f.  7-5-1954 ). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 49]
49 
 (iii) safe  means  of access to the floors or flats and maintenance and cleanliness of staircases and 
common passages;  
(iv) precautions in case of fire;  
(v) maintenance of hoists and lifts; and  
(vi) maintenance of any other common facilities provid ed in the premises.  
(4) The Chief Inspector shall have, subject to the control of the State Government, power to issue 
orders to the owner of the premises in respect of the carrying out the provisions of sub -section ( 3). 
(5) The provisions of sub -section ( 3) relating to the liability of the owner shall apply where in any 
premises independent rooms with common latrines, urinals and washing facilities are leased to different 
occupiers for use as separate factories:  
Provided that the owner shall be responsible  also for complying with the requirements relating to the 
provision and maintenance of latrines, urinals and washing facilities.  
(6) The Chief Inspector shall have, subject to the control of the State Government, the power to issue 
orders to the owner of t he premises referred to in sub -section ( 5) in respect of the carrying out of the 
provisions of section  46 or section  48. 
(7) Where in any premises portions of a room or a shed are leased to different occupiers for use as 
separate factories, the owner of the premises shall be liable for any contravention of the provisions of — 
(i) Chapter III, except sections  14 and 15; 
(ii) Chapter IV, except sections  22, 23, 27, 34, 35 and 36: 
Provided that in respect of the provisions of sections  21, 24 and 32 the owner' s liability shall be only 
in so far as such provisions relate to things under  his control:  
Provided further that the occupier shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of Chapter 
IV in respect of plant and machinery belonging to or supplied by  him; 
(iii) section  42. 
(8) The Chief Inspector shall have, subject to the control of the State Government, power to issue 
orders to the owner of the premises in 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 49]
ject to the control of the State Government, power to issue 
orders to the owner of the premises in respect of the carrying out the provisions of sub -section ( 7). 
(9) In respect of sub -sections (5) and ( 7), while computing for the purposes of any of the provisions of 
this Act the total number of workers employed, the whole of the premises shall be deemed to be a single 
factory.]  
94. Enhanced penalty after previous conviction .—1[(1)] If any person  who has been convicted of 
any offence punishable under section 92 is again guilty of an offence involving a contravention of the 
same provision, he shall be punishable on a subsequent conviction with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to2[three year s] or with fine3[which shall not be less than4[ten thousand rupees] but which 
may extend to5[two lakh rupees]] or with both : 
6[Provided that the court may, for any adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, 
impose a fine of less than4[ten thousand rupees]:  
Provided further  that where contravention of any of the provisions of Chapter IV or any rule made 
thereunder or under section 87 has resulted in an accident cau sing death or serious bodily in jury, the fine 
                                                           
1. Section 94 renumbered is sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 94 of 1976, s. 41 (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
2. Subs. by Act 20 of 1987, s. 31, for “six months” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
3. Subs. by Act 94 of 1976, s. 41, for “which may extend to one thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
4. Subs. by Act 20 of 1987, s. 31, for “two hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
5. Subs. by s. 31, ibid.,  for “five thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
6. Subs. by Act 94 of 1976, s. 41, for the proviso (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 50]
50 
 shall not be less than1[thirty-five thousand rupees] in the case of an accident causing death and2[ten 
thousand rupees] in the case of an accident causing serious bodily injury.]  
3[(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1) no cognizance shall be taken of any conviction made more 
than two years before the commission or the offence for which the person is subsequently being 
convicted.]  
95. Penalty for obstructing Inspector .—Whoever willfully obstructs an Inspector in the exercise of 
any power conferred on hi m by or under this Act, or fails to produce on demand by an Inspector any 
registers or other documents in hi s custody kept in pursuance of this Act or of any rules made thereunder, 
or conceals or prevents any worker in a factory from appearing before, or being examined by, a n 
Inspe ctor, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to4[six months] or with 
fine which may extend to5[ten thousand rupees] or with both.  
96. Penalty for wrongfully disclosing results of analysis under section 91 .—Whoever, except in so 
far as it may be necessary for the purposes of a prosecution for any offence punishable under this Act, 
publishes or discloses to any person the results of an analysis made under section 91, shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to6[six months] or with fine which may extend to7[ten 
thousand rupees] or with both.  
8[96A. Penalty for contravention of the provisions of sections 41B, 41 C and 41 H .—(1) Whoever 
fails to comply with or contravenes any of the provisions of section 41B , 4 1 C or 41 H or the rules made 
thereunder, shall, in respect of such failure or contravention, be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to seven years and with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees, and in case the 
failure or contraven tion continues, with additional fine which may extend to five thousand rupees for 
every day during which such failure or contravention continues
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 50]
y extend to five thousand rupees for 
every day during which such failure or contravention continues after the conviction for the first such 
failure or contravention.  
(2) If the failure or contravention  referred to in sub -section ( 1) continues beyond a period of one year 
after the date of conviction, the offender shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to ten years.]  
97. Offences by workers .—(1) Subject to the provisions of section 111 , if any worker employed in a 
factory contravenes any provision of this Act or any rules or orders made thereunder, imposing any duty 
or liability on workers, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to9[five hundred rupees].  
(2) Where a worker is convicted of an offence  punishable under sub -section ( 1) the occupier or 
manager of the factory shall not be deemed to be guilty of an offence in respect of that contravention, 
unless it is proved that he failed to take all reasonable measures for its prev ention.  
98. Penalty for using false certificate of fitness .—Whoever knowingly uses or attempts to use, as a 
certificate of fitness granted to himself under section 70 , a certificate granted to another person under that 
section, or who, having procured suc h a certificate, knowingly allows it to be used, or an attempt to use it 
to be made, by another person, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to10[two months] or with fine which may extend to11[one thousand rupees] or with both.  
99. Penalty forpermitting double employment of child .—If a child works in a factory on any day 
on which he has already been working in another factory, the parent or guardian of the child or the person 
having custody of or control over hi m or obtai ning any  direct benefit from hi s wages, shall be punishable 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 20 of 1987, s. 31, for “two thousand rupess” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
2. Subs. by s. 31
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 50]
. Subs. by Act 20 of 1987, s. 31, for “two thousand rupess” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
2. Subs. by s. 31, ibid.,  for “one thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
3. Ins. by Act 94 of 1976, s. 41 (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
4. Subs. by Act 20 of 1987, s. 32, for “three months” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
5. Subs. by s. 32, ibid.,  for “five thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
6. Subs. by s. 33, ibid.,  for “three months” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
7. Subs. by s. 33, ibid., for “five hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
8. Ins. by s. 34, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
9. Subs. by s. 35, ibid.,  for “twenty rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
10. Subs. by s. 36, ibid.,  for “one month” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
11. Subs. by s. 36, ibid.,  for “fifty rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 51]
51 
 with fine which may extend to1[one thousand rupees], unless it appears to the Court that the child so 
worked without the consent or connivance of such parent, guardian or person.  
100.[Detentio n of occupier in certain cases. ]Rep. by the Factories (Amendment) Act, 1987 (20  of 
1987) ,s. 38 (w.e.f.  1-12-1987).  
101. Exemption of occupier or manager from liability in certain cases .—Where the occupier or 
manager of a factory is charged with an offence punis hable under this Act, he shall be untitled, upon 
complaint duly made by  him and on giving to the prosecutor not less than three clear days' notice in 
writing of  his intention so to do, to have any other person whom he charges as the actual offender brought  
before the Court at the time appointed for hearing the charge; and if, after the commission of the offence 
has been proved, the occupier or manager of the factory, as the case may be, proves to the satisfaction of 
the Court — 
(a) that he has used due dilig ence to enforce the execution of this Act, and  
(b) that the said other person committed the offence in question without  his knowledge, consent 
or connivance,  
that other person shall be convicted of the offence and shall be liable to the like punishment as if he were 
the occupier or manager of the factory, and the occupier or manager, as the case may be, shall be 
discharged from any liability under this Act in respect of such offence:  
Provided that in seeking to prove as aforesaid, the occupier or manager of  the factory, as the case may 
be, may be examined on oath, and  his evidence and that of any witness whom he calls in  his support shall 
be subject to cross -examination on behalf of the person he charges as the actual offender and by the 
prosecutor:  
Provided  further that, if the person charged as the actual offender by the occupier or manager cannot 
be brought before the Court at the time appointed for hearing the charge, the Court shall adjourn the 
hearing from time t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 51]
Court at the time appointed for hearing the charge, the Court shall adjourn the 
hearing from time to time for a period not exceeding three m onths and if by the end of the said period the 
person charged as the actual offender cannot still be brought before the Court, the Court shall proceed to 
hear the charge against the occupier or manager and shall, if the offence be proved, convict the occup ier 
or manager.  
102. Power of Court to make orders .—(1) Where the occupier or manager of a factory is convicted 
of an offence punishable under this Act the Court may, in addition to awarding any punishment, by order 
in writing require  him, within a period specified in the order (which the court may, if it thinks fit and on 
application in such behalf, from time to time extend) to take such  measures as may be so specified for 
remedying the matters in respect of which the offence was committed.  
(2) Where an or der is made under sub -section ( 1) the occupier or manager of the factory, as the case 
may be, shall not be liable under this Act in respect of the continuation of the offence during the period or 
extended period, if any, allowed by the Court, but if, on th e expiry of such period or extended period, as 
the case may be, the order or the Court has not been fully complied with, the occupier or manager, as 
the case may be, shall be deemed to have committed a further offence, and may be sentenced therefore by 
the Court to undergo imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or to pay a fine which may 
extend to one hundred rupees for every day after such expiry on which the order has not been complied 
with, or both to undergo such imprisonment and to pay such fine, as aforesaid.  
103. Presumption as to employment .—If a person is found in a factory at any time, except during 
intervals for  meals or rest, when work is going on or the machinery is in motion, he shall until the 
contrary is proved, be deemed for the purposes of this Act and the r
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 51]
 in motion, he shall until the 
contrary is proved, be deemed for the purposes of this Act and the rules made thereunder to have been at 
that time employed in the factory.  
104. Onus as to age .—(1) When any act or omission would, if a person wear under a certain age, be 
an offence punishable under this Act, and such perso n is in the opinion of the Court prima facie  under 
such age, the burden shall be on the accused to prove that such person is no under such age.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 20 of 1987, s. 37, for “fifty rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 52]
52 
 (2) A declaration in writing by a certifying surgeon relating to a worker that he has personally 
examined  him an d believes  him to be under the age stated is such declaration shall, for the purposes of 
this Act and the rules made thereunder, be admissible as evidence of the age of that worker.  
1[104A . Onus of proving limits of what is practicable, etc .—In any proceed ing for an offence for 
the contravention of any provision of this Act or rules made thereunder consisting of a failure to comply 
with a duty or requirement to do something, it shall be for the person who is alleged to have failed to 
comply with such duty o r requirement, to prove that it was not reasonably practicable or, as the case may 
be, all practicable  measures were taken to satisfy the duty or requirement.]  
105. Cognizance of offences .—(1) No Court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act 
except on complaint by, or with the previous sanction in writing of, an Inspector.  
(2) No Court below that of a Presidency Magistrate or of a Magistrate of the first class shall try any 
offence punishable under this Act.  
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 105 of 63 of 1948. —In section 105 of the principal Act, in sub -section (1), 
for the words “an Inspector” the words “the Chief Inspector” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act 40 of 2015, s. 8].  
Rajasthan  
Amendment of section 105,  Central Act No. 63 of 1948. - For t he existing sub -section (1) of section 
105 of the principal Act,  the following shall be substituted, namely: -  
"(1) No Court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act except on complaint by an 
Inspector with the  previous sanction in writing by the State Government." . 
[Vide Rajasthan Act 20 of 2014, s. 4]  
106. Limitation of prosecutions .—No Court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under 
this Act unless complaint thereof is made within three months of the date on which the alleged 
commission of 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 52]
nless complaint thereof is made within three months of the date on which the alleged 
commission of the offence came to the knowledge of an Inspector:  
Provided that where the offence consists of disobeying a written order made by an Inspector, 
complaint thereof may be made within six months of the date on which  the offence is alleged to have 
been committed.  
2[Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) in the case of a continuing offence, the period of limitation shall be computed with reference 
to every point of time dur ing which the offence continues ; 
(b) where for the performance of any act time is granted or extended on an application made by 
the occupier or manager of a factory, the period of limitation shall be computed from the date on 
which the time so granted or extended expired.]  
3[106A . Jurisdi ction of a court for entertaining proceedings, etc., for offence .—For the purposes 
of conferring jurisdiction on any court in relation to an offence under this Act or the rules made 
thereunder in connection with the operation of any plant, the place where the plant is for the time being 
situate shall be deemed to be the place where such offence has been committed.]  
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Uttar Pradesh  
Insertion of new section 106 -A in Act No. 63 of 1948. —In Chapter X of the Factories Act, 1948, 
after section 106,  the following section shall be inserted, namely: —  
“106-A.—Compounding of offences. — The Inspector may, subject to any general or special order of 
the State Government in this behalf compound any offence punishable under this Act with fine only 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 20 of 1987, s. 39 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
2. Ins. by Act 94 of 1976, s. 43 (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
3. Ins. by Act 20 of 1987, s. 40 (w .e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 53]
53 
 committed for the first time, either before or after the institution of the prosecution, on realization of such 
amount of composition fee as he thinks fit, not exceeding the maximum amount of fine fixed for the 
offence; and where the offence is so compounded — 
 (i) before the institution of the prosecution, the offender shall not be liable to prosecution for such 
offence and shall, if in custody, be set at liberty;  
(ii) before the institution of the prosecution, the composition shall amount to acquittal of the 
offen der.”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 35 of 1979, s. 4].  
Rajasthan  
Insertion of new section 106B, Central Act No. 63 of 1948. -  After the existing section 106A 
and before the existing section 107 of the principal Act , the following shall be inserted, namely: - 
"106B. Compounding of offences. - The Inspector may, subject to any general or special order of the 
State Government in this behalf, compound any offence punishable under this Act with fine only, and 
committed for the first time, either before or after the i nstitution of the prosecution, on realisation of such 
amount of composition fee as he thinks fit not exceeding the maximum amount of fine fixed for the offence; 
and where the offence is so compounded, - 
(i) before the institution of the prosecution, the off ender shall not be liable to prosecution, for 
such offence and shall, if in custody, be set at liberty;  
(ii) after the institution of the prosecution the composition shall amount to acquittal of the 
offender.".  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 20 of 2014, s. 5]  
CHAPTER  XI 
SUPPLEMENTAL  
107. Appeals .—(1) The manager of a factory on whom an order in writing by an Inspector has been 
served under the provisions of this Act or the occupier of the factory may, within thirty days of the service 
of the order, appeal against it to the prescribed authority, and such authority may, subject to rules made in 
this behalf by the State Government, confirm, modify or reverse the order.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 53]
bject to rules made in 
this behalf by the State Government, confirm, modify or reverse the order.  
(2) Subject to rules made in this behalf by the State Government (which may prescribe classes of 
appeal s which shall not be heard with the aid of assessors), the appellate authority may, or if so required 
in the petition of appeal shall, hear the appeal with the aid of assessors, one of whom shall be appointed 
by the appellate authority and the other by suc h body representing the industry concerned as may be 
prescribed:  
Provided that if no assessor is appointed by such body before the time fixed for hearing the appeal, or 
if the assessor so appointed fails to attend the hearing at such time, the appellate authority may, unless 
satisfied that the failure to attend is due to sufficient cause, proceed to hear the appeal without the aid of 
such assessor or, if it thinks fit, without the aid of any assessor.  
(3) Subject to  such rules as the Stale Government may make in this behalf and subject to such 
conditions as to partial compliance or the adoption of temporary  measures as the appellate authority may 
in any case think fit to impose, the appellate authority may, if it thinks fit, suspend the order appealed 
against pending the decision of the appeal.  
108. Display of notices .—(1) In addition to the notices required to be displayed in any factory by or 
under this Act, there shall be displayed in every factory a notice containing such abstracts of this Act and 
of th e rules made thereunder as may be prescribed and also the name and address of the Inspector and the 
certifying surgeon.  
(2) All notices required by or under this Act to be displayed in a factory shall be in English and in a 
language understood by the major ity of the workers in the factory, and shall be displayed at some 
conspicuous and convenient place at or near the main entrance to the factory, and shall be maintained in a 
clean and legible condition.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 53]
he factory, and shall be maintained in a 
clean and legible condition.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 54]
54 
 (3) The Chief Inspector may, by order in writing serve d on the manager of any factory, require that 
there shall be displayed in the factory any other notice or poster relating to the health, safety or welfare of 
the workers in the factory.  
109. Service of notices .—The State Government may make rules prescribi ng the manner of the 
service of orders under this Act on owners, occupiers or managers of factories.  
110. Returns .—The State Government may make rules requiring owners, occupiers or managers of 
factories to submit such returns, occasional or periodical, as  may in its opinion be required for the 
purposes of this Act.  
111. Obligations of workers .—(1) No worker in a factory — 
(a) shall willfully interfere with or misuse any appliance, convenience or other thing provided in a 
factory for the purposes of securing  the health, safety or welfare of the workers therein;  
(b) shall willfully and without reasonable cause do anything likely to endanger  himself or others; 
and 
(c) shall willfully neglect to make use of any appliance or other thing provided in the factory fo r 
the purposes of securing the health or safety of the workers therein.  
(2) If any worker employed in a factory contravenes any of the provisions of this section or of any 
rule or order made thereunder, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term w hich may extend to 
three months, or with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees, or with both . 
1[111A . Right of workers, etc .—Every worker shall have the right to — 
(i) obtain from the occupier, information relating to wor kers’ health and safety at wor k, 
(ii) get trained within the factory wherever possible, or, to get himself sponsored by the occupier 
for getting trained at a training center or institute, duly approved by the Chief Inspector, where 
training is imparted for workers ’ health and safety at  work,  
(iii) represent to the I nspector directly or through hi s representative in the matter of ina
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 54]
rk,  
(iii) represent to the I nspector directly or through hi s representative in the matter of inadequate  
provision for protection of hi s health or safety in the factory.]  
112. General power to make rules .—The State Government may make rules providing for any 
matter which under any of the provisions of this Act, is to be or may be prescribed or which may be 
considered expedient in order to give effect to the purposes of this Act.  
113. Powers of Centre to give directions .—The Central Government may give directions to a State 
Governments to the carrying into execution of the provisions of this Act.  
114. No charge for facilities and conveniences .—Subject to the provisions of section  46 no fee or 
charge shall be realised from any worker in respect of any arrangements  or facilities to be provided, or 
any equipments or appliances to be supplied by the occupier under the provisions of this Act.  
115. Publication  of rules .—2[(1)] All rules made under this Act shall be published in the Official 
Gazette, and shall be subject to the condition of previous publication; and the date  to be specified under 
clause ( 3) of section 23 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 ( 10 of 1897), shall be not less than  3[forty-five 
days] from the date on which the draft of the proposed rules was published.  
4[(2) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made , before the State Legislature. ] 
116. Application of Act to Government factories .—Unless otherwise provided this Act shall apply 
to factories belonging to the Central or any State Government.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 20 of 1987, s. 41 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
2. Section 115 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by, s. 42, ibid., (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
3. Subs. by s. 42, ibid.,  for “three months” (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
4. Ins. by s. 42, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 54]
 1 -12-1987).  
4. Ins. by s. 42, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 55]
55 
 117. Protection to persons acting under this Act .—No suit, prosecution or other  legal proceeding 
shall lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
118. Restrictions on disclosure of information .—(1) No Inspector shall, while in service or after 
leaving the service, disclose otherwise than in conne ction with the execution, or for the purposes, of this 
Act any information relating to any manufacturing or commercial business or any working process which 
may come to  his knowledge in the course of  his official duties . 
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shal l apply to any disclosure of information made with the previous 
consent in writing of the owner of such business or process or for the purposes of any legal proceeding 
(including arbitration) pursuant to this Act or of any criminal proceeding which may be taken, whether 
pursuant to this Act or otherwise, or for the purposes of any report of such proceedings as aforesaid.  
(3) If any Inspector contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) he shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to  six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees, or with both.  
1[118A. Restriction on disclosure of information .—(1) Every Inspector shall treat as confidential 
the source  of any complaint brought to hi s notice on the breach of any provision of this Act.  
(2) No inspector shall, while making an inspection under this Act, disclose to the occupier, manager  
or his representative that the inspection is made in pursuance of the receipt of a complaint:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall apply to any case in which the person who has made 
the complai nt has consented to disclose hi s name. ]  
2[119. Act to have effect notwithstanding anything contained in Act 37 of 1970 .—The provisions 
of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding an ything inconsistent therewith contained in the Contract 
Lab
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 55]
ct shall have effect notwithstanding an ything inconsistent therewith contained in the Contract 
Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970  3[or any other law for the time being in force.] ] 
120. Repeal and savings .—The enactments set out in the Table appended to t his section are hereby 
repealed : 
Provided that anything done under the said enactments which could have been done under this Act if 
it had then been in force shall be deemed to have been done under this Act.  
TABLE.—[Enactments repealed. ] Rep. by the Rep ealing and Amending Act,  1950 ( 35 of 1950), s. 2 
and the First Schedule ( w.e.f. 10-4-1950. ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 20 of 1987, s. 43  (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
2. Ins. by Act 94 of 1976, s. 44 (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
3. Ins. by Act 20 of 1987, s. 44 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 56]
56 
 1[THE FIRST SCHEDULE]  
[See section 2 ( cb)] 
LIST OF INDUSTRIES INVOLVING HAZARDOUS PROCESSES  
1. Ferrous Metallurgical industries  
—Integrated Iron and Steel  
—Ferrow -alloys  
—Special Steels  
2. Non-ferrous Metallurgical Industries  
—Primary Metallurgical Industries, namely, size, lead, copper, manganese and aluminium  
3. Foundries (ferrous and non -ferrous)  
—Castings and forgings including cleaning or smoothening/roughening by sand and shot blastin g 
4. Coal (including coke) industries  
—Coal Lignite, coke, etc.  
—Fuel Gases (in cluding Coal Gas, Producer Gas, Water Gas)  
5. Power Generating Industries  
6. Pulp and paper (including paper products) industries  
7. Fertiliser Industries  
—Nitrogenous  
—Phosphatic  
—Mixed  
8. Cement Industries  
—Portland Cement (including slag cement, puzzolona cement and their products)  
9. Petroleum industries  
—Oil Refining  
—Lubricating Oils and Greases  
10. Petro -chemical Industries  
11. Drugs and Pharmaceutical Industries  
—Narcotics, Drugs and Pharmaceutical  
12. Fermentation Industries (Distilleries and Breweries)  
13. Rubber (Synthetic Industries)  
14. Paints and Pigment Industries  
15. Leather Tanning Industries  
16. Electroplating Industries  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 20 of 1987, s. 45 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 57]
57 
  
17. Chemical Industries  
—Coke Oven B y -products and Coal tar Distillation products  
—Industrial Gases (nitrogen, oxygen, acetylene, argon, carbon dioxide, hydrogen, 
sulphurdioxide, nitrous oxide halogenated hydrocarbon, ozone, etc. ) 
—Industrial Carbon  
—Alkalies and Acids  
—Chromates and dichromates  
—Leads and its compounds  
—Electro chemicals (metallic sodium, potassium and magnesium, chlorates, perchlorates and 
peroxides)  
—Electro thermal produces (artificial abrasive, calcium carbide)  
—Nitrogenous compounds (cyanides, cyanamides, and oth er nitrogenous compounds)  
—Phosphorous and its compounds  
—Halogens and Halogenated compounds (Chlorine, Fluorine, Bromine and Iodine)  
—Explosives (including industrial explosives and detonators and fuses)  
18. Insecticides, Fungicides, Herbicides and other Pesticides Industries  
19. Synthetic Resin and Plastics  
20. Man -made Fiber (Cellulosic and non -cellulosic) industry  
21. Manufacture and repair of electrical accumulators  
22. Glass and Ceramics  
23. Grinding or glazing of metals  
24. Manufacture, handling and processing of asbestos and its products  
25. Extraction of oils and fats from vegetable and animal sources  
26. Manufacture, handling and use of benzene and substances containing benzene  
27. Manufacturing processes and operations involving carbon disulphide  
28. Dyes and Dyestuff including their intermediates  
29. Highly flammable liquids and gases.  
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 58]
58 
   
THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(Seesection 41 F)  
PERMISSIBLE LEVELS OF CERTAIN CHEMICAL SUBSTANCES IN  WORK ENVIRONMENT  
 
 
 
Substance  Permissible limits of exposure  
Time -weighted  
average concentration 
(8 hrs)  Short -term 
exposure limit  
(15 min)  
 ppm Mg/m3 ppm Mg/m3 
Acetaldehyde  100 180 150 270 
Acetic acid  10 25 15 37 
Acetone  750 1780  1000  2375  
Acrolein  0.1 0.25 0.3 0.8 
Acrylonitrile -Skin (S.C.)  2 4.5 . . . . 
Aldrin -skin . . 0.25 . . 0.75 
Allychloride  1 3 2 6 
Ammonia  25 18 35 27 
Aniline -Skin 2 10 . . . . 
Anisidine (o -,p-isomers) Skin  0.1 0.5 . . . . 
Arsenic A soluble compounds (as As)  . . 0.2 . . . . 
Benzene (S.C.)  05 1.5 25 7.5 
Beryllium & Compound (as Be) (S.C.)  . . 0.002  . . . . 
Boron trifluoride -C 1 3 . . . . 
Bromine  0.1 0.7 0.3 2 
Butane  800 1900  . . . . 
2-Butanone (Methyl -ethyl Ketone -MEK)  200 590 300 835 
n-Butyl acetate  150 710 200 950 
n-Butyle alcohol -Skin-C 50 150 . . . . 
sec/tert. Butylacetate  200 950 . . . . 
Butyl mercaptan  0.5 1.5 . . . . 
Cadmium Dusts and salts (as Cd)  . . 0.05 . . . . 
Calcium oxide  . . 2 . . . . 
Carbaryl (Sevin)  . . 5 . . . . 
Carbofuran (Furadan)  . . 0.1 . . . . 
Carbon disulphade -Skin 10 30 . . . . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 59]
59 
  ppm Mg/m3 ppm Mg/m3 
Carbon monoxide  50 55 400 440 
Carbon tetrachloride -Skin (S.C.)  5 30 . . . . 
Chlordane -Skin . . 0.5 . . . . 
Chlorine  1 3 3 9 
Chlorobenzene (Monochlorobenzene)  75 350 . . . . 
Chloroform (S.C.)  10 50 . . . . 
bis (Chloromethyl) ether (H.C.)  0.001  0.005  . . . . 
Chromic acid and chromates (as Cr) (Water Soluble)  . . 0.05 . . . . 
Chromous salts (as Cr)  . . 0.05 . . . . 
Copper Fume  . . 0.2 . . . . 
Cotton dust, raw  . . 0.2 . . 0.6 
Crosol, all isomers —Skin 5 22 . . . . 
Cyanides (as CN) —Skin . . 5 . . . . 
Cyanogen  10 20 . . . . 
DDT (Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane)  . . 1 . . 3 
demeron -Skin 0.01 0.1 0.03  0.3 
Diazinon -Skin . . 0.1 . . 0.3 
Dibutylphthalale  . . 5 . . 10 
Dichlorvos (DDVP) —Skin 0.1 1 0.3 3 
Dieldrin—Skin . . 0.25 . . 0.75  
Dinitrobenzene (all isomers) —Skin 0.15 1 0.5 3 
Dinitrotolune -Skin . . 1.5 . . 5 
Diphenyl -(Biphenyl)  0.2 1.5 0.6 4 
Endosulfan (Thiodan) —Skin . . 0.1 . . 0.4 
Endrin—Skin . . 0.1 . . 0.3 
Ethyl acetate  400 1400  . . . . 
Ethyl alcohol  1000  1900  . . . . 
Ethylamine  10 18 . . . . 
Fluorides (as F)  . . 2.5 . . . . 
Fluorine  1 2 2 4 
Formaldehyde (S.C.)  1.0 1.5 2 3 
Formic acid  5 9 . . . . 
Gasoline  300 900 500 1500  
Hydrazine —Skin (S.C.)  0.1 0.1 . . . . 
Hydrogen chloride —C 5 7 . . . . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 60]
60 
  ppm Mg/m3 ppm Mg/m3 
Hydrogen cyanide —Skin—C 10 10 . . . . 
Hydrogen fluoride (as F) —C 3 2.5 . . . . 
Hydrogen peroxide  1 1.5 . . . . 
Hydrogen sulphide  10 14 15 21 
Iodine—C 0.1 1 . . . . 
Iron-Oxide Fume (Fe2O3) (as Fe)  . . 5 . . . . 
Isoamyl acetate  100 525 . . . . 
Isoamyl alcohol  100 360 125 4500  
Isobutyl alcohal  50 150 . . . . 
Lead, inorg, dusts and fumes (as Pb)  . . 0.15 . . . . 
Lindane -Skin . . 0.5 . . . . 
Malathion -Skin . . 10 . . . . 
Manganese dust and compounds (as Mn) —C . . 5 . . . . 
Manganese fume (as Mn) . . 1 . . 3 
Mercury (as Hg) —Skin—     
(i) Alkyl compounds  . . 0.01 . . 0.03 
(ii) All forms except alkyl vapour  . . 0.05 . . . . 
(iii) Aryl and inorganic compounds  . . 0.1 . . . . 
Methyl alcohol (Methanol) —Skin 200 260 250 310 
Methyl Cellosolve  (2-Methoxy -ethanol) Skin  5 16 . . . . 
Methyl isobutyl ketone  50 205 75 300 
Methyl isocyanate -Skin 0.02 0.05 . . . . 
Napthalene  10 50 15 75 
Nickel carbonyl (as Ni)  0.05 0.35 . . . . 
Nitric acid  2 5 4 10 
Nitric oxide  25 30 . . . . 
Nitrobenzene —Skin 1 5 . . . . 
Nitrogen dioxide  3 6 5 10 
Oil mist -mineral  . . 5 . . 10 
Ozone  0.1 0.2 0.3 0.6 
Parathion —Skin . . 0.1 . . . . 
Phenol—Skin 5 19 . . . . 
Phorate (Thimet) —Skin . . 0.05 . . 0.2 
Phosgene (Carbonyl chloride)  0.1 0.4 . . . . 
Phosphine  0.3 0.4 1 1 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 61]
61 
  ppm Mg/m3 ppm Mg/m3 
Phosphoric acid   . . 1 . . 3 
Phosphorus (yellow)  . . 0.1 . . . . 
Phosphorus pentachloride  0.1 1 . . . . 
Phosphorus trichloride  0.2 1.5 0.5 3 
Picric acid —Skin . . 0.1 . . 0.3 
Pyridine  5 15 . . . . 
Silane (Silicon tetrahydride)  5 7 . . . . 
Sodium hydroxide —C . . 2 . . . . 
Styrene, monomer (Phenylethylene)  50 215 100 425 
Sulphur dioxide  2 5 5 10 
Sulphur hexafluoride  1000  6000  . . . . 
Sulphuric acid  . . 1 . . . . 
Tetraethyl lead (as Pb) —Skin . . 0.1 . . . . 
Toluene (Toluol)  100 375 150 560 
O—Toluidinz —Skin (S.C.)  2 9 . . . . 
Tributyl phosphate  0.2 2.5 . . . . 
Trichloroethylene  50 270 200 1080  
Uranium, natural (as U)  . . 0.2 . . 0.6 
Vinyl chloride (H.C.)  5 10 . . . . 
Welding fumes  . . 5 . . . . 
Xylene (o-, m-, p-isomers)  100 435 150 655 
Zinc oxide —     
(i) Fume  . . 5.0 . . 10 
(ii) Dust (Total dust)  . . 10.0 . . . . 
Zirconium compounds (as Zr)  . . 5 . . 10 
C denotes ceiling limit  
*Not more than 4 times a day with at least 60 min. interval between successive exposures.  
Substance  Permissi ble 
(8 hours)  Time -
weighted  average  concentration  
(i) Silica      
(a) Crystalline      
(b) Quartz      
(1) In term of dusts count  10600    mppcm  
% Quartz+10    
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 62]
62 
 Substance  Permissible 
(8 hours)  Time -
weighted  average  concentration  
(2) In terms of respirable dust  
 
(3) In terms of total dust  10  mg/m3 
% respirable quartz+2   
10  mg/m3 
% Quartz+3   
(ii) Cristobalite  Half the limits given against quartz.  
(iii) Tridymite  Half the limits given against quartz.  
(iv) Silica, fused  Same limits as for quartz.  
(v) (a) Tripoli  Same limit as in formula in item 2 given against 
quartz.  
(b) Amorphous  705 mppcm.]  
___________  
  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 63]
63 
 1[THE THIRD SCHEDULE]  
(See sections 89 and 90 ) 
LIST OF NOTIFIABLE DISEASES  
1. Lead  poisoning, including poisoning by any preparation or compound of lead or their sequelae.  
2. Lead -tetra-ethyle poisoning.  
3. Phosphorus poisoning or its sequelae.  
4. Mercury poisoning or its sequelae.  
5. Manganese poisoning or its sequelae.  
6. Arsenic  poisoning or its sequelae.  
7. Poisoning by nitrous fumes.  
8. Carbon bisulphide poisoning.  
9. Benzene poisoning, including, poisoning by any of its homologues, their nitro or amide 
derivatives or its sequelae.  
10. Chrome ulceration or its sequelae.  
11. Anthrax.  
12. Silicosis.  
13. Poisoning by halogens or halogen derivatives of the hydrocarbons of the aliphatic series.  
14. Pathological manifestations due to — 
 (a) radium or other radio -active substances;  
 (b) X -ray.4 
15. Primary epitheliomatous  cancer of the skin.  
16. Toxic anaemia.  
17. Toxic jaundice due to poisonous substances.  
2[18. Oil acne or dermatitis due to mineral oils and compounds containing mineral oil base.  
19. Byssionosis.  
20. Asbestosis.  
21. Occupational or contact dermatitis caused by direct contract with chemicals and paints. These are 
of two types, that is, primary irritants and allergic sensitizers.  
22. Noise induced hearing loss (exposure to high noise levels).]   
3[23. Beriyllium poisoning.   
24. Carbon monoxide poisoning.  
25. Coal miners’pnoumoconiosis.  
26. Phosgene poisoning.  
27. Occupational cancer.  
28. Isocyanates poisoning.  
29. Taxic nephritis.]  
                                                           
1. The existing Schedule renumb ered as the Third Schedule by Act 20 of 1987, s. 46 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
2. Ins. by Act 94 of 1976, s. 45 (w.e.f. 26 -10-1976).  
3. Ins. by Act 20 of 1987, s. 46 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1987).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 64]
64 
  
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Maharashtra  
Addition of FOURTH SCHEDULE to 63 of 1948 .—After the THIRD SCHEDULE appended to 
the principal Act, the following SCHEDULE shall be added, namely: — 
“THE FOURTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 92A)  
List of Compoundable offences  
Serial  
number  Section and rules framed  
thereunder and orders  
issued thereunder  Nature of offence  
(1) (2) (3) 
1. Section 11 –Cleanliness.  Not maintaining cleanliness as per the 
provisions.  
2. Section 18 -Drinking water.  Not providing and maintaining arrangements 
for drinking water as per the provisions.  
3. Section 19 -Latrines and urinals  Not providing latrine and urinal 
accommodation as per the provisions.  
4. Section 20 - Spittoons.  (a) Not providing the spittoons as per the 
provisions.  
(b) Spitting in contravention of sub -section 
(3) of section 20.  
5. Section 42 - Washing facilities.  Not providing and maintaining washing 
facilities as per the provisions.  
6. Section 43 - Facilities for storing and 
drying of wet clothing.  Not providing facilities as per the 
provisions.  
7. Section 44 - Facilities for sitting.  Not providing facilities as per the 
provisions.  
8. Sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) of section 
45 - First-aid appliances.  Not providing and maintaining first -aid 
appliances as per the provisions.  
9. Section 46 - Canteens.  Not providing and maintaining canteen as 
per the provisions.  
10. Section 47 - Shelters, rest rooms and 
lunch rooms.  Not providing and maintaining shelters, 
rest rooms and lunch rooms as per the 
provisions.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 65]
65 
 11. Section 48 - Creches.  Not providing and maintaining creches as 
per the provisions.  
12. Section 50 - Power to make rules to 
supplement Chapter V.  Not complying with the rules framed under 
section 50.  
13. Sub-section (2) of section 53 -
Compensatory Holidays.  Not displaying the notice and not 
maintaining the register for compensatory 
holiday.  
14. Sub-section (5)  of section 59 - Extra 
wages for overtime.  Not maintaining the prescribed registers.  
15. Section 60 - Restriction on double 
employment.  Allowing a worker a double employment 
on any day.  
16. Section 61 - Notice of periods of work 
for adults.  Not complying  with the provisions.  
17. Section 62 - Register of adult workers.  Not maintaining register as per the 
provisions.  
18. Section 63 - Hours of work to 
correspond with notice under section 61.  Not complying with the provisions.  
19. Section 64 - Power to make exempting 
rules.  Not complying with the rules framed under 
section 64.  
20. Section 65 - Power to make exempting 
orders.  Not complying with the orders issued 
under section 65.  
21. Section 79 - Annual leave with wages.  Not complying with the provision s. 
22. Section 80 - Wages during leave period.  Not complying with the provisions.  
23. Section 81 - Payment in advance in 
certain cases.  Not complying with the provisions.  
24. Section 82 - Mode of recovery of unpaid 
wages.  Not complying with the provisions.  
25. Section 83 - Power to make rules.  Not maintaining registers as per rules and 
not complying with the provisions.  
26. Section 84 - Power to exempt factories.  Not complying with the conditions 
specified in the exempting order.  
27. Section 93 - Liability of owner of 
premises in certain circumstances.  Not complying with the provisions 
contained in sub -section (1) and clauses (i) 
and (vi) of sub -section (3).  
28. Section 97 - Offences by workers.  Not complying with the provisions.  
29. Section  108-Display of notices.  Not complying
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 65]
y workers.  Not complying with the provisions.  
29. Section  108-Display of notices.  Not complying with the provisions.  
30. Section 110 -Returns.  Not complying with the provisions.  
31. Section 111 - Obligation of workers.  Not complying with the provisions.  
32. Section 111A - Right of workers, etc.  Denial of rights of workers.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FACTORIES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 66]
66 
 33. Section 114 - No charge for facilities and 
conveniences.  Demanding charge from worker for 
providing any facility under the Act.".]  
 
[Vide Maharashtra Act 40 of 2015, s. 9].  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FARM LAWS REPEAL ACT, 2021.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE FARM LAWS REPEAL ACT, 2021  
_______________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
2. Repeal of Acts 20 of 2020, 21 of 2020 and 22 of 2020.  
3. Amendment of Act 10 of 1955.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FARM LAWS REPEAL ACT, 2021.pdf - page 2]
2 
 THE FARM LAWS REPEAL ACT, 2021  
ACT NO. 40 OF 2021  
[30th November , 2021.]  
 
An Act to repeal the Farmers (Empowerment and Protection) Agreement on Price Assurance 
and Farm Services Act, 2020, the Farmers' Produce Trade and Commerce (Promotion and 
Facilitation) Act, 2020, the Essential Commodities (Amendment) Act, 2020 and to amend the 
Essential Commodities Act, 1955.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -second Year of the Republic of India as follows: —  
1. Short title .— This Act may be called the Farm Laws Repeal Act, 2021 . 
2. Repeal of Acts 20 of 2020, 21 of 2020 and 22 of 2020. — The Farmers (Empowerment and 
Protection) Agreement on Price Assurance and Farm Services Act, 2020, the Farmers' Produce Trade and 
Commerce (Promotion and Facilitation) Act, 2020 and the Essential Commo dities (Amendment) Act, 2020 
are hereby repealed.  
3. Amendment of Act 10 of 1955.  —In section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955,                         
sub-section (1A) shall be omitted . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FATAL ACCIDENTS ACT, 1855.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE FATAL ACCIDENTS ACT, 1855  
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
Preamble  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and extent . 
1A. Suit for compensation to the family of a person for loss occasioned to it by his death by 
actionable wrong .  
2. Not more than one suit to be  brought.  
Claim for loss to estate may be added.  
3. Plaintiff shall deliver particulars, etc.  
4. Interpretation  clause.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FATAL ACCIDENTS ACT, 1855.pdf - page 2]
2 
 THE FATAL ACCIDENTS ACT, 1855  
ACT NO. 13  OF 18551 
[27th March, 1855 .] 
An Act to provide compensation to families for loss occasioned by the death of a person 
caused by actionable wrong . 
Preamble. —WHEREAS no action or suit is now maintainable in any Court against a person who, by 
his wrongful act, neglect or default, may have caused the death of another person , and it is often -times 
right and e xpedient that the wrong -doer in such case should be answerable in damages for the injury so 
caused by  him. It is enacted as follows: — 
2[1. Short title and extent .—(1) This Act may be called  the Fatal Accidents Act, 1855.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India 3[***].] 
4[1A.] Suit for compensation to the family of a person for loss occasioned to it by his death by 
actionable wrong .—Whenever the death of a person shall be caused by wrongful act, neglect or 
default, and the act, neglect or default is such as would (if death had not ensured) have entitled the 
party injured to maintain an action and recover damages in respect thereof, the party who would have 
been liable if death had not ensued , shall be liable to an action or suit for damages, notwithstanding the 
death of the person injured and although the death shall have been caused under such circumstances as 
amount in law to felony or other crime.  
5** * Every such action or suit shall be for the benefit of the wife, husband, pa rent and child, if any, 
of the person whose death shall have been so caused, and shall be brought by and in the name of the 
executor, administrator or representative of the person deceased;  
and in every such action , the Court may give such damages as it ma y think proportioned to 
the loss resulting from such death to the parties respectively, for whom and for whose benefit 
such action shall be brought , and the amount so recovered, after deducting all costs and 
expenses, including the costs not recovered from  the defendant, shall be divided amongst the 
befo
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FATAL ACCIDENTS ACT, 1855.pdf - page 2]

expenses, including the costs not recovered from  the defendant, shall be divided amongst the 
before -mentioned parties, or any of them, in such shares as the Court by its judgment or decree 
shall direct.  
2. Not more than one suit to be brought .—Provided always that not more than one action or suit 
shall be brought for, and in respect of the same subject -matter of complaint 6***: 
Claim for loss to the estate may be added. —Provided that, in any such action or suit, the 
executor , administrator or representative of the deceased may insert a claim for , and recover any 
pecuniary loss to the estate of the deceased occasioned by such wrongful act, neglect or default, 
which sum, when recovered, shall be deemed part of the assets of the estate of the deceased.  
3. Plaintiff shall deliver particulars, etc .—The plaint in any such action or suit shall give a 
full particular of the person or persons for the whom, or on whose behalf, such action or suit shall 
be brought, and of the nature of the claim in respect of which damages shall be sought to be 
recovered.  
                                                   
1. The Act has been extended to Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands by Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 and Sch., and to the Union 
territory of  Pondicherry by Act 26 of 1968, s. 3 and Sch .  
2. Ins. by Act 3 of 1951 , s. 3 and Sch  (w.e.f. 1 -4-1951) . 
3. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule  
   (w.e.f. 31 -10- 2019).  
4. Original s. 1 re -numbered as s. lA by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch.  (w.e.f 1 -4-1951) . 
5. The words "And it is enacted further that" omitted by Act 10 of 1914, s. 3 and Second Sch. (w.e.f. 17 -3-1914) . 
6. The words "and that every such action shall be brought within twelve calendar months after the death of such deceased person" 
omitted by Act 9 of 1871 , s. 2 and First Sch. (w.e.f. 24 -3-1871). For limitation, see now the Indian Limitation Act, 1963           
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FATAL ACCIDENTS ACT, 1855.pdf - page 2]
d First Sch. (w.e.f. 24 -3-1871). For limitation, see now the Indian Limitation Act, 1963                  
(36 of 1963).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FATAL ACCIDENTS ACT, 1855.pdf - page 3]
3 
 4. Interpretation  clause.—The following words and expressions are intended to have the meanings 
hereby assigned to them respectively, so far as such meanings are not excluded by the  context or by the 
nature of the subject -matter; that is to say 1*** the word “person ”, shall apply to bodies politic and 
corporate; and the word "parent" shall include father and mother and grand -father and grand -mother; and 
the word "child" shall include son and daughter , and grand -son and grand -daughter and step -son and 
step-daug hter. 
_________  
                                                   
1. Certain words omitted by Act  10 of 1914, s. 3 and Second Sch. (w.e.f. 17 -3-1914).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FORFEITED DEPOSITS ACT, 1850.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE FORFEITED DEPOSITS ACT, 1850  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Repeals.  
2. Application of forfeited deposits.  
 
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE FORFEITED DEPOSITS ACT, 1850.pdf - page 2]
2 
 1[THE FORFEITED DEPOSITS ACT, 1850 ] 
ACT NO. 25 OF 1850  
[14th June,  1850 .] 
An Act for the forfeiture to Government of deposits made on incomplete sales of land under 
2Regulation 8, 1819 3***. 
WHEREAS  patnidars 4*** fraudulently avail themselves of the 5provision in section 9, Regulation                    
8, 1819, of the Bengal C ode 6*** that forfeited deposits at sales of land 7*** for arrears of rent shall be 
applied as if they were purchase -money.  
1. [Repeals .] Rep. by the Repealing Act, 1870 (14 of 1870), s. 1 and Sch. Pt. II.  
2. Application of forfeited deposits .—Any such forfeited deposit shall be applied to defray the 
expenses of the sale, and the surplus shall be forfeited to Government.  
 
                                                           
1. Short title given by the amending Act 1897 (5 of 1897), s. 4 and Sch. III.  
The Act has been declared, by notification under the schedule Districts Act, 1874 (14 of 1874), s. 3, to be in force in the 
Districts of Hazaribagh, Ranchi, Palam au and Manbhum and Pargana Dhalbhum and the Kolhan in the District of Singbhum in the 
Chota Nagpur Division, See Gazette of India, 1881, Pt. I, p. 504.  
The Act has also been declared to be in force in the Sonthal Parganas by the Sonthal  Parganas Settlement Regulation, 1872 (3 
of 1872), s. 3 ( 1) and Sch.  
2. The Bengal Patni Taluks Regulations, 1819.  
3. The words and figures “and Act 4, 1846” rep. by Act 12 of 1891 , s. 2 and Sch. I, Pt. I.  
4. The words “and judgment -debtors,” rep. by s. 2 and Sch. I, Pt. I, ibid. 
5. The provision referred to rep. by s. 1 of the present Act.  
6. The words and figures “and in section 5, Act 4, 1846,” rep. by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and Sch. I, Pt. I.  
7. The words “in execution of decrees or” rep. by s. 2 and Sch. I, Pt. I,  ibid. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GOVERNMENT SAVINGS PROMOTION ACT, 1873.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE GOVERNMENT SAVINGS PROMOTION ACT, 1873  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
PREAMBLE   
Preliminary  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
Local extent.  
2. [Omitted .]. 
3. Definitions.  
3A. Framing of Savings Schemes.  
3B. Deposit by minor.  
Deposits belonging to the Estates of deceased  Persons.  
4. Nomination by depositor.  
4A. Payment on death of depositor.  
5. Payment to be a discharge.  
 Saving of right of executor.  
 Saving of right of creditor.  
6. Security for due administration.  
7. Power to administer  oath.  
Penalty for false statements.  
7A. Power to call for information.  
8. Deposit when excluded in computing court fees.  
9. [Omitted .]. 
Deposits belonging to Minors  
10. Payment of deposits to minor or guardian.  
11. [Omitted .]. 
Deposits belonging to lunati cs 
12. Payment of deposits belonging to lunatics.  
12A. Operation of account by differently abled persons.  
[Omitted .]. 
13. [Omitted .]. 
Miscellaneous  
14. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
14A. Protection against attachment.  
15. Power to make rules.  
16. Repeal and savings.  
THE SCHEDULE  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GOVERNMENT SAVINGS PROMOTION ACT, 1873.pdf - page 2]
2 
 THE GOVERNMENT SAVINGS PROMOTION  ACT, 1873  
ACT NO. 5 OF 18731 
[28th January , 1873.]  
2[An Act to regulate and channelise the savings from general public into Government Savings 
Schemes.]  
Preamble. —WHEREAS  it is expedient to amend the law relating to the payment of deposits in 
Government Savings Banks; It is hereby enacted as follows: —  
Preliminary  
1. Short title. —This Act may be called the Government Savings 3[Promotion]  Act, 1873.  
Local extent. —It extends  to 4[the whole of India  5***].  
6*   *   *   *               * 
2. [Act not to apply to d eposits in Anchal Savings Bank .]Omitted by the Finance Act, 2018 (13 of 
2018), s. 117 ( w.e.f.  1-4-2018).  
 7[3. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context  otherwise requires, — 
(a) “account ” means an account opened under any of the Savings Schemes;  
(b) “administrator ” means an administrator as defined in clause ( a) of section 2  of the Indian 
Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925);  
(c) “Authorised Officer ” means — 
(i) in the case of a Post Office Savings Bank, an officer authorised by the Director General 
Posts; and  
(ii) in the case of State Bank of India or a banking company or any other company or 
institution, an officer so authorised by State Bank of India or tha t banking company or that other 
company or that institution, as the case may be;  
(d) “banking company ” means a banking company as defined in clause ( c) of section 5  of the 
Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949);  
(e) “depositor ” means an individual by whom, or on whose behalf money has been deposited in a 
Government Savings Bank and “deposit ” means the money so deposited;  
(f) “executor ” means an executor as defined in clause ( c) of section 2  of the Indian Succession 
Act, 1925 (39  of 1925);  
(g) “Government Savings Bank ” means — 
(i) a Post Office Savings Bank; or  
                                                      
1. The Act has been extended to the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu vid
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GOVERNMENT SAVINGS PROMOTION ACT, 1873.pdf - page 2]
                      
1. The Act has been extended to the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu vide Notification No. S.O. 2734 dated 1st September, 
1962, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Pt. II, Sec. 300, p. 1991, extended to and brought into force in Dadra and Nagar Haveli by 
Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and Sch. I (w.e.f. 1 -7-1965) and to the whole of the Union territory of Lakshadweep by Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3  and 
Sch.. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1967).  
 The Act came into force in Pondicherry on 1 -10-1963 vide Reg. 7 of 1963, S. 3 and Sch. I.  
2.  Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s.114, for long title (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018).  
3.  Subs.  by s. 11 5, ibid.,  for “Banks” (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018).  
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “all the Provinces of India ” which had been subs, by the A. O. 1948, for  “the whole of British 
India ”. 
5. The words “except the State of Jammu an d Kashmir ” which were subs. by Act 3 of 1951, for “except  Part B States ” omitted 
by Act 62 of 1956, s. 2 and Sch.  
6. The commencement c lause  rep. by Act 16 of 1874, s. 1 and Sch., Pt. I.   
7.  Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 118, for section 3 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GOVERNMENT SAVINGS PROMOTION ACT, 1873.pdf - page 3]
3 
 (ii) State Bank of India or a banking company, or any other company or institution, as the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify for the p urposes of this 
Act; 
(h) “guardian ”, in relation to a minor or a person of unsound mind means — 
(i) either of the parents;  
(ii) where neither parent is alive or where neither or the only living parent is incapable of 
acting as such, a person entitled under the law for the time being in force to have the care of the 
property of a minor or a person of unsound mind, as the case may be;  
(iii) legal guardian appointed by a court;  
(i) “minor ” means a person who has not attained the age of majority under the Indian  Majority 
Act, 1875 (9 of 1875);  
(j) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(k) “Savings Schemes ” means the Government Savings Schemes, including Savings Certificates 
and Public Provident Fund Scheme, listed in the Schedule;  
(l) “Schedule ” means the Schedule annexed to this Act.  
3A. Framing of Savings Schemes. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, frame new Savings Schemes or amend or discontinue existing Savings Schemes to promote 
household savin gs in the country.  
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, include or omit or amend 
Savings Schemes in the Schedule.  
(3) The notification referred to in sub -section ( 1) may include any or all of the following provisions, 
depending on the desi gn of such Scheme, namely: — 
(a) the persons who shall be eligible to make deposit in a Savings Scheme;  
(b) the terms and conditions subject to which deposit may be made;  
(c) the manner of calculation, frequency of payment and rate of int erest payable on the deposit;  
(d) the maximum and minimum limits of deposit;  
(e) premature closure, withdrawal of deposit, grant of loans against deposit and transfer of 
deposit;  
(f) any other provision depending on the purpose and des
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GOVERNMENT SAVINGS PROMOTION ACT, 1873.pdf - page 3]
against deposit and transfer of 
deposit;  
(f) any other provision depending on the purpose and design of the Savings Scheme.  
3B. Deposit by minor. —(1) A minor who has attained the age of ten years may open and operate an 
account in the Government Savings Bank, if so permitted under a Savings Scheme.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the guardian of a mino r may open and operate an 
account on behalf of the minor, till he becomes a major.]  
Deposits belonging to the Estates of deceased  Persons. 
1[4. Nomination by depositor. —2[(1) The depositors shall designate one or more individuals, as 
nominee or nominees, who shall be entitled, in the event of the death of the depositor of a single account, 
or all the depositors of a joint account, as the case may be, to receive the sum due, as an owner or a 
trustee, and to the extent, as may be specified by the depositor a t the time of making nomination:  
Provided that if the depositor is a minor or a person of unsound mind, the nominee shall be 
designated by the guardian.]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 1959, s. 3, for the former s. 4.  
2. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 119, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GOVERNMENT SAVINGS PROMOTION ACT, 1873.pdf - page 4]
4 
  (2) Any nomination referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall become void if the nominee predece ases, or 
where there are two or more nominees, all the nominees predecease , the depositor.  
(3) Where the nominee is a minor it shall be lawful for the depositor to appoint in the 
prescribed manner any person to receive the deposit in the event of his death during th e minority of 
the nominee.  
1[(4) The transfer of deposit, if permitted under a Savings Scheme, shall automatically cancel a 
nomination previously made.]  
4A. Payment on death of depositor. —(1) If a depositor dies and there is in force at the 
time of the death of the depositor a nomination in favour of any person, the deposit shall be paid 
to the nominee.  
(2) Where the nominee is a minor, the deposit shall be paid —  
(a) in any case where a pers on has been appointed to receive it under sub -section (3) of section 4, 
to that person; and  
(b) where there is no such person, to the g uardian of the minor for the use of the minor.  
(3) Where a deposit is payable to two or more nominees and either or any o f them is dead, the deposit 
shall be paid to the surviving nominee or nominees.  
2[(3A) Where the deposit belongs to a minor or to a person of unsound mind who dies and there is no 
nominee immediately before the date of commencement of Part I of Chapter VIII of the Finance Act, 
2018  (13 of 2018) , the deposit shall be paid to the guardian.]  
(4) If a depositor dies and there is no nomination in force at the time of his death and probate 
of his will or letters of administration of his estate or a succession certificate granted under the 
Indian Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925), is not within three months of the death of the 
depositor produced to the 3[Authorised Officer]  of the Government Savings Bank in which the 
deposit is, then —  
(a) if the deposit does no t exceed 4[such limit as may be prescribed ,] the 3[Authorised Officer ] 
may pay the same to any person appearing to him to
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GOVERNMENT SAVINGS PROMOTION ACT, 1873.pdf - page 4]
 may be prescribed ,] the 3[Authorised Officer ] 
may pay the same to any person appearing to him to be entitled to receive it or to administer the estate 
of the 5[deceased  in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed.]  
6*  *  *  *  *  * 
7*   *   *  *  *  * 
5. Payment to be a discharge. — 8[Any payment made in accordance with the foregoing 
provisions of this Act] shall be a full discharge from all further liability in respect of the money so 
paid: 
Saving of right of executor. —9[Nothing ] herein contained precludes any executor or 
administrator, or other representative of the deceased, from recovering from the person 
receiving the same the amount remaining in his hands after deducting the amount of all debts 
or other demands lawfully paid or discharged by him in due course of administration.  
  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 119 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018).  
2. Ins. by s. 120, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018).  
3. Subs. by s. 11 6, ibid.,  for “Secretary ” (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018).  
4. Subs.  by Act 56 of 1985, s. 2, for “f ive thousand rupees”.  
5. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 120, for “ deceased; and” (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018).  
6. Clause ( b) omitted by s. 120 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018). 
7. Sub -section ( 5) omitted by s. 120, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018).  
8. Subs, by Act 45 of 1959, s. 4 for “Such payment”.  
9. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 121, for “But nothing” (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GOVERNMENT SAVINGS PROMOTION ACT, 1873.pdf - page 5]
5 
 Saving of right of creditor. —1[Every creditor]  or claimant against the estate of the deceased  
may recover his debt or claim out of the money paid under this Act, 2*** to any person, and remaining 
in his hands unadministered, in the same manner and to the same extent as 3[if that person had obtained]  
letters of administration of the estate of the deceased.  
6. Security for due administration. —The 4[Authorised  Officer ] of 5[a Government Saving s 
Bank ] may take such security as he thinks necessary from any person 6[to whom he pays any 
money under sub -section (4) of section 4A] for  the due administration of the money so paid,  
and he may assign the said security to any person interested in such administr ation.  
7. Power to administer oath. —For the purpose of ascertaining the right of the person 
claiming to be entitled as aforesaid, the 4[Authori sed Officer ] of 7[a Government Saving s Bank ] 
may take evidence on oath or affirmation according to the law8 for the time being relating to        
and affirmations . 
Penalty for false statements. —Any person who, upon such oath or affirmation, makes any 
statement which is false, and which he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to 
be true, shal l be deemed guilty of an offence under section 193 of the Indian Penal Code            
(45 of 1860).  
9[7A. Power to call for information. —The Central Government through any designated authority, 
may call for such information, documents and evidence as it ma y deem necessary, in relation to any 
account, for carrying out the purposes of this Act.]  
8. Deposit when ex cluded in computing court fees. —Where the amount of the deposit belonging to 
the estate of a deceased depositor does not exceed 10[the prescribed limit ], such amount shall be excluded 
in computing the fee chargeable, under the Court -Fees Act, 1870 (7 of 1870), on the probate, or letters of 
administration, or certificate (if any), granted in respect of his property
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GOVERNMENT SAVINGS PROMOTION ACT, 1873.pdf - page 5]
 probate, or letters of 
administration, or certificate (if any), granted in respect of his property11: 
Provided that the person claiming  such probate or letters or certificate shall exhibit to the Court 
authori sed to grant the same a certificate of the amount of the deposit in any Government Savings 
Bank belonging to the estate of the deceased. Such certificate  shall be signed by the 4[Aut horised 
Officer]  of such Bank, and the Court shall receive it as evidence of the said amount.  
9. [Act not to apply to deposits belonging to estates of European soldiers or deserters. ] Omitted  by 
the Government Savings Banks (Amendment) Act, 1959 (45 of 1959), s. 7. 
Deposits belonging to Minors  
10. Payment of deposits to minor or guardian. —Any deposit made by, 12[or on behalf of, a 
minor] , may be paid to him personally, if he made the deposit, or to his guardian 13[for the use of 
such minor] , if the deposit was made by any person other than the minor, together with the 
interest accrued thereon.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 121, for “ And any creditor ” (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018).  
2. Of the words “or the said Act No. 26 of 1855” the words “the said” were omitted by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and Sch. I, Pt. I, and 
the remaining words by Act 45 of 1959, s. 4.  
3. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 121, for “if the latter had obtained ” (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018).  
4. Subs. by  s. 116, ibid., for “Secretary ” (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018).  
5. Subs. by s. 122, ibid.,  for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018).  
6. Subs. by  Act 45 of 1959,  s. 5,  for “to whom he pays any money under section 4”.  
7. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 123, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018).  
8. See the Indi an Oaths Act, 1873 (10 of 1873).  
9. Ins. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 124 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018).  
10. Subs. by s. 125, ibid., for “ three  thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018).  
11.Cf. the Savings Bank Act, 1828 ( 9 Geo. 4, c.  92), s. 40, now rep. by the Savings B
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GOVERNMENT SAVINGS PROMOTION ACT, 1873.pdf - page 5]
 -4-2018).  
11.Cf. the Savings Bank Act, 1828 ( 9 Geo. 4, c.  92), s. 40, now rep. by the Savings Banks Act, 1863 (26 and 
27 Viet., c. 87).  
12. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 126, for “or on behalf of, any minor” (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018).  
13. Subs. by s. 126, ibid.,  for “for his use” (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GOVERNMENT SAVINGS PROMOTION ACT, 1873.pdf - page 6]
6 
 The 1[receipt of the  minor ] or guardian, for money paid to him under this section, shall be a su fficient 
discharge therefor.  
11. [Legalization of like payments heretof ore made. ] Omitted  by the Government Savings Banks 
(Amendment) Act, 1959 (45 of 1959), s. 7. 
Deposits belonging to lunatics  
12. Payment of deposits belonging to lunatics. —If any depositor becomes insane or otherwise 
incapable of managing his affairs,  
and if such insanity or incapacity is proved to the satisfaction of the 2[Authorised Officer ] of                          
the 3[Government Saving s Bank ] in which his deposit may be,  
such 1[Authorised Officer]  may, from time to time, make payments out of the deposit                           
to 4[guardian] , 
and the receipt of 5[such guardian] , for money paid under this section, shall be a sufficient discharge 
therefor . 
Where a Committee or Manager of the Depositor ’s estate has been duly appointed, 6[payments shall 
be made to]  such committee or Manager.  
7[12A. Operation of account by differently abled persons. —Any depositor who suffers from 
physical infirmity, including blindness may operate and make a deposit through any literate individual 
whom he authorises.]  
8*** 
13. [Payment of married women ’s deposits .] Omitted by the Finance Act,  2018 (13 of 2018), s. 130 
(w.e.f . 1-4-2018 ). 
9[Miscellaneous ] 
14. Protection of action taken in good faith. —No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 
1[Authorised Officer] or any other officer of the 10[Central Gove rnment ] in respect of anything which is in 
good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
11[14A. Protection against attachment. —The amount standing to the credit of any depositor in the 
Public Provident Fund Scheme shall not be liable to attachment  under any decree or order of any court in 
respect of any debt or liability incurred by the depositor.]  
15. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification in 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GOVERNMENT SAVINGS PROMOTION ACT, 1873.pdf - page 6]
d by the depositor.]  
15. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any o f the following matters, namely :—  
12*   *   *  *   * 
13[(b) the conditions as to interest or discount relating to deposits generally, or any class of 
deposits in particular ;] 
                                                      
1. Subs. by  Act 13 of 2018 , s. 126  for “receipt of any minor” (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018).  
2. Subs. by s. 11 6, ibid., for “Secret ary” (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018).  
3. Subs. by s. 127, ibid., for “Bank” (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018).  
4. Subs. by s. 127, ibid., for “any proper person” (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018).  
5. Subs. by s. 127 , ibid.,  for “such person” (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018).  
6. Subs. by s. 127,  ibid., for “nothing in this section authori ses payments to any person other than” (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018).  
7. Ins. by s. 128, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018).  
8. The heading “ Deposits made by Married Women ” omitted by s. 129, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018).  
9. Subs. by Act 45 of 1959, for the  heading “Rules”, and s. 14.  
10. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 131, for “Government” (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018).  
11. Ins. by s. 13 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018).  
12. Clause ( a) omitted by s. 133, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018).  
13. Subs. by s. 133, ibid., for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GOVERNMENT SAVINGS PROMOTION ACT, 1873.pdf - page 7]
7 
 (c) the non -accrual of interest on deposits when the maximum limits are excee ded and the 
recovery of any interest paid in excess in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue or in any other 
manner;  
(d) the perso ns to whom and the manner in which deposits may be paid;  
(e) the form of nominations, the manner in which, the persons in whose favour and the 
conditions and restrictions subject to which, nominations may be made and the registration of 
nominations;  
(f) the variation or cancellation of nominations;  
1[(g) the fees that may be levied for discharge of any services under this Act;]  
(h) the manner in which any person may be appointed for the purpose of sub -section ( 3) of 
section 4;  
2[(i) the limit and procedure under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 4) of section 4A;  
(j) the mode of making deposits, such as physical, electronic or through use of any other tools of 
communication and information technology;  
(k) benchmark for interest rates on deposits with a view to ensure financial sustainability of 
Savings Schemes;  
(l) amount to be excluded in computing the court fee chargeable under the Court -Fees Act, 1870 
(7 of 1870) for the purpose of  section 8  of the Act;  
(m) mechanism for redressal of grievances and se ttlement of disputes;  
(n) any other matter which is required to be or may be, prescribed.]  
 (3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made be fore each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period o f thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or 3[in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid] both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however that any such modification or 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GOVERNMENT SAVINGS PROMOTION ACT, 1873.pdf - page 7]
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the vali dity of anything previously done under that rule.]  
4[16. Repeal and savings. —(1) The Government Savings Certificates Act, 1959 (46 of 1959) and the 
Public Provident Fund Act, 1968 (2 3 of 1968) are hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal and without prejudice to the provisions contained in the General 
Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), with respect to repeals — 
(a) anything done or any action taken or purported to have been done or taken, including any rule, 
notification, order or notice made or i ssued or any direction given under the repealed enactments shall 
be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act;  
(b) subject to the provisions of clause ( a), any instrument executed or certificate issued, or 
anything do ne under or in pursuance of any repealed enactment shall, if is in force at the 
commencement of Part I of Chapter VIII of the Finance Act, 2018  (13 of 2018) , continue to be in 
force in so far as it could have been executed, or issued or done under or in pu rsuance of such Part, 
shall have effect as if the same has been executed, issued or done under or in pursuance of the 
provisions contained in the aforesaid Part;  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 133, for clause ( g) (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018).  
2. Subs. by s. 133, ibid.,  for clause ( i) (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018).   
3. Subs. by Act  20 of 1983, s. 2 and Sch. (w.e.f. 15 -3-1984).  
4. Ins. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 134 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2018).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GOVERNMENT SAVINGS PROMOTION ACT, 1873.pdf - page 8]
8 
 (c) all deposits made or accounts or certificates held under the repealed enactments shall be 
deemed to be deposits or holdings in the Savings Scheme made under the corresponding provisions of 
this Act; and  
(d) any proceeding under the repealed enactments pending immediately before the 
commencement of Part I of Chapter VIII of the Finance Act, 201 8 (13 of 2018)  before any court 
shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, continue to be heard and disposed of by the said court.  
(3) The repeal shall not prejudicially affect the interest of depositors who, before the commencement 
of Part I of Chapter  VIII of the Finance Act, 2018  (13 of 2018) , made deposits or were issued certificates 
or made contribution to any scheme  under the repealed enactments.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GOVERNMENT SAVINGS PROMOTION ACT, 1873.pdf - page 9]
9 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 3A]  
This Act applies to the following Government Savings Schemes:  
PART A  
EXISTING  SAVINGS  SCHEMES  
1. Post Office Savings Account  
2. National Savings Monthly Income (Account)  
3. National Savings Recurring Deposit  
4. Sukanya Samridhhi Account  
5. National Savings Time Deposit (1 year, 2 years, 3 years and 5 years)  
6. Senior Citizens' Savings Scheme  
7. Savings Certificates: — 
(a) Kisan Vikas Patra (discontinued from 1st December, 2011 and restarted from 23rd 
September, 2014);  
(b) National Savings Certificates (VIII Issue).  
8. Public Provident Fund Scheme  
PART B  
DISCONTINUED  SAVINGS  SCHEMES  
1.  National Savings Scheme, 1987  
2. National Savings Scheme, 1992  
3.  Block Deposit Account  
4. Defence Savings Account  
5.  Gift Coupons  
6. Cum ulative Time Deposit Accounts: — 
(a) 5-year account  
(b) 10 -year account  
(c) 15 -year account  
7. 5-year Prize Bonds  
8. 5-year Premium Prize Bonds  
9. 5-year Compulsory Deposit Account Scheme, 1963  
10. 5-year Fixed Deposit Account  
11. 5-Year Cash Certificates  
12. 10-Year Defence Savings Certificates  
13. 12-Year National Savings Certificates  
14. 7-Year National Savings Certificates  
15. 5-Year National Savings Certificates  
16. 10-Year Treasury Savings  Deposits Certificates  
17. 15-Year Annuity Certificates (I series)  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GOVERNMENT SAVINGS PROMOTION ACT, 1873.pdf - page 10]
10 
 18. 10-Year National Plan Savings Certificates  
19. 10-Year Treasury Savings Deposits Certificates  
20. 12-Year National Plan Savings Certificates  
21. 15-Year Annuity Certificates (II series)  
22. 10-Year Defence Dep osit Certificates  
23. 12-Year National Defence Certificates  
24. 10-Year National Savings Certificates (I -Issue)  
25. 7-Year National Savings Certificates (II -Issue)  
26. 7-Year National Savings Certificates (III -Issue)  
27. 7-Year National Savings Certificates (IV -Issue)  
28. 7-Year National Savings Certificates (V -Issue)  
29. 12-Year National Savings Annuity Certificates  
30. 5-Year National Development Bonds  
31. 6-Year National Savings Certificates (VI -Issue)  
32. 6-Year National Savings Certificates (VII -Issue)  
33. 10-Year Social Security Certificates  
34. Indira Vikas Patras  
35. 10-Year National Savings Certificates (IX -Issue).]  
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS ACT, 1890  
______  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______  
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Title, extent and commencement.  
2. [Repealed .]. 
3. Saving of jurisdiction of Courts of Wards and Chartered High Courts.  
4. Definitions.  
4A. Power to confer jurisdiction on subordinate judicial officers and to transfer proceedings  
    to such officers.  
CHAPTER II  
APPOINTMENT  AND DECLARATION  OF GUARDIANS  
5. [Omitted .]. 
6. Saving of power to appoint in other cases.  
7. Power of the Court to make order as to guardianship.  
8. Persons entitled to apply for order.  
9. Court having jurisdiction to entertain application.  
10. Form of application.  
11. Procedure on admission of application.  
12. Power to make interlocutory order for production of minor and interim  protection of  
    person and property.  
13. Hearing of evidence before making of o rder. 
14. Simultaneous proceedings in different Courts.  
15. Appointment or declaration of several guardians.  
16. Appointment or declaration of guardian for property beyond jurisdiction of the Court.  
17. Matters to be consid ered by the Court in appointing guardian.  
18. Appointment or declaration of Collector in virtue of office.  
19. Guardian not to be appointed by the Court in certain cases.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 2]
2 
 CHAPTER III 
DUTIES , RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES OF GUARDIANS  
General  
SECTIONS  
20. Fiduciary relation of guardian to ward.  
21. Capacity of minors to act as guardians.  
22. Remuneration of guardian.  
23. Control of Collector as guardian.  
Guardian of the person  
24. Duties of guardian of the person.  
25. Title of guardian to custody of ward.  
26. Removal of war from jurisdiction.  
Guardian of property  
27.  Duties of guardian of pro perty.  
28. Powers of testamentary guardian.  
29. Limitation of powers of guardian of property appointed or declared by the Court.  
30. Voidability of transfers made in contravention of section 28 or section 29.  
31. Practice with respect to permitting transfe rs under section 29.  
32. Variation of powers of guardian of property appointed or declared by the Court.  
33. Right of guardian so appointed or declared to apply to the Court for opinion in management of 
property, of ward.  
34. Obligations on guardian of pro perty appointed or declared by the Court.  
34A. Power to award remuneration for auditing accounts.  
35. Suit against guardian where administration -bond was taken.  
36. Suit against guardian where administration -bond was not taken.  
37. General liability of gu ardian as trustee.  
Termination of guardianship  
38. Right of survivorship among joint guardians.  
39. Removal of guardian.  
40. Discharge of guardian.  
41. Cessation of authority of guardian.  
42. Appointment of successor to guardian dead, discharged or removed.  
CHAPTER IV  
SUPPLEMENTAL  PROVISIONS  
43. Orders for regulating conduct or proceedings of guardians, and enforcement of those orders.  
44. Penalty for removal of ward from jurisdiction.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 3]
3 
 SECTIONS  
45. Penalty for contumacy.  
46. Reports by C ollectors and subordinate Courts.  
47. Orders appealable.  
48. Finality of other orders.  
49. Costs.  
50. Power of High Court to make rules.  
51. Applicability of Act to guardians already appointed by Court.  
52. [Repealed .]. 
53. [Repealed .]. 
THE SCHEDULE.  — [Repealed .]. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 4]
4 
 THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS ACT, 1890  
ACT NO. 8 OF 18901 
[21st March, 1890.]  
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to Guardian and Ward.  
WHEREAS  it is expedient to consolidate and amend the law relating to guardian and ward; It is 
hereby enacted as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Title, extent and commencement. — (1) This Act may be called the Guardians and Wards Act, 
1890.  
(2) It extends to th e whole of India 2***, 
3*   *  *  4*** 
(3) It shall come into force on the first day of July, 1890.  
2. [Repeal .] Rep. by the Repealing Act , 1938 (1 of 1938), s. 2 and the Schedule . 
3. Saving of jurisdiction of Courts of Wards and Chartered High Courts. — This Act shall be 
read subject to every enactment heretofore or hereafter passed relating to any Court of Wards by 5[any 
competent legislature, authority or person in 6[any State to which this Act extends]], and nothing in  
this Act shall be construed to affect, or in any way derogate from the jurisdiction or authority of any 
Court of Wards, or to take away any power possessed by 7[any High Court  8***]. 
4. Definitions. — In this Act, unless there is something repugnant in the  subject or                    
context, — 
(1) “minor ” means a person who, under the provisions of the Indian Majority Act, 1875, (9 of 
1875) is to be deemed not to have attained his majority:  
(2) “guardian ” mean ’s a person having the care of the person of a  minor or of his property, or of 
both is person and property:  
(3) “ward ” means a minor for whose person or property, or both, there is a guardian:  
(4) “District Court ” has the meaning assigned to that expression in the 9Code of Civil                
                                                      
1. This Act has been extended to Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and Sch. I, to the whole of the Union 
territory of Lakshadweep by Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 and Sch. and to Sikkim vide Notifn. No. S.O. 644(E), dated 24 -81984, 
Gaz
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 4]
p by Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 and Sch. and to Sikkim vide Notifn. No. S.O. 644(E), dated 24 -81984, 
Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Pt. II, s. 3(ii) (w.e.f. 1 -9-1984).  
This Act has been extended to Pondicherry by Act 26 of 1968, with the following modification:  
In section 1, after sub -section (2), insert: — 
“Provided that nothing contained in this Act shall apply to the Renoncants of the Union territory of  
Pondiche rry.”.  
2. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule  
    (w.e.f. 31 -10- 2019).  
3. The words “inclusive of British Baluchistan” rep by A.O. 1948 . 
4. The word “and” omitted by Act 40 of 1949, s. 3 and the Second Schedule.  
5. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, fo r “the G.G. in C., or by a Governor or Lieutenant -Governor in Council”.  
6. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule for “Part A States and Part C States”.  
7. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “any High Court established under the Statute 24 and 25 Victoria, Ch. 104 (an Act 
for establishing High Courts of Judicature in India)”.  
8. The words “established in Part A States and Part C States” omitted by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule.  
9. See now the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908).   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 5]
5 
 Procedure (14 of 1882) , and includes a High Court in the exercise of its ordinary original civil 
jurisdiction:  
1[(5) “the Court ” means —  
(a) the District Court having jurisdiction to entertain an application under this                    
Act for an order appointing or declaring a person to be a guardian; or  
(b) where a guardian has been appointed or declared in pursuance of any such application —  
(i) the Court which, or the Court of the officer who, appointed or declared the guardian or 
is under this Act deemed to have appointed or declared the guardian; or  
(ii) in any matter relating to the person of the ward the District Court having jurisdiction 
in the place where the ward for the time being ordinarily resides; or  
(c) in respect of any proc eeding transferred under section 4A, the Court of the officer to 
whom such proceeding has been transferred:]  
(6) “Collector ” means the chief officer in charge of the revenue —administration of a district, 
and includes any officer whom the State Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, may, 
by name or in virtue of his office, appoint to be a Collector in any local are a, or with respect to any 
class of persons, for all or any of the purposes of this Act:  
2*      *    *   *; and 
(8) “prescribed ”  means prescribed by rules made by the High Court under this Act.  
3[4A. Power to confer jurisdiction on subordinate judicial of ficers and to transfer 
proceedings to such officers. —(1) The High Court may, by general or special order, empower any 
officer exercising original civil jurisdiction subordinate to a District Court, or authori se the Judge of 
any District Court to empower an y such officer subordinate to him, to dispose of any proceedings 
under this Act transferred to such officer under the provisions of this section.  
(2) The Judge of a District Court may, by order in writing, transfer at any stage any proceeding 
under this Ac t pending in his Court for disposal to any office
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 5]
ransfer at any stage any proceeding 
under this Ac t pending in his Court for disposal to any officer subordinate to him empowered under 
sub-section ( 1). 
(3) The Judge of a District Court may at any stage transfer to his own Court or to any officer 
subordinate to him empowered under sub -section ( 1) any pro ceeding under this Act pending in the 
Court of any other such officer.  
(4) When any proceedings ar e transferred under this section in any case in which a guardian has 
been appointed or declared, the Judge of the District Court may, by order in writing, dec lare that the 
Court of the Judge or officer to whom they ar e transferred shall, for all or any of the purposes of this 
Act, be deemed to be the Court which appointed or declared the guardian.]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 4 of 1926, s. 2, for the clause ( 5). 
2. Clause ( 7) omitted by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule.  
3. Ins. by Act 4 of 1926, s. 3.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 6]
6 
 CHAPTER II  
APPOINTMENT  AND DECLARATION OF GUARDIANS  
5. [Power of parents to appoint in case of European British subjects .] Omitted  by the Part B  States 
(Laws ) Act, 1951 (3 of 1951), s. 3 and Sch edule . 
6. Saving of power to appoint in other cases. —In the case of a minor 1***, nothing in this Act 
shall be construed to take away or derogate from any power to appoint a guardian of his person or 
property, or both, which is valid by the law to which the minor is subject.  
7. Power of the Court to make order as to guardianship. —(1) where the Court is satisf ied that 
it is for the welfare of a minor that an order should be made —  
(a) appointing a guardian of his person or property, or both, or  
(b) declaring a person to be such a guardian,  
the Court may make an order accordingly.  
(2) An order under this sectio n shall imply the removal of any guardian who has not been 
appointed by will or other instrument or appointed or declared by the Court.  
(3) Where a guardian has been appointed by will or other instrument or appointed or declared by 
the Court, an order unde r this section appointing or declaring another person to be guardian in his  
stead shall not be made until the powers of the guardian appointed or declared as aforesaid have 
ceased under the provisions of this Act.  
8. Persons entitled to apply for order. —An order shall not be made under the last foregoing 
section except on the application of —  
(a) the person desirous of   being, or claiming to be, the guardian of the minor, or  
(b) any relative or friend of the minor, or  
(c) the Collector of the district or  other local area within which the minor ordinarily resides or 
in which he has property, or  
(d) the Collector having authority with respect to the class to which the minor belongs.  
9. Court having jurisdiction to entertain application. —(1) If the applicati on is with respect to 
the guardianship of the person of the minor, it shall be made to the District Court h
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 6]
th respect to 
the guardianship of the person of the minor, it shall be made to the District Court having jurisdiction 
in the place where the minor ordinarily resides.  
(2) If the application is with respect to the guardianship of the property of the  minor, it may be 
made either to the District Court having jurisdiction in the place where the minor ordinarily resides or 
to a District Court having jurisdiction in a place where he has property.  
(3) If an application with respect to the guardianship of t he property of a minor is made to a 
District Co urt other than that having jurisdiction in the place where the minor ordinarily resides, the 
Court may return the application if in its opinion the application would be disposed of more justly or 
conveniently by any other District Court having jurisdiction.  
10. Form of application. —(1) If the application is not made by the Collector, it shall be by 
petition signed and verified in manner prescribed by the 2Code ,of Civil Procedure (14 of 1882) for 
the signing an d verification of a plaint, and stating, so far as can be ascertained —  
(a) the name, sex, religion, date of birth and ordinary residence of the minor;  
(b) where the minor is a female, whether she is married, and, if so, the name and age of her 
husband;  
(c) the nature, situation and approximate value of the property, if any, of the minor;  
                                                      
1. The words “who is not an European British subject” omitted by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule.  
2. See now the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 7]
7 
 (d) the name and residence of the person having the custody or possession of the person or 
property of the minor;  
(e) what near relations the minor has, and  where they reside;  
(f) whether a guardian of the person or property, or both, of the minor has been appointed by 
any person entitled or claiming to be entitled by the law to which the minor is subject to make such 
an appointment;  
(g) whether an applicatio n has at any time been made to the Court or to any other Court with 
respect to the guardianship of the person or property, or both, of the minor, and, if so, when, to 
what Court and with what result;  
(h) whether the application is for the appointment or de claration of a guardian of the person of 
the minor, or of his property, or of both;  
(i) where the application is to appoint a guardian, the qualifications of the proposed guardian;  
(j) where the application is to declare a person to be a guardian, the grounds on which that 
person claims;  
(k) the causes which have led to the making of the applications; and  
(l) such other particulars, if any, as may be prescribed or as the nature of the application renders 
it necessary to state.  
(2) If the application is made by the Collector, it shall be by letter addressed to the Court and 
forwarded by post or in such other manner as may be found convenient, and shall state as far as 
possible the particulars mentioned in sub -section ( 1). 
(3) The application must be accom panied by a declaration of the willingness of the proposed 
guardian to act and the declaration must be signed by him and attested by at least two 
witnesses.  
11. Procedure on admission of application. —(1) If the Court is satisfied that there is ground 
for p roceeding on the application, it shall fix a day for the hearing thereof, and cause notice of the 
application and of the date fixed for the hearing — 
(a) to be served in the manner directed in the 1Code of Civil Procedure (14 of 1882) on —  
(i) the parents of the
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 7]
ed in the manner directed in the 1Code of Civil Procedure (14 of 1882) on —  
(i) the parents of the minor if they arc residing in 2[any State to which this Act extends],  
(ii) the person, if any, named in the petition or letter as having the custody or possession of 
the person or property of the minor,  
(iii) the person proposed in the a pplication or letter to be appointed or declared guardian, 
unless that person is himself the applicant, and  
(iv) any other person to whom, in the opinion of the Court, special notice of the application 
should be given; and  
(b) to be posted on some conspicu ous part of the court -house, and of the residence of the minor, 
and otherwise published in such manner as the Court, subject to any rules made by the High Court 
under this Act, thinks fit.  
(2) The State Government may, by general or special order, require that, when any part of the 
property described in a petition under section 10, sub -section ( 1), is land of which a Court of Wards 
could assume the superintendence, the Court shall also cause a notice as aforesaid to be served on the 
Collector in whose distr ict the minor ordinarily resides, and on  
                                                      
1. See now the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908).  
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule,  for “a Part A State or a Part C State”.   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 8]
8 
 every Collector in whose district any portion of the land is situate, and the Collector may cause the 
notice to be published in any manner he deems fit.  
(3) No charge shall be made by the Court or the  Collector for the service or publication of any 
notice served or published under sub -section ( 2). 
12. Power to make interlocutory order for production of minor and interim protec tion of 
person and property. —(1) The Court may direct that the person, if an y, having the custody of the 
minor shall produce him or cause him to be produced at such place and time and before such person 
as it appoints, and may make such order for the temporary custody and protection of the person or 
property of the minor as it thi nks proper.  
(2) If the minor is a female who ought not to be compelled to appear in public, the direction under 
sub-section ( 1) for her production shall require her to be produced in accordance with the customs and 
manners of the country.  
(3) Nothing in th is section shall authori se—  
(a) the Court to place a female minor in the temporary custody of a person claiming to be her 
guardian on the ground of his being her husband, unless she is already in his custody with the 
consent of her parents, if any, or  
(b) any person to whom the temporary custody and protection of the property of a minor is 
entrusted to dispossess otherwise than by due course of law any person in possession of any of the 
property.  
13. Hearing of evidence before making of order. —On the day f ixed for the hearing of the 
application, or as soon afterwards as may be, the Court shall hear such evi dence as may be adduced in 
support of or in opposition to the application.  
14. Simultaneous proceedings in different Courts. —(1) If proceedings for the appointment or 
declaration of a guardian of a minor arc taken in more Courts than one, each of those Courts shall, on 
being apprised of the proceedings in the other Court or Courts, stay the proceedings before itself. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 8]
being apprised of the proceedings in the other Court or Courts, stay the proceedings before itself.  
(2) If the Courts arc both or all subo rdinate to the same High Court, they shall report the case to the 
High Court, and the High Court shall determine in which of the Courts the proceedings with respect to 
the appointment or declaration of a guar dian of the minor shall be had.  
1[(3) In any ot her case in which proceedings arc stayed under. sub -section ( 1), the Courts shall 
report the case to, and be guided by such orders as they may receive from, their respective State 
Governments]  
15. Appointment or declaration of several guardians. —(1) If the  law to which the minor is 
subject admits of his having two or more joint guardians of his person or property, or both, the Court 
may, if it thinks fit, appoint or declare them.  
2*   *                      *              *               *       
(4) Separate guardians may be appointed or declared of the person and of the property of a minor.  
(5) If a minor has several properties, the Court may, if it thinks fit, appoint or declare a separate 
guardian for any one or more of the properties.  
16. Appointment or declaration of guardian for property beyond jurisdiction of the   
Court .—If the Court appoints or declares a guardian for any property situate beyond the                
local limits of its jurisdiction, the Court having jur isdiction in the place where the
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for sub -section ( 3).    
2. Sub -section s (2) and ( 3) omitted by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 9]
9 
 property is situate shall, on production of a certified copy of the order appointing or declaring the 
guardian, accept him as duly appointed or declared and give effect to the order.  
17. Matters to be considered by the Cour t in appointing guardian. —(1) In appointing or 
declaring the guardian of a minor, the Court shall, subject to the provisions of this section, be guided 
by what, consistently with the law to which the minor is subject, appears in the circumstances to be 
for the welfare of the minor. 
(2) In considering what will be for the welfare of the minor, the Court shall have regard to the age, 
sex and religion of the minor, the character and capacity of the proposed guardian and his nearness of 
kin to the minor, the wi shes, if any, of a deceased parent, and any existing or previous relations of the 
proposed guardian with the minor or his property.  
(3) If the minor is old enough to form an intelligent preference, the Court may consider that 
preference.  
1*     *      *   *              * 
(5) The Court shall not appoint or declare any person to be a guardian against his will.  
18. Appointment or declaration of Collector in virtue of office. —Where a Collector is 
appointed or declared by the Court in virtue of his office to be  guardian of the person or property, or 
both, of a minor, the order appointing or declaring him shall be deemed to authorize and require the 
person for the time being holding the office to act as guardian of the minor with respect to his person 
or property , or both, as the case may be.  
19. Guardian not to be appointed by the Court in certain cases. —Nothing in this Chapter shall 
authori se the Court to appoint or declare a guardian of the property of a minor whose property is 
under the superintendence of a Co urt of Wards, or to appoint or declare a guardian of the person —  
(a) of a minor who is a married female and whose husband is not, in the opinion of the Court, 
unfit to be guardian of her person, or 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 9]
male and whose husband is not, in the opinion of the Court, 
unfit to be guardian of her person, or  
2[(b) of a minor, other than a married female, whose fath er or mother is living and is not, in the 
opinion of the court, unfit to be guardian of the person of the minor, or. ] 
(c) of a minor whose property is under the superintendence of a Court of Wards competent to 
appoint a guardian of the person of the minor.  
CHAPTER III  
DUTIES , RIGHTS  AND LIABILITIES  OF GUARDIANS  
General  
20.  Fiduciary relation of guardian to ward. —(1) A guardian stands in a fiduciary relation to his 
ward, and, save as provided by the will or other instrument, if any, by which he was appointed, or by 
this Act, he must not make any profit out of his office.  
(2) The fiduciary relation of it guardian to his ward extends to and affects purchases by the 
guardian of the property of the ward, and by the ward of the property of the guardian, i mmediately or 
soon after the ward has ceased to be a minor, and generally all transactions between them while the 
influence of the guardian still lasts or is recent.  
21. Capacity of minors to act as guardians. —A minor is incompetent to act as guardian of a ny 
minor except his own wife or child or  where he is the managing member of an undivided Hindu 
family, the wife  or child of another minor Member of that family.  
                                                      
1. Sub -section ( 4) omitted by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule.  
2. Subs. by Act 30 of 2010, s. 2 for sub -clause ( b) (w.e.f. 31 -8-2010).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 10]
10 
 22. Remuneration of guardian. —(1) A guardian appointed or declared by the Cour t shall be 
entitled to such allowance, if any, as the Court thinks fit for his care and paints in the execution of his 
duties.  
(2) When an officer of the Government, as such officer, is so appointed or declared to be guardian, 
such fees shall be paid to th e Government out of the property of the ward as the State Government, by 
general or special order, directs.  
23. Control of Collector as guardian. —A Collector appointed or declared by the Court to be 
guardian of the person or property, or both, of a minor s hall, in all matters connected with the 
guardianship of his ward, be subject to the control of the State Government or of such authority as that 
Government, by 1notification in the Official Gazette, appoints in this behalf.  
Guardian of the person  
24. Duties of guardian of the person. —A guardian of the person of a ward is charged with 
the custody of the ward and must look to his support, health and education, and such other matters as 
the law to which the ward is subject requires.  
25. Title of guardian to custody of ward. —(1) If a ward leaves or is removed from the custody 
of a guardian of his person, the Court, if it is of opinion that it will be for the welfare of the ward to 
return to the custody of his guardian, may make an order for his return, and for the purpose of 
enforcing the order may cause the ward to be arrested and to be delivered into the custody of the 
guardian.  
(2) For the purpose of arresting the ward, the Court may exercise the power conferred on a 
Magistrate of the first class by secti on 100 of the 2Code of Criminal Procedure, 1882 (10 of 1882).  
(3) The residence of a ward against the will of his guardian with a person who is not his guardian 
does not of itself terminate the guardianship.  
26. Removal of ward from jurisdiction. —(1) A gua rdian of the person appointed or declared 
by the Court unless he is the Collector or is 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 10]
—(1) A gua rdian of the person appointed or declared 
by the Court unless he is the Collector or is a guardian appointed by will or other instrument, shall 
not, without the leave of the Court by which he was appointed or declared, remove the ward from 
the limits of its jurisdiction except for such purposes as may be prescribed.  
(2) The leave granted by the Court under sub -section (1) may be special or general, and may be 
defined by the order granting it.  
Guardian of property  
27. Duties of guardian of property. —A guar dian of the property of a ward is bound to deal 
therewith as carefully as a man of ordinary prudence would deal with it if it were his own, and, 
subject to the provisions of this Chapter, he may do all acts which are reasonable and proper for the 
realisati on, protection or benefit of the property.  
28. Powers of testamentary guardian. —Where a guardian has been appointed by will or other 
instrument, his power to mortgage or charge, or transfer by sale, gift, exchange or otherwise, 
immovable property belonging  to his ward is subject to any restriction which may be imposed by the 
instrument, unless he has under this Act been declared guardian and the Court which made die 
declaration permits him by an order in writing, notwithstanding the restriction, to dispose of any 
immovable property specified in the order in a manner permitted by the order.  
29. Limitati on of powers of guardian of property appointed or declared by the 
Court .—Where  a person other than a Collector,  or than a guardian appointed by will or other  
                                                      
1. For notifications appointing authorities to whose control Collectors appointed under the Act shall be subject, see different 
local R. & O.  
2. See now the Code  of Criminal Procedure, 1 898 (Act 5 of 1898).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 11]
11 
 instrum ent, has been appointed or declared by the Court to be guardian of the property of a ward, he 
shall not, without the previous permission of the Court, —  
(a) mortgage or charge, or transfer by sale, gift, exchange or otherwise, any pa rt of the 
immovable property of his ward, or  
(b) lease any part of that property for a term exceeding five years or for any term extending 
more than one year beyond the date on which the ward will cease to be a minor.  
30. Viodability  of transfers made in c ontravention of section 28 or section 29. —A disposal of 
immovable property by a guardian in contravention of either of the two last foregoing sections is 
voidable at the instance of any other person affected thereby.  
31. Practice with respect to permitting  transfers under section 29. —(1) Permission to the 
guardian to do any of the acts mentioned in section 29 shall not be granted by the Court except in case 
of necessity or for an evident advantage to the ward.  
(2) The order granting the permission shall rec ite the necessity or advantage, as the case may 
be, describe the property with respect to which the act permitted is to be done, and specify such 
conditions, if any, as the Court may see fit to attach to the permission; and it shall be recorded, 
dated and signed by the Judge of the Court with his own hand, or, when from any cause he is 
prevented from recording the order with his own hand, shall be taken down in writing from his 
dictation and be dated and signed by him.  
(3) The Court may in its discretion attach to the permission the following among other conditions, 
namely: —  
(a) that a sale shall not be completed without the sanction of the Court;  
(b) that a sale shall be made to the highest bidder by public auction, before the Court or 
some person specially appointed by the Court for that purpose, a t a time and place to be 
specified by the Court, after such proclamation of the intended sale as the Court, subject to 
any rules made 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 11]
by the Court, after such proclamation of the intended sale as the Court, subject to 
any rules made under this Act by the High Court, directs;  
(c) that a lease shall not be made in consideration of a premium or shall be made for such term 
of years and subje ct to such rents and covenants as the Court directs;  
(d) that the whole or any part of the proceeds of the act permitted shall be paid into the 
Court by the guardian, to  be disbursed therefrom or to be invested by the Court on 
prescribed securities or to be otherwise disposed of as the Court directs.  
(4) Before granting permission to a guardian to do an act mentioned in section 29, the Court 
may cause notice of the applic ation for the permission to be given to any relative or friend of the 
ward who should, in its opinion, receive notice thereof, and shall hear and record the statement of 
any person who appears in opposition to the application.  
32. Variation of powers of gu ardian of property appointed or declared by the Court. —
Where a guardian of the property of a ward has been appointed or declared by the Court and such 
guardian is not the Collector, the Court may, from time to time, by order, define, restrict or extend 
his powers with respect to the property of the ward in such manner and to such extent as it may 
consider to be for the advantage of the ward and consistent with the law to which the ward is 
subject.  
33. Right of guardian so appointed or declared to apply to t he Court for opinion in 
management of property of ward. —(1) A guardian appointed or declared by the Court may 
apply by petition to the Court which appointed or declared him for its opinion, advice or direction 
on any present question respecting the management or administration of the property of his ward.  
(2) If the Court considers the question to be proper for summary disposal, it shall cause a copy of 
the petition to be served on, and the hearing thereof may be attended by, such of the persons inte rested 
in
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 11]
ion to be served on, and the hearing thereof may be attended by, such of the persons inte rested 
in the application as the Court thinks fit.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 12]
12 
 (3) The guardian stating in good faith the facts in the petition and acting upon the opinion, advice 
or direction given by the Court shall be deemed, so far as regards his own responsibility, to have 
performed his duty as guardian in the subject -matter of the application.  
34. Obligations on guardian of property appointed  or declared by the Court. —Where a 
guardian of the property of a ward has been appointed or declared by the Court and such gua rdian is 
not the Collector, he shall, —  
(a) if so required by the Court, give a bond, as nearly as may be in the prescribed form, to the 
Judge of the Court to ensure for the benefit of the Judge for the time being, with or without 
sureties, as may be presc ribed, engaging duly to account for what he may receive in respect of the 
property of the ward;  
(b) if so required by the Court, deliver to the Court, within six months from the date of his 
appointment or declaration by the Court, or within such other time  as the Court directs, a statement 
of the immovable property belonging to the ward, of the money and other movable property which 
he has received on behalf of the ward up to the date of delivering the statement, and of the debts 
due on that date to or from  the ward;  
(c) if so required by the Court, exhibit his accounts in the Court at such times and in such form 
as the Court from time to time directs;  
(e) if so required by the Court, pay into the Court at such time as the Court directs the balance 
due from him on those accounts, or so much thereof as the Court directs; and  
(f) apply for the maintenance, education and advancement of the ward and of such per sons as 
are dependent on him, and for the celebration of ceremonies to which the ward or any of those 
persons may be a party, such portion of the income of the property of the ward as the Court from 
time to time directs, and, if the Court so directs, the whole or any part of that property.  
1[34A. Power to award remuneration for aud
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 12]
urt so directs, the whole or any part of that property.  
1[34A. Power to award remuneration for auditing accounts. —When accoun ts are exhibited by 
a guardian of the property of a ward in pursuance of a requisition made under clause ( c) of section 34 
or otherwise, the Court may appoint a person to audit the accounts, and may direct that remuneration 
for the work be paid out of the income of the property.]  
35. Suit against guardian where administration bond was taken. —Where a guardian appointed 
or declared by the Court has given a bond duly to account for what he may receive in respect of the 
property of his ward, the Court may, on application made by petition and on being satisfied that the 
engagement of the bond has not been kept, and upon such terms as to security, or providing that any 
money received be paid into the Court, or otherwise as the Court thinks fit, assign the bond to  some 
proper person, who shall thereupon be entitled to sue on the bond in his own name as if the bond had 
been originally given to him instead of to the Judge of the Court, and shall be entitled to recover 
thereon, as trustee for the ward, in respect of a ny breach thereof.  
36. Suit against guardian where administration bond was not taken. —(1) Where a guardian 
appointed or declared by the Court has not given a bond as aforesaid, any person, with the leave of the 
Court, may, as next friend, at any time durin g the continuance of the minority of the ward, and upon 
such terms as aforesaid, institute a suit against the guardian, or, in case of his death, against his 
representative, for an account of what the guardian has received in respect of the property of the  ward, 
and may recover in the suit, as trustee for the ward, such amount as may be found to be payable by the 
guardian or his representative, as the case may be.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 17 of 1929, s. 2.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 12]
         
1. Ins. by Act 17 of 1929, s. 2.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 13]
13 
 (2) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall, so far as they relate to a suit ag ainst a guardian, be 
subject to the provisions of section 440 of the Code of Civil Procedure (14 of 1882) as amended by 
this Act1. 
37. General liability of guardian as trustee. —Nothing in either of the two last foregoing sections 
shall be construed to depr ive a ward or his representative of any remedy against his guardian, or the 
representative of the guardian, which, not being expressly provided in either of those sections, any 
other beneficiary or his representative would have against his trustee or the r epresentative of the 
trustee.  
Termination of guardianship  
38. Right of survivorship among joint guardians. —On the death of one of two or more joint 
guardians, the guardianship continues to the survivor or survivors until a further appointment is made 
by th e Court.  
39. Removal of guardian.  —The Court may, on the application of any person interested, or of its 
own motion, remove a guardian appointed or declared by the Court, or a guardian appointed by will or 
other instrument, for any of the following causes,  namely: —  
(a) for abuse of his trust;  
(b) for continued failure to perform the duties of his trust;  
(c) for incapacity to perform the duties of his trust;  
(d) for ill -treatment, or neglect to take proper care, of his ward;  
(e) for contumacious disregard of any provision of this Act or of any order of the Court;  
(f) for conviction of an offence implying, in the opinion of the Court, a defect of character 
which unfits him to be the guardian of his ward;  
(g) for having an interest adv erse to the faithful performance of his duties;  
(h) for ceasing to reside within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court;  
(i) in the case of a guardian of the property, for bankruptcy or insolvency;  
(j) by reason of the guardianship of the guardi an ceasing, or being liable to cease, under the law 
to which the minor is subject:  
Provided tha
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 13]
i an ceasing, or being liable to cease, under the law 
to which the minor is subject:  
Provided that a guardian appointed by will or other instrument, whether he has been declared 
under this Act or not, shall not be removed —  
(a) for the cause mentioned in cla use ( g) unless the adverse interest accrued after the death of 
the person who appointed him, or it is shown that that person made and maintained the 
appointment in ignorance of the existence of the adverse interest, or  
(b) for the cause mentioned in clause  (h) unless such guardian has taken up such a residence as, 
in the opinion of the Court, renders it impracticable for him to discharge the functions of guardian.  
40. Discharge of guardian. —(1) If a guardian appointed or declared by the Court desires to res ign 
his office, he may apply to the Court to be discharged.  
(2) If the Court finds that there is sufficient reason for the application, it shall discharge him, and if 
the guardian making the application is the Collector and the State Government approves of  his 
applying to be discharged, the Court shall in any case discharge him.  
41. Cessation of authority of guardian. —(1) The powers of a guardian of the person cease —  
(a) by his death, removal or discharge;  
(b) by the Court of Wards assuming superintendence  of the person of the  ward;  
 
                                                      
1. See now Order  XXXII, rules 1 and 4( 2), in the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 
1908).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 14]
14 
 (c) by the ward ceasing to be a minor;  
(d) in the case of a female ward, by her marriage to a husband who is not unfit to be guardian of 
her person or, if the guardian was appointed or declared by the Court, by her marriage to a husband 
who is not, in the opinion of the Court, so unfit; or  
(e) in the case of a ward whose father was unfit to be guardian of the person of the ward, by the 
father ceasing to be so or, if the father was deemed by the Court to be so unfit, by his ceasi ng to be 
so in the opinion of the Court.  
(2) The powers of a guardian of the property cease —  
(a) by his death, removal or discharge;  
(b) by the Court of Wards assuming superintendence of the property of the ward; or  
(c) by the ward ceasing to be a minor.  
(3) When for any cause the powers of a guardian cease, the Court may require him or, if he is dead, 
his representative to deliver as it directs any property in his possession or control belonging to the 
ward or any accounts in his possession or control rel ating to any past or present property of the ward.  
(4) When he has delivered the property or accounts as required by the Court, the Court may 
declare him to be discharged from his liabilities save as regards any fraud which may subsequently be 
discovered.  
42. Appointment to successor to guardian dead, discharged or removed. —When a guar dian 
appointed or declared by the Cowl is discharged, or, under the law to which the ward is subject, 
ceases to be entitled to act, or when any such guardian or a guardian ap pointed by will or other 
instrument is removed or dies, the Court, of its own motion or on application under Chapter II, may, if 
the ward is still a minor, appoint or declare another guardian of his person or property, or both, as the 
case may be.  
CHAPTER IV 
SUPPLEMENTAL  PROVISIONS  
43. Orders for regulating conduct or proceedings of guardians, and enforcement of those 
orders. —(1) The Court may, on the application of any person interested or 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 14]
nd enforcement of those 
orders. —(1) The Court may, on the application of any person interested or of its own motion, make 
an order regulating the conduct or proceedings of any guardian appointed or declared by the Court.  
(2) Where there ar e more guardians than one of a ward, and they are unable to agree upon a 
question affecting his welfare, any of them may apply to the Court for its direction, and the Court may 
make such order respecting the matter in difference as it thinks fit.  
(3) Except  where it appears that the object of making an order under sub -section ( 1) or                 
sub-section ( 2) would be defeated by the delay, the Court shall, before making the order, direct notice 
of the application therefor or of the intention of the Cou rt to make it, as the case may be, to be given, 
in a case under sub -section ( 1), to the guardian or, in a case under sub -section ( 2), to the guardian who 
has not made the application  
(4) In case of disobedience to an order made under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the order 
may be enforced in the same manner as an injunction granted under section 492 or section 493 of the 
Code of Civil Procedure (14 of 1882), in a case under sub -section ( 1), as if the ward were the plaintiff 
and the guardian were the d efendant or, in a case under sub -section ( 2), as if the guardian who made 
the application were the plaintiff and the other guardian were the defendant.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 15]
15 
  (5) Except in a case under sub -section ( 2), nothing in this section shall apply to a Col lector who is, 
as such, a guardian.  
44. Penalty for removal of ward from jurisdiction. —If, for the purpose or with the effect of 
preventing the Court from exercising its authority with respect to a ward, a guardian appointed or 
declared by the Court remove s the ward from the limits of the jurisdiction of the Court in 
contravention of the provisions of section 26, he shall be liable, by order of the Court, to find not 
exceeding one thousand rupees, or to imprisonment in the civil jail for a term which may ex tend to six 
months.  
45. Penalty for contumacy. —(1) In the following cases, namely: —  
(a) if a person having the custody of a minor fails to produce him or cause him to be produced 
in compliance with a direction under section 12, sub -section ( 1), or to do h is utmost to compel the 
minor to return to the custody of his guardian in obedience to an order under section 25,                       
sub-section ( 1), or 
(b) if a guardian appointed or declared by the Court fails to deliver to the Court, within the time 
allowed by or under clause ( b) of section 34, a statement required under that clause, or to exhibit 
accounts in compliance with a requisition under clause ( c) of that section, or to pay into the Court 
the balance due from him on those accounts in complianc e with a requisition under clause ( d) of 
that section, or  
(c) if a person who has ceased to be a guardian, or the representative of such a p erson, fails to 
deliver any property or accounts in compliance with a requisition under section 41, sub -section ( 3), 
the person, guardian or repre sentative, as the case may be, shall be liable, by order of the Court, to 
fine not exceeding one hundred rupees, and in case of recusancy to further fine not exceeding ten 
rupees for each day after the first during which the d efault continues, and not exceeding five hundred 
rupees in the aggr
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 15]
er the first during which the d efault continues, and not exceeding five hundred 
rupees in the aggregate, and to detention in the civil jail until he undertakes to produce the minor or 
cause him to be produced, or to compel his return, or to deliver the statement, or to exhibit the 
accou nts, or to pay the balance, or to deliver the property or accounts, as the case may be.  
(2) If a person who has been released from detention on giving an undertaking under                   
sub-section ( 1) fails to carry out the undertaking within the tim e allowed by the Court, the Court may 
cause him to be arrested and re -committed to the civil jail.  
46. Reports by Collectors and subordinate Courts. —(1) The Court may call upon the Collector, 
or upon any court subordinate to the Court, for a report on any matter arising in any proceeding under 
this Act and treat the report as evidence.  
(2) For the purpose of preparing the report the Collector or the Judge of the subordinate Court as 
the case may be, shall make such inquiry as he deems necessary, and may for  the pruposes of the 
inquiry exercise any power of compelling the attendance of a witness to give evidence or produce a 
document which is conferred on a Court by the 1Code of Civil Procedure (14 of 1882).  
47. Orders appealable. — An appeal shall lie to the High Court from an order made by a 2*** 
Court, —  
(a) under section 7, appointing or declaring or refusing to appoint or declare a guardian; or,  
(b) under section 9, sub -section ( 3), returning an application ; or,  
                                                      
1. See now the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908).  
2. The word “District” rep. by Act 4 of 1926, s. 4.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 16]
16 
 (c) under section 25, making  or refusing to make an order for the return of a ward to the 
custody of his guardian; or,  
(d) under section 26, refusing leave for, the removal of award from the limits of the jurisdiction 
of the Court, or imposing conditions with respect thereto; or,  
(e) under section 28 or section 29, refusing permission to a guardian to do an act referred to in 
the section; or,  
(f) under section 32, defining, restricting or extending the powers of a guardian ; or,  
(g) under section 39, removing a guardian ; or,  
(h) unde r section 40, refusing to discharge a guardian; or,  
(i) under section 43, regulating the conduct or proceedings of a guardian or settling a matter in 
difference between joint guardians, or enforcing the order ; or,  
(j) under section 44 or section 45, impos ing a penalty.  
48. Finality of other orders. —Save as provided by the last foregoing section and by 1section 622 
of the Code of Civil Procedure (14 of 1882), an order made under this Act shall be final and shall not 
be liable to be contested by suit or othe rwise.  
49. Costs. —The costs of any proceeding under this Act, including the costs of maintaining a 
guardian or other person in the civil jail, shall, subject to any rules made by the High Court under this 
Act, be in the discretion of the Court in which the  proceeding is had.  
50. Power of High Court to make rules. —(1) In addition to any other power to make rules 
conferred expressly or impliedly by this Act, the High Court may from time to time make rules 
consistent with this Act —  
(a) as to the matters respe cting which, and the time at which, reports should be called for from 
Collectors and subordinate Courts;  
(b) as to the allowances to be granted to, and the security to be required from, guardians, and 
the cases in which such allowances should be granted;  
(c) as to the procedure to be followed with respect to applications of guardians for permission 
to do acts referred to in sectio
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 16]
 followed with respect to applications of guardians for permission 
to do acts referred to in sections 28 and 29 ;  
(d) as to the circumstances in which such requisitions as arc mentioned in clauses ( a), (b), (c) 
and ( d) of sectio n 34 s hould be made ;  
(e) as to the preservation of statements and accounts delivered and exhibited by guardians ;  
(ff) as to the inspection of those statements and accounts by persons interested ;  
2[(ff) as to the audit of accounts under section 34A, the class of persons who should be 
appointed to audit accounts, and the scales of remuneration to be granted to them; ] 
(g) as to the custody of money, and securities for money, belonging to wards ;  
(h) as to the securities on which money belonging to wards may  be invested ;  
(i) as to the education of wards for whom guardians, not being Collectors, have been appointed 
or declared by the Court ; and,  
(j) generally, for the guidance of the Courts in carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Rules under clauses ( a) and ( 1) of sub -section ( 1) shall not have effect until they have been 
approved by the State Government, nor shall any rule under this section have effect until it has been 
published in the Official Gazette.  
                                                      
1. See now s. 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908).  
2. Ins. by Act 17 of 1929, s. 3.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE GUARDIANS AND WARDS ACT, 1890.pdf - page 17]
17 
 51. Applicability of Act to guardians already appointed by Court. —A guardian appointed by, 
or holding a certificate of administration from, a Civil Court under any enactment repealed by this Act 
shall, save as may be prescribed, be subject to the provisions of this Act, and of the ru les made under 
it, as if he had been appointed or declared by the C ourt under Chapter II.  
52. [Amendment of Indian Majority Act .] Rep. by the Repealing Act , 1938 (1 of 1938), s. 2 and the 
Schedule . 
53. [Amendment of Chapter XXXI of the Code of Civil Proced ure.] Rep. by the Code of Civil 
Procedure,  1908 (5 of 1908), s. 156 and the Fifth Schedule . 
THE SCHEDULE .—[Enactments repealed .] Rep. by the Repealing Act,  1938 (1 of 1938), s. 2 and 
the Schedule . 
 
______  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL  UNIVERSITIES  ACT, 1970                                                                                                                                        
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                            
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF CORRESPONDING UNIVERSITIES  
3. Dissolution of the existing University and establishment of Haryana and Punjab Agricultural 
Universities.  
4. Incorporation.  
5. Territorial limits.  
6. Headquarters.  
7. Objects of corresponding University.  
8. Adm ission to a corresponding University.  
9. Power s of a corresponding University.  
10. Visitations.  
CHAPTER III  
MANAGEMENT OF A CORRESPONDING UNIVERSITY  
11. Authorities and officers of a corresponding University.  
12. Chancellor.  
13. Constitution , power s and duties of the Board of a corresponding University.  
14. Powers and duties of the Board.  
15. The Vice -Chancellor.  
16. Power s and duties of the Vice -Chancellor.  
17. The Registrar.  
18. Comptroller.  
19. The Estate Officer.  
20. Director of Student Welfare.  
21. Deans of colleges.  
22. The Librarian.  
23. Academic Council.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970.pdf - page 2]
2 
 CHAPTER IV  
COLLEGES  
SECTIONS  
24. The colleges.  
25. Experiment Stations for research.  
26. Agricultural Extension Education.  
CHAPTER V  
SERVICES  
27. Retirement and other conditions of services.  
28. Provident fund. 
29. Appointment of salaried office rs. 
30. Temporary arrangements.  
CHAPTER VI  
STATUTES AND REGULATIONS  
31. Statutes.  
32. Statutes how made.  
33. Regulations.  
CHAPTER VII  
ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
34. Account s and audit.  
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
35. Division of assets and liabilities.  
36. Legal proceedings.  
37. Transfer of employees.  
38. Member ship of corresponding University bodies.  
39. Annual Report.  
40. Construction of references to existing University in any document, etc.  
41. Obligations to be discharged by the Punjab Agricultural University.  
42. Proportion of cost to be borne by the Government of Himachal Pradesh.  
43. Settlement of unresolved  disputes.  
44. Power to remove difficulties.  
45. Repeals and saving.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970.pdf - page 3]
3 
 THE HARYANA AND  PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL  UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970  
ACT NO. 16 OF 1970  
[2nd April, 1970 .] 
An Act to provide for the establishment of two independent Agricultural Universities in place of 
the Punjab Agricultural University constituted by the Punjab Agricultural University         
Act, 1961, and for matters consequential on, or connected with the  establishment of those 
independent Agricultural Universities . 
WHEREAS , for the development of agriculture in the States of Haryana and Punjab, it is expedient to 
provide for the establishment of two independent Agricultural Universities in place of the Pu njab 
Agricultural University constituted by the Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961;  
AND WHEREAS , the Legislatures of the States of Haryana and Punjab have passed resolutions in terms 
of clause (1) of article 252 of the Constitution in relation to the  above -mentioned matter and matters 
ancillary thereto in so far as such matters are matters enumerated in List II in the Seventh Schedule to the 
Constitution;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -first Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Haryana and Punjab 
Agricultural Universities Act, 1970.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 2nd day of February, 1970.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, and in all Statutes made thereunder, unless the context otherwise 
requires,— 
(a) “Academic Council ” means, in relation to a corresponding University, the Academic Council 
of that University;  
(b) “agriculture ” includes the basic and applied scien ce of soil and water management, crop and 
live-stock production and management, home sciences and the betterment of rural people;  
(c) “appropriate Government ” means,— 
(i) in relation to the Haryana Agricultural University, the Government of the State of 
Haryana;  
(ii) in relation to the Punjab Agricultural University, the Gov
<|CHUNK|>
[THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970.pdf - page 3]
vernment of the State of 
Haryana;  
(ii) in relation to the Punjab Agricultural University, the Government of the State of Punjab;  
(d) “Board”, in relation to a corresponding University, means the Board  of Management of that 
University;  
(e) “college” means a constituent college of a corresponding University;  
(f) “corresponding University ” means,— 
(i) in relation to the territories to which the functions of the Haryana Agricultural University 
extend, that  University;  
(ii) in relation to the territories to which the functions of the Punjab Agricultural University 
extend, that University;  
(g) “existing University ” means the Punjab Agricultural University constituted by section 3 of the 
Punjab Agricultural Un iversity Act, 1961  (Punjab Act 32 of 1961);  
(h) “library” means a library established or maintained by a corresponding University;  
(i) “prescribed ” means prescribed by the Statutes of a corresponding University;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970.pdf - page 4]
4 
 (j) “Statutes” and “Regulations ” mean, respectively, the Statutes and Regulations made by a 
corresponding University under this Act;  
(k) “transferred territories ” means the territories added to the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh 
by sub -section  (1) of section 5 of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966  (31 o f 1966);  
(l) “Vice -Chancellor ” means the Vice -Chancellor of a corresponding University.  
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF CORRESPONDING UNIVERSITIES  
3. Dissolution of the existing University and establishment of Haryana and Punjab Agricultural 
Universities .—As from the commencement of this Act, the existing University shall stand dissolved and 
there shall be established in its place two independent Agric ultural Universities, to be known respectively 
as the Haryana Agricultural University and the Punjab Agricultural University.  
4. Incorporation .—(1) Each of the Agricultural Universities mentioned in section 3 shall be a body 
corporate having perpetual succ ession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of 
property, and to contract, and may, by its name, sue and be sued.  
(2) Each body corporate referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall consist of the Chancellor and the          
Vice -Chancellor of  that University, the members of the Board, the Academic Council and all persons, 
who may hereafter become or be appointed as such officers or members, so long as they continue to hold 
such office or membership.  
5. Territorial limits .—(1) The Haryana Agric ultural University shall function within the territories 
of the State of Haryana and the Punjab Agricultural University shall function within such other territories 
to which the functions of the existing University extended immediately before the commencem ent of this 
Act: 
Provided that on the establishment of a University in the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh, the 
Punjab Agricultural University shall cease to function in the transferred territories.  
(2) U
<|CHUNK|>
[THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970.pdf - page 4]
 the 
Punjab Agricultural University shall cease to function in the transferred territories.  
(2) Until a University is established in the Union te rritory of Himachal Pradesh, the Agricultural 
College at Palampur in the transferred territories shall, notwithstanding the dissolution of the existing 
University, continue to be a college of the Punjab Agricultural University and shall cease to be such 
college on the establishment of a University in those territories.  
(3) On the establishment of a University in the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh, the assets and 
liabilities of the Punjab Agricultural University pertaining to the Agricultural College at  Palampur, all 
research, training and extension centres, and any other property, of the Punjab Agricultural University 
located in the said Union territory shall stand transferred to, and shall vest in, such University.  
6. Headquarters .—(1) The headquarters  of the Haryana Agricultural University shall be at Hissar, 
and the headquarters of the Punjab Agricultural University shall be at Ludhiana, or at such other place as 
the appropriate Government may direct.  
(2) Each corresponding University shall establish an office at the place at which the seat of the 
appropriate Government is located.  
7. Objects of corresponding University .—Each corresponding University shall be deemed to be 
established and incorporated for the following objects, namely: — 
(a) making  provision for imparting education in different branches of study, particularly 
agriculture, veterinary and animal science, agricultural engineering, home sciences and other allied 
sciences;  
(b) furthering the advancement of learning and prosecution of res earch, particularly in agriculture 
and other allied sciences;  
(c) undertaking the extension of such sciences to the rural people of the territories within which 
the University is required by this Act to function;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970.pdf - page 4]
 by this Act to function;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970.pdf - page 5]
5 
 (d) such  other purposes as the appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, direct.  
8. Admission to a corresponding University .—(1) Each corresponding University shall, subject to 
the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, be open to all persons:  
Provided that nothing herein shall require any such University to admit to any course of study a 
number of students larger than the prescribed number.  
(2) The appropriate Government may direct the corresponding University to reserve in any college  
seats for women, Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes or such educationally backward classes of citizens 
as may be specified by that Government in this behalf, and where such direction has been given, the 
corresponding University shall make the reservations  accordingly:  
Provided that no such person shall be entitled to be admitted to a corresponding University unless he 
meets the standards laid down by the corresponding University.  
9. Power s of a corresponding University .—Each  corresponding University shall have the following 
powers, namely: — 
(a) to provide for graduate and post -graduate instructions in agriculture, veterinary and animal 
sciences, agricultural engineering, home sciences and other allied sciences and in such oth er branches 
of learning as the University may deem fit;  
(b) to make provision for instructions in applied fields, research and the dissemination of the 
findings of research and technical information through an extension education programme;  
(c) to institut e degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions;  
(d) to hold examinations and to grant and confer degrees, diplomas and other academic 
distinctions to and on persons who shall have — 
(i) pursued a prescribed course of study; or  
(ii) carried  out research in the University, or in an institution recognised in this behalf by the 
University, under the prescribed conditions;  
(e) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in the p
<|CHUNK|>
[THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970.pdf - page 5]
ty, under the prescribed conditions;  
(e) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in the prescribed manner and under the 
prescribed conditions;  
(f) to pr ovide lectures and instructions for field workers, village leaders and other persons not 
enrolled as regular students of the University and to grant certificates to them when deemed desirable;  
(g) to co -operate with other Universities and authorities in su ch manner and for such purposes as 
the University may determine;  
(h) to institute teaching, research and extension education posts required by the University and to 
appoint persons to such posts;  
(i) to create administrative, ministerial and other posts an d to make appointments thereto;  
(j) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships and prizes in accordance with the Statutes;  
(k) to institute and maintain residential accommodation for students of the University;  
(l) to supervise and control the residential accommodation and to regulate the discipline of the 
students of the University and to make arrangements for promoting their health and welfare;  
(m) to institute and receive such fees and other charges as may prescribe d; and  
(n) to do all such acts and things, whether incidental to the powers aforesaid or not, as may be 
requisite in order to further the objects of the University.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970.pdf - page 6]
6 
 10. Visitations .—(1) The Chancellor of a corresponding University may cause an inspection  to be 
made by such person as he may direct, of the corresponding University, its buildings, laboratories, and 
equipment and of any institution maintained by that University, and may cause an inquiry to be made in 
respect of any matter connected with the a dministration and the finances of that University.  
(2) The Chancellor of a corresponding University shall, in every case, give notice to the University of 
his intention to cause an inspection or inquiry to be made, and, on receipt of such notice, that Univ ersity 
shall be entitled to appoint a representative who shall have the right to be present, and heard, at such 
inspection or inquiry.  
(3) The Chancellor of a corresponding University may address the Board of the University with 
reference to the result of such inspection or inquiry with such advice as he may offer regarding the action 
to be taken.  
(4) The Board shall communicate to the Chancellor such action as it proposes to take or has taken as 
the result of such inspection or inquiry.  
(5) If the Board do es not, within a reasonable time, take action to the satisfaction of the Chancellor, 
he may, after considering any explanation furnished or representation made by the Board, issue such 
directions as he may deem fit, and the Board shall comply with such dir ections.  
CHAPTER III  
MANAGEMENT OF A CORRESPONDING UNIVERSITY  
11. Authorities and officers of a corresponding University .—The following shall be the authorities 
and officers of each corresponding University, namely: — 
(a) Authorities of a corresponding University — 
(i) Board;  
(ii) Academic Council;  
(iii) Board of Studies; and  
(iv) Such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be authorities of the 
University.  
(b) Officers of the corresponding University — 
(i) Chancellor;  
(ii) Vice -Chancellor;  
(iii) Dean of Post -Graduate Studies;  
(iv) Deans of the colleg
<|CHUNK|>
[THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970.pdf - page 6]
ncellor;  
(ii) Vice -Chancellor;  
(iii) Dean of Post -Graduate Studies;  
(iv) Deans of the colleges;  
(v) Director of Research;  
(vi) Director of Agricultural Extension Education;  
(vii) Director of Students Welfare;  
(viii) Registrar;  
(ix) Comptroller;  
(x) Estate Officer;  
(xi) Librarian; and  
(xii) Such other persons in the service of the University as may be declared by the Statutes to 
be officers of the University.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970.pdf - page 7]
7 
 12. Chancellor .—(1) The Governor of the State of Haryana shall be the Chancellor of the Haryana 
Agricultural University and the Governor of the State of Punjab shall be the Chancellor of the Punjab 
Agricultural University.  
(2) The Chancellor of a corresponding University shall, by virtue of his office, be the Head of that 
University and shall, when present, presi de at a convocation of that University.  
(3) The Chancellor of a corresponding University shall have such other powers as are specified in this 
Act or as may be prescribed.  
13. Constitution , power s and duties of the Board of a corresponding University .—(1) The 
appropriate Government shall, within a period of one year from the commencement of this Act, establish 
a Board for the management of the corresponding University.  
(2) The Board of the Haryana Agricultural University shall consist of — 
(a) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(b) the Chief Secretary to the Government of the State of Haryana;  
(c) the Secretaries to the Government of the State of Haryana in the Departments of — 
(i) Agriculture;  
(ii) Finance; and  
(iii) Community Development;  
(d) persons, not being  officials, appointed by the Government of the State of Haryana from 
amongst the following categories of persons, namely: — 
(i) one from amongst persons who are, in the opinion of that Government, eminent 
agricultural scientists with a background of agricul tural research or education;  
(ii) two from amongst persons who are, in the opinion of that Government, progressive 
farmers or live -stock breeders having experience of, and interest in scientific farming and live -
stock improvement;  
(iii) one from amongst pe rsons who are, in the opinion of that Government, distinguished 
industrialists, businessmen, manufacturers or live -stock breeders, associated with agricultural 
development; and  
(iv) one from amongst women who are , in the opinion of that Government, outstan ding social 
workers, preferably with a background
<|CHUNK|>
[THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970.pdf - page 7]
 are , in the opinion of that Government, outstan ding social 
workers, preferably with a background of rural advancement.  
(3) The Board of the Punjab Agricultural University shall consist of — 
(a) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(b) the Chief Secretary to the Government of the State of Punjab;  
(c) the Secretaries to the G overnment of the State of Punjab  in the Departments of — 
(i) Agriculture; and  
(ii) Finance;  
(d) the Director of Agriculture, Punjab;  
(e) the Director of Animal Husbandry, Punjab;  
(f) one nominee of the Indian Council of Agricultural Res earch;  
(g) two nominees of the Government of the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh;  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970.pdf - page 8]
8 
 (h) persons, not being officials, appointed by the Government of the State of Punjab from 
amongst the following categories of persons, namely: — 
(i) two  from amongst persons who are, in the opinion of that Government, eminent 
agricultural scientists with a background of agricultural research or education;  
(ii) two from amongst persons who are, in the opinion of that Government, progressive 
farmers or live -stock breeders having experience of, and interest in, scientific farming and      
live-stock improvement;  
(iii) one from amongst persons who are, in the opinion of that Government, distinguished 
industrialists, businessmen, manufacturers or live -stock bre eders, associated with agricultural 
development; and  
(iv) one from amongst women who are , in the opinion of that Government, outstanding social 
workers, preferably with a background of rural advancement.  
(4) The Board of the Haryana Agricultural University  shall associate with its meeting the following 
persons as technical advisers, but the persons so associated shall not be entitled to vote at any such 
meeting.— 
(a) the Director of Agriculture, Haryana;  
(b) the Director of Animal Husbandry, Haryana; and  
(c) two officers appointed by the Board of that University from amongst the Deans or Directors of 
that University.  
(5) The term of office of the members of the Board, other than the official members, shall be three 
years:  
Provided that two members of the Boa rd, not being official members, shall retire at the end of each 
year.  
(6) The members of the Board, other than the official members, shall determine, by lots, the members 
who shall retire at the end of each year.  
(7) A member of the Board may resign his of fice by a notice in writing, addressed to the Chancellor 
of the corresponding University.  
(8) If, for any reason, a vacancy occurs in the office of a member of the Board, the appropriate 
Government may fill the vacancy by appointing another person thereto in ac
<|CHUNK|>
[THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970.pdf - page 8]
e Board, the appropriate 
Government may fill the vacancy by appointing another person thereto in accordance with the provisions 
of this section.  
(9) No act or proceeding of the Board shall be invalid merely on the ground of the existence of any 
vacancy in, or defect in the constitution of, such Board.  
(10) Four members of the Board, in the case of the Haryana Agricultural University, and five 
members of the Board, in the case of the Punjab Agricultural University, shall be a quorum for a meeting 
of the Board:  
Provided that if a meeting of the Board is adjourned for want of a quorum, no quorum shall be 
necessary at the next meeting for the transaction of the same business.  
(11) The Chancellor shall be the Honorary Chairman of the Board and the Vice -Chancellor, the 
Working Chairman.  
(12) The members of the Board shall not be entitled to receive any rem uneration for the performance 
of their functions under this Act except such daily and travelling allowances as may be prescribed:  
Provided that nothing herein shall affect the emoluments or other conditions of service of the       
Vice -Chancellor.  
(13) On the commencement of this Act, the members of the Board of Management of the existing 
University shall be deemed to have vacated their offices as such.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970.pdf - page 9]
9 
 14. Powers and duties of the Board .—The powers and duties of the Board shall be as follows: — 
(a) to appro ve the budget submitted by the Vice -Chancellor;  
(b) to hold and control the properly and funds of the University and issue any general directive on 
behalf of the University;  
(c) to accept or transfer any property on behalf of the University;  
(d) to adminis ter funds placed at the disposal of the University for specific purposes;  
(e) to invest moneys belonging to the University;  
(f) to appoint the officers, teachers and other employees of the University in the prescribed 
manner;  
(g) to direct the form and use of the common seal of the University;  
(h) to appoint such committees as it may deem necessary for its proper functioning;  
(i) to borrow money for capital improvements and make suitable arrangements for its repayment;  
(j) to appoint  the Vice -Chancellor subject to the provisions of section 15;  
(k) to meet at such times and as often as the Board may deem necessary:  
Provided that regular meetings of the Board shall be held at least once in every two months;  
(l) to regulate and determine  all matters concerning the University in accordance with this Act 
and the Statutes, and to exercise such powers and to discharge such duties as may be conferred on or 
imposed upon the Board by this Act or the Statutes.  
15. The Vice -Chancellor .—(1) The Vic e-Chancellor shall be a whole -time officer of the 
corresponding University and shall be appointed by the Board in the prescribed manner:  
Provided that where the members of the Board are not unanimous with regard to the selection of the 
person proposed to b e appointed as the Vice -Chancellor, the appointment shall be made by the Chancellor 
of the concerned corresponding University:  
Provided further that the first Vice -Chancellor of the Haryana Agricultural University shall be 
appointed by the Government of th e State of Haryana:  
Provided also that the person holding office i
<|CHUNK|>
[THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970.pdf - page 9]
pointed by the Government of th e State of Haryana:  
Provided also that the person holding office immediately before the commencement of this Act as the 
Vice -Chancellor of the existing University shall be deemed to be the first Vice -Chancellor of the Punjab 
Agricultural University and sha ll hold such office for the unexpired portion of his term of office as the 
Vice -Chancellor of the existing University.  
(2) The term of office of the Vice -Chancellor shall be four years and he shall be eligible for              
re-appointment.  
(3) The emoluments and other condition;  of service of the Vice -Chancellor shall be such as may be 
prescribed and shall not be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.  
(4) When a vacancy occurs, or is likely to occur, in the office of the Vice -Chancellor b y reason of 
leave taken by the Holder of such office or any cause other than the expiry of the term of office, the 
Registrar shall report the fact forthwith to the Board, and such vacancy shall be filled in accordance with 
the provisions of sub -section ( 1). 
(5) Until the vacancy is filled under sub -section ( 4) or until such time as the Board designates an 
acting Vice -Chancellor, the senior -most Dean, in the case of the Haryana Agricultural University, or the 
Registrar, in the case of the Punjab Agricultural  University, as the case may be, shall carry on the current 
duties of the office of the Vice -Chancellor.  
(6) The Vice -Chancellor may relinquish office by resignation in writing addressed to the Board and 
ordinarily delivered to the Secretary of the Board a t least tw o months prior to the date on which  the     
Vice -Chancellor wishes to be relieved.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970.pdf - page 10]
10 
 16. power s and duties of the Vice -Chancellor .—(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be the principal 
executive and academic officer of the corresponding University and the Chairman of the Academic 
Council and shall, in the absence of the Chancellor, preside at a convocation of the corresponding 
University and s hall confer degrees on persons entitled to receive them.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall exercise control over the affairs of the corresponding University and 
shall be responsible for the due maintenance of discipline at that University.  
(3) The Vice -Chancel lor shall convene meetings of the Academic Council unless he temporarily 
delegates this power to some other officer of the corresponding University.  
(4) Without prejudice to the powers conferred by this Act on the appropriate Government, the        
Vice -Chancellor shall ensure the faithful observance of the provisions of this Act and the Statutes and he 
shall exercise all such powers as may be necessary in that behalf.  
(5) The Vice -Chancellor shall be responsible for the presentation of the budget and the s tatement of 
accounts to the Board.  
(6) In any emergency, which, in the opinion of the Vice -Chancellor, requires immediate action to be 
taken, he shall take such action as he deems necessary and shall, at the earliest opportunity, report the 
action taken to the officer, authority or other body for confirmation who or which in the ordinary course 
would have dealt with the matter, but nothing in this  sub-section shall be deemed to empower the      
Vice -Chancellor to incur any expenditure not duly authorised and provided for in the budget.  
(7) Where any action by the Vice -Chancellor under sub -section ( 6) affects any person in the service 
of the corresponding University to his disadvantage, su ch action shall not be taken unless the person 
concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard, and the person against whom any 
action is proposed to be taken may p
<|CHUNK|>
[THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970.pdf - page 10]
le opportunity of being heard, and the person against whom any 
action is proposed to be taken may prefer an appeal to the Board within thirty days of the date on which 
the action proposed to be taken against him is communicated to him.  
(8) Subject as aforesaid, the Vice -Chancellor shall give effect to the orders of the Board regarding the 
appointment, suspension and dismissal of officers, teachers and other employees of the corresponding 
University.  
(9) The Vice -Chancellor shall be responsible for the close co -ordination and integration of teaching, 
research and extension education.  
(10) The Vice -Chancellor shall exercise such oth er powers as may be prescribed.  
(11) The salary and allowances payable to the officers, teachers and other employees of the 
corresponding University shall be determined by the Vice -Chancellor with the approval of the Board.  
17. The Registrar .—(1) The Registrar of a corresponding Universi ty shall be a whole -time office  of 
that University and shall be appointed by the Vice -Chancellor of that University with the approval of the 
Board.  
(2) The Registrar of a corresponding University shall receive such remu neration and other 
emoluments as may be prescribed and shall not, during the tenure of his office, accept any remuneration 
or emolument other than the prescribed remuneration or emolument.  
(3) The powers and duties of the Registrar of a corresponding Unive rsity shall be as follows: — 
(a) to be responsible for the custody of the records and the common seal of the University;  
(b) to be the ex officio  Secretary to the Academic Council and to the Board and to place before 
such Council and Board all such informat ion as may be necessary for the transaction of business of 
the Council or the Board, as the case may be;  
(c) to receive applications for admission into the University;  
(d) to keep a permanent record of all syllabi, curricula and informations connected ther ewith;  
(e) to make arrangements for
<|CHUNK|>
[THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970.pdf - page 10]
cord of all syllabi, curricula and informations connected ther ewith;  
(e) to make arrangements for the conduct of such examinations as may be prescribed and to be 
responsible for the due execution of all processes connected therewith;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970.pdf - page 11]
11 
 (f) to perform such other duties as may be prescribed or required, from time to time , by the     
Vice -Chancellor.  
18. Comptroller .—(1) The Comptroller of a corresponding University shall be a whole -time officer 
of that University and shall be appointed by the Vice -Chancellor of that University with the approval of 
the Board.  
(2) The Comptroller shall manage the property and investments of the corresponding University and 
advise it in regard to its financial policy.  
(3) The Comptroller shall be responsible to the Vice -Chancellor for all accounting matters of the 
corresponding Universit y including the preparation and presentation of its Budget and statement of 
accounts.  
(4) The Comptroller shall receive such remuneration as may be prescribed and shall not, during the 
tenure of his office, receive any remuneration or other emolument other  than the prescribed remuneration.  
(5) The Comptroller shall — 
(a) ensure that expenditure, not authorised in the budget, is not incurred by the corresponding 
University except by way of investment; and  
(b) disallow  any expenditure not warranted by the terms of any Statute or for which provision is 
required to be made by the Statute but has not been so made.  
(6) All moneys belonging to the corresponding University shall be kept in a Scheduled Bank 
approved by the Boa rd. 
19. The Estate Officer .—The Estate Officer of a corresponding University, who shall be appointed 
by the Vice -Chancellor with the approval of the Board, shall be responsible for the custody, maintenance 
and management of all the buildings, lawns, gardens and other properties of the University.  
20. Director of Student Welfare .—(1) The Director of Student Welfare of a corresponding 
University shall be a whole -time officer of that University and shall be appointed by the Vice -Chancellor 
with the appro val of the Board.  
(2) The Director of Student Welfare shall have the following duties, namely: — 
(a) to make arrangement
<|CHUNK|>
[THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970.pdf - page 11]
 The Director of Student Welfare shall have the following duties, namely: — 
(a) to make arrangements for the housing of students;  
(b) to direct a programme of student -counselling;  
(c) to arrange for the employment of students in accorda nce with the plans approved by the    
Vice -Chancellor;  
(d) to supervise the extra -curricular activities of students;  
(e) to assist in the placement of graduates of the University; and  
(f) to organise  and maintain contact with the Alumni Association of the University.  
21. Deans of colleges .—(1) Each college shall have a Dean who shall be a whole -time officer and 
shall be appointed by the Vice -Chancellor with the approval of the Board.  
(2) The Dean shal l be responsible to the Vice -Chancellor for all matters concerning his college.  
(3) The Dean shall be responsible for the organisation and the conduct of resident instruction of the 
Departments of the college.  
22. The Librarian .—(1) The Librarian of a corresponding University shall be appointed by the     
Vice -Chancellor with the approval of the Board and shall be in charge of the library.  
(2) The Librarian shall be responsible to the Vice -Chancellor for all matters concerning the l ibrary.  
23. Academic Council .—(1) The Academic Council shall be in charge of the academic affairs of the 
University and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, superintend, direct and control, 
and be responsible for the maintenance of standards of instruction, educ ation and examinations and other 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970.pdf - page 12]
12 
 matters connected with the obtaining of degrees and shall exercise such other powers and perform such 
other duties as may be prescribed.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the Academic Council s hall have 
power— 
(a) to advise the Vice -Chancellor on all academic matters, including the control and management 
of the libraries;  
(b) to co -opt at its meetings such Heads of Departments as it may consider necessary;  
(c) to make recommendations to the Vice -Chancellor for the institution of the Professorships, 
Associate Professorships, Assistant Professorships and teacherships and other teaching posts and in 
regard to the duties and emoluments thereof;  
(d) to formulate, modify or revise schemes for the const itution or reconstitution of departments of 
teaching, research and extension;  
(e) to make regulations regarding the admission of students to the University;  
(f) to make regulations regarding examinations conducted by the University and the conditions on 
which students shall be admitted to such examinations;  
(g) to make regulations relating to courses of study leading to degrees, diplomas and certificates;  
(h) to make recommendations regarding post -graduate teaching, research and extension;  
(i) to make recommendations regarding the qualifications to be prescribed for teachers in the 
University;  
(j) to exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or imposed 
on it by or under the provisions of this Act.  
(3) The Academi c Council shall consist of — 
(a) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(b) the Deans of the colleges of the University;  
(c) the Dean of Post -Graduate Studies;  
(d) the Director of Extension Education;  
(e) the Director of Research;  
(f) the Head of one Department from each college, to be selected by the respective college.  
(4) The term of office of the members specified in clause ( f) of sub -section ( 3) shall be two years.  
CHAPTER IV  
COLLEGES  
24. The colleg
<|CHUNK|>
[THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970.pdf - page 12]
ied in clause ( f) of sub -section ( 3) shall be two years.  
CHAPTER IV  
COLLEGES  
24. The colleges .—(1) The  following colleges shall be the constituent colleges of the Haryana 
Agricultural University, namely: — 
(a) the College of Agriculture at Hissar;  
(b) the College of Veterinary Medicine at Hissar;  
(c) the College of Animal Sciences at Hissar;  
(d) the  College of Basic Sciences and the Humanities and such other colleges as may be 
established by the University after the commencement of this Act; and  
(e) such Central Government institutions of agricultural research, technical and extension 
education in th e State of Haryana as may desire to be integrated as colleges of the Haryana 
Agricultural University.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970.pdf - page 13]
13 
 (2) The following colleges shall be the constituent colleges of the Punjab Agricultural University, 
namely:— 
(a) the College of Agriculture at Ludhiana;  
(b) the College of Agricultural Engineering at Ludhiana;  
(c) the College of Basic Sciences and the Humanities at Ludhiana;  
(d) the College of Home Sciences at Ludhiana;  
(e) the College of Veterinary Medicine at Ludhiana;  
(f) until  a University is established in the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh, the Agricultural 
College at Palampur;  
(g) such other colleges as may be established by the University after the commencement of this 
Act; and  
(h) such Central Government institutions of agricultural research, technical and extension 
education in the State of Punjab as may desire to be integrated as colleges of the Punjab Agricultural 
University.  
(3) (a) There shall be a Board of Studies for each college of a corresponding University an d where 
there is more than one college in a branch of learning, there may be one Board of Studies for all the 
colleges in that branch of learning.  
(b) The Deans of various colleges shall be the Chairmen of the respective Boards of Studies and the 
Heads of Departments of the colleges shall be members thereof.  
(c) Where there is a Board of Studies for more than one college in a branch of learning, the Deans 
shall act as Chairmen of the Board of Studies by rotation according to seniority for a period of one year 
each.  
(d) The Vice -Chancellor may nominate to the Board of Studies such other teachers of related subjects 
or sciences from the same or other colleges, as he may deem fit.  
(e) The duties of such Boards of Studies shall be to prescribe syllab i so as to  ensure integrated and 
well-balanced courses of study.  
(4) Every college shall comprise such Departments as may be prescribed and each Department shall 
be assigned such subjects of study as the Academic Council may deem fit.  
(5) There shall be a Head of ea ch Department who shall be res
<|CHUNK|>
[THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970.pdf - page 13]
 the Academic Council may deem fit.  
(5) There shall be a Head of ea ch Department who shall be responsible to the Dean, for resident 
instruction, to the Director of Research, for research, and to the Director of Extension Education, for 
extension education.  
(6) The Head of each Department shall be selected by the Vice -Chan cellor and appointed by him with 
the approval of the Board.  
(7) The duties, powers and functions of the Heads of Departments shall be such as may be prescribed.  
25. Experiment Stations for research .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statute s, 
Experiment Stations shall be established under each corresponding University, which shall be responsible 
for research, both fundamental and applied, and research activities shall be concentrated as far as possible 
at the Central Research Stations and ot her Regional Research and Testing Stations in the different        
agro-climatic zones of the State.  
(2) There shall be a Director of Research in each corresponding University, who shall be responsible 
to the Vice -Chancellor and who shall be appointed by the Vice -Chancellor in consultation with the Deans 
and with the approval of the Board.  
(3) The Director of Research shall be a whole -time officer trained in Agriculture and shall initiate, 
guide and co -ordinate the research programme of the corresponding U niversity and its outlying            
sub-stations.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970.pdf - page 14]
14 
 26. Agricultural Extension Education .—(1) In relation to the territories to which the functions of a 
corresponding University extend, such University shall be responsible for — 
(a) the agricultural extensi on functions which are primarily educational in nature; and  
(b) imparting training to the future Extension Officers for the National Extension Blocks and 
instructors for the Extension Training Centres.  
(2) All Extension Specialists, in relation to any subj ect-matter, shall be the members of the staff of 
their respective subject -matter sections in each corresponding University and work in close co -ordination 
with the Departments of Agriculture, Development and Co -operatives.  
(3) The Director of Extension Edu cation shall be a whole -time officer technically trained in 
agriculture and shall be appointed by the Vice -Chancellor in consultation with the Deans and with the 
approval of the Board.  
(4) The Director of Extension Education shall be responsible to the Vic e-Chancellor and shall 
develop programmes for assisting farmers and housewives in applying results of scientific investigations 
to the solution of their problems.  
CHAPTER V  
SERVICES  
27. Retirement and other conditions of services .—The age of retirement and other conditions of 
service of every officer , teacher or other employee of a corresponding Univ ersity shall be such as may be 
prescribed.  
28. Provident fund.—Each corresponding University shall constitute gratuity and provident fund for 
the benefit of its officers, teachers and other employees in such manner, and subject to such conditions, as 
may be prescribed.  
29. Appointment of salaried office rs.—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the members of the 
technical staff of a corresponding University shall be selected by the Head of the Department in 
consultation with the members of the Department concerned, recommended by the Dean or the Director 
of Research or the Director of Extension Education, as the c
<|CHUNK|>
[THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970.pdf - page 14]
ecommended by the Dean or the Director 
of Research or the Director of Extension Education, as the case may be, and appointed by the             
Vice -Chancellor with the approval of the Board.  
30. Temporary arrangements .—The Vice -Chancellor may, until such time as the authorities of the 
correspond ing University are duly constituted, temporarily appoint any such officer of that University as 
such University is authorised by this Act to appoint . 
CHAPTER VI  
STATUTES AND REGULATIONS  
31. Statutes .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes of a  corresponding University may 
provide for any matter and shall, in particular, provide for the following: — 
(a) the constitution, powers and duties of the authorities of the University;  
(b) the election, appointment, and continuance in office of the members  of the authorities of the 
University and of the officers, teachers and other employees of the University including the filling up 
of vacancies and all other matters relating to these authorities and officers, teachers and other 
employees for which it may be necessary or desirable to provide;  
(c) the designation, the manner of appointment, the powers, and the duties of the officers of the 
University;  
(d) the classification and the manner of appointment of teachers;  
(e) the constitution of gratuity or provid ent fund or both for the benefit of officers, teachers and 
other employees of the University;  
(f) the institution of degrees and diplomas;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970.pdf - page 15]
15 
 (g) the conferment of honorary degrees;  
(h) the establishment, amalgamation, sub -division and abolition of Department s; 
(i) the establishment, and the abolition of hostels maintained by the University;  
(j) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, medals and prizes;  
(k) the maintenance of a register of graduates;  
(l) the admission of students to the University and their enrolment and continuance as such;  
(m) the courses of study to be laid down for degrees and diplomas of the University;  
(n) the conditions under which students shall be admitted to the degree, diploma or o ther courses 
and the manner in which the examinations are to be held and the eligibility for the award of degrees 
and diplomas;  
(o) the conditions of residence of the students of the University and the levy of fees for residence 
in hostels maintained by th e University;  
(p) the recognition and supervision of hostels not maintained by the University;  
(q) the number, qualifications, emoluments, and other conditions of service of officers, teachers 
and other employees of the University and the preparation and t he maintenance of record of their 
services and activities;  
(r) the fees which may be charged by the University;  
(s) the remuneration and allowances, including travelling and daily allowances, to be paid to 
persons employed on the business of University;  
(t) the conditions for the award of fellowships, scholarships, medals and prizes, stipends and fee 
concessions;  
(u) all other matters which by this Act are to be or may be provided for by the Statutes.  
32. Statutes how made .—(1) The Statutes made by the existing University under section 30 of the 
Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961  (Punjab Act 32 of 1961), and in force immediately before the 
commencement of this Act shall, in so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, and 
subject to such adaptations and modifications as may be notified by the appropriate Governmen
<|CHUNK|>
[THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970.pdf - page 15]
, and 
subject to such adaptations and modifications as may be notified by the appropriate Government, be the 
first Statutes of a corresponding University.  
(2) The Board may, from time to time, make new or additional Statutes and may amend or repeal the 
Statutes in  the manner hereinafter provided in this section.  
(3) The Academic Council may propose to the Board the draft of Statutes and such draft shall be 
considered by the Board at its next meeting:  
Provided that the Academic Council shall not propose the draft of  any Statute or any amendment of a 
Statute affecting the status, powers or constitution of any authority of the University until such authority 
has been given an opportunity to express its opinion upon the proposal, and any opinion so expressed 
shall be co nsidered by the Board.  
(4) The Board may consider any such draft as is referred to in sub -section ( 3) and pass the proposed 
Statute or reject or return it to the  Academic Council for re -consideration, either in whole or in part, 
together with any amendment  which it may suggest.  
(5) (a) Any member of the Board may propose to the Board the draft of any Statute and the Board 
may either accept or reject the proposal if it relates to a matter not falling within the purview of the 
Academic Council.  
(b) In case su ch a draft relates to a matter within the purview of the Academic Council, the Board 
shall refer it for consideration to the Academic Council, which may either report to the Board that it does 
not approve the proposal, which, then, shall be deemed to have been rejected by the Board or submit the 
draft to the Board in such form as the Academic Council may approve, and the provisions of this section 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970.pdf - page 16]
16 
 shall apply in the case of the draft submitted by any member of the Board as they apply in the case of a 
draft presented to the Board by the Academic Council.  
33. Regulations .—(1) Any authority of a corresponding University may make Regulations consistent 
with this Act and the Statutes for — 
(a) laying  down the procedure to be observed at its meetings and the number of members required 
to form a quorum;  
(b) providing for all matters which by this Act and the Statutes are to be provided for by the 
Regulations; and  
(c) providing for any other matter solel y concerning the authority and not provided for by this Act 
and the Statutes.  
(2) Every authority of the corresponding University shall make Regulations providing for the giving 
of notice to the members of such authority of the dates of meetings and of the  business to be transacted at 
meetings and for keeping of records of the proceedings of the meetings.  
(3) The Academic Council may, subject to the provisions of the Statutes, make Regulations providing 
for courses of study, system of examinations, and degr ees and diplomas of a corresponding University 
after receiving drafts of the same from the Board of Studies concerned.  
(4) The Academic Council may not alter a draft received from the Board of Studies, but may reject or 
return it to the Board of Studies fo r further consideration together with the suggestions of the Academic 
Council.  
(5) The Board may direct the amendment, in such manner as it may specify, of any Regulation made 
under this section or the annulment of any Regulation made under sub -section ( 1). 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the Regulations made by the existing 
University under section 31 of the Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961  (Punjab Act 32 of 1961) and 
in force immediately before the commencement of this Act shall, in so far as they are not inconsistent 
with the provisions of this Act and subject to such adaptations and mo
<|CHUNK|>
[THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970.pdf - page 16]
as they are not inconsistent 
with the provisions of this Act and subject to such adaptations and modifications as may be notified by 
the appropriate Government, be the first Regulations of each corresponding University.  
CHAPTER VII  
ACCOUNT S AND AUDIT  
34. Account s and audit .—(1) Each corresponding University shall have a general fund to which 
shall be credited — 
(a) income from fees, endowments and grants and from properties of the University including 
Hostels, Experiment Stations and Farms;  
(b) contributions and grants which may be made by the appropriate Government on such 
conditions which it may impose; and  
(c) other contributions, grants, donations and benefactions.  
(2) Each corresponding University shall constitute a Finance Committee con sisting of— 
(a) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(b) the Comptroller;  
(c) a member chosen by the Board from amongst the official members;  
(d) a member chosen by the Board from amongst the non -official members.  
(3) The powers and duties of the Finance Committee of a corresponding University shall be as 
follows— 
(a) to examine the annual accounts of the University and to advise the Board thereon;  
(b) to examine the annual budget estimates and to advise the Board thereon;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970.pdf - page 17]
17 
 (c) to review the financial position of the Univ ersity from time to time;  
(d) to make recommendations to the University on all matters relating to the finances of the 
University;  
(e) to make recommendations to the Board on all proposals involving expenditure for which no 
provision has been made in the b udget or which involves expenditure in excess of the amount 
provided in the budget.  
(4) The accounts and the balance -sheet shall be submitted by the Vice -Chancellor through the Board 
to the appropriate Government which shall cause them to be audited by the  Examiner, Local Fund 
Accounts.  
(5) The accounts, when audited, shall be printed and copies thereof together with audit report, shall be 
submitted by the Vice -Chancellor to the Board, which shall forward them to the appropriate Government 
with such comments as it may deem fit and that Government shall cause a copy of the audited accounts 
together with its comments thereon to be laid before the State Legislature.  
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
35. Division of assets and liabilities .—On the commencement of  this Act, the assets and liabilities of 
the existing University shall stand transferred to, and shall vest in, the Haryana Agricultural University 
and the Punjab Agricultural University and shall be apportioned between such Universities in accordance 
with the following principles, namely: — 
(a) (i) any asset of the existing University which is, immediately before the commencement of 
this Act, in the State of Haryana, and every right to such property, shall stand transferred to, and shall 
vest in, the Haryan a Agricultural University;  
(ii) every other asset and every right thereto shall stand transferred to, and shall vest in, the 
Punjab Agricultural University;  
(b) (i) every liability of the existing University which is relatable to any unit or asset in the S tate 
of Haryana shall, if subsisting immediately before the commencement of this Act, be the liability of 
the Haryan
<|CHUNK|>
[THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970.pdf - page 17]
hall, if subsisting immediately before the commencement of this Act, be the liability of 
the Haryana Agricultural University;  
(ii) every other liability of the existing University, if subsisting on such commencement, shall be 
the liability  of the Punjab Agricultural University;  
(c) the cash balances (whether in the form of cash, bank or security deposits) and reserve funds 
held by the existing University, immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall, after 
deducting all the liabil ities of the existing University up to such commencement, be apportioned 
between the Haryana Agricultural University and the Punjab Agricult ural University in the ratio        
of 40 :60; 
(d) every contract made by the existing University before the commence ment of this Act shall, if 
subsisting at such commencement, be deemed to have been made — 
(i) in the case of a contract which is relatable to any asset or unit of the existing University in 
the State of Haryana, by the Haryana Agricultural University;  
(ii) in any other case, by the Punjab Agricultural University;  
(e) every share, debenture, bond and other investment made by the existing University shall be 
valued on the basis of average market value thereof during one year immediately before the 
commencement  of this Act, and the value so determined shall be apportioned between the Haryana 
Agricultural University and the Punjab Agricultural University in the ratio of 40:60;  
(f) every borrowing made by the existing University before the commencement of this Act  shall, 
if the liability is subsisting on such commencement, be repaid together with the interest due thereon 
by the Haryana Agricultural University and the Punjab Agricultural University in the ratio of 40:60;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970.pdf - page 18]
18 
 (g) the Provident Fund and accruals thereto o f every officer or other employee of the existing 
University shall stand transferred to the corresponding University in which he has been posted on the 
date of the commencement of this Act.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, “asset” shall be de emed to include all property, 
movable and immovable, rights, powers, authorities and privileges, and all other rights and interests 
arising out of such property as were immediately before the commencement of this Act in the ownership, 
possession, power or control of the existing University, and all books of accounts, registers, records and 
all other documents of whatever nature relating thereto and shall also be deemed to include all obligations 
of whatever kind then subsisting of the existing University.  
36. Legal proceedings .—If, at the commencement of this Act, any suit, appeal or other proceeding of 
whatever nature is pending by or against the existing University, the same shall not abate, be discontinued 
or be in any way prejudicially affected by reason  of the dissolution of the existing University, but the suit, 
appeal or other proceeding may be continued, prosecuted or enforced by or against — 
(a) the  Haryana Agricultural University, if it relates to any property or unit of the existing 
University in the State of Haryana; and  
(b) in any other case, the Punjab Agricultural University.  
37. Transfer of employees .—(1) Save as otherwise provided in section 13, all officers and other 
employees of the existing University holding office as such immediately before the commencement of 
this Act shall, on such commencement, become the officers or other employees of the corresponding 
University and such officers or other employees shall be divided between those Universities in 
accordance with the following principles, namely: — 
(a) those officers or other employees of the existing University who are holding office in, or in 
connection with
<|CHUNK|>
[THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970.pdf - page 18]
cers or other employees of the existing University who are holding office in, or in 
connection with, any property or unit of the  existing University in the State of Haryana shall become 
the officers or other employees of the Haryana Agricultural University;  
(b) every other officer or other employee of the existing University, shall become the officer or 
other employee of the Punjab  Agricultural University.  
(2) Every officer or other employee of the existing University shall, on and from the commencement 
of this Act hold his office or service in the corresponding University on the same terms and conditions 
and with the same rights to  pension, provident fund , gratuity and other matters as would have been 
admissible to him if the existing University had not been dissolved, and continue to do so unless and until 
his employment in the corresponding University is duly terminated or until h is remuneration and terms or 
conditions of service are duly altered by the corresponding University.  
(3) For the persons who, immediately before the commencement of this Act, were the trustees for 
pension, provident, gratuity or other like fund, constitute d for the officers or other employees of the 
existing University, there shall be substituted as trustees such persons as the appropriate Government may 
by general or special order, specify.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947  (14 of 1947), or any 
other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any officer or other employee from the 
existing University to a corresponding University shall not entitle such officer or other employee to any 
compensat ion, whether under this Act or under any other  law for the time being in force, and no such 
claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority.  
38. Member ship of corresponding University bodies .—(1) All casual vacancies among the 
members (other than ex officio  members) of any aut
<|CHUNK|>
[THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970.pdf - page 18]
ity bodies .—(1) All casual vacancies among the 
members (other than ex officio  members) of any authority or body of each corresponding University shall 
be filled, as soon as possible, by the person or body who or which appointed or nominated the member, 
whose place became vacant, and the person appointed or nom inated to a casual vacancy shall be a 
member of such authority or body for the remaining period of the term for which the person whose place 
he fills would have been a member.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970.pdf - page 19]
19 
 (2) A person, who is a member of any authority of a corresponding University a s a representative of 
another body, whether of that University or not, shall retain his seat on that authority so long as he 
continues to be a member of the body by which he was appointed or nominated and thereafter till his 
successor is duly appointed or elected.  
(3) No act or proceeding of any authority or body of a corresponding University shall be invalid by 
reason merely of the existence of any vacancy or defect in the constitution of such authority or body.  
(4) If any question arises whether any person has been duly appointed as, or is entitled to be, a 
member of any authority of a corresponding University subordinate to the Board or whether any decision 
of the corresponding University is in accordance with this Act and the Statutes, the question shall be 
referred to the appropriate Government whose decision thereon shall be final.  
39. Annual Report .—(1) The Annual Report of a corresponding University shall be prepared under 
the directions of the Vice -Chancellor and submitted to the Board at least one month before the annual 
meeting at which it is to be considered.  
(2) The Board shall, after consideration of the Annual Report, forward a copy thereof to the 
appropriate Government.  
(3) On receipt of a copy of the Annual Report referred to in sub -section (1), the appropriate 
Government shall cause a copy of such Report, together with its comments thereon, to be laid before the 
State Legislature.  
(4) Notwithstanding the dissolution of the existing University, the Annual Report of the existing 
University for the year 1969 -70 shall be prepared under the directions of the Vice -Chancellor of the 
Punjab Agricultural University and the Board of that University shall, after consideration of the Annual 
Report, forward a copy thereof to the appropriate Government.  
40. Construction of references to existing University in any document, etc. —Any reference to 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970.pdf - page 19]
nt.  
40. Construction of references to existing University in any document, etc. —Any reference to the 
existing University in any law, other than this Act, or in any contract or other instrument shall be 
construed, — 
(a) if such reference relates to any asset or  property of the existing University in the State of 
Haryana, as a reference to the Haryana Agricultural University; and  
(b) in any other case, as a reference to the Punjab Agricultural University.  
41. Obligations to be discharged by the Punjab Agricultural University .—Any obligation 
incurred, before the commencement of this Act, by the existing University to confer any degree or other 
academic distinction on, or to issue any diploma or other certificat e to, any person or to grant any copy of 
any degree, diploma, certificate, marks -sheet or other document to any person shall, on such 
commencement, be the obligation of the Punjab Agricultural University.  
42. Proportion of cost to be borne by the Governmen t of Himachal Pradesh .—In consideration of 
the maintenance, by the Punjab Agricultural University, of a campus at Palampur, the Government of the 
Union territory of Himachal Pradesh shall bear a portion of the cost of the Punjab Agricultural University 
and the quantum of such cost shall be determined by the Central Government having regard to the benefit 
derived by that Union territory.  
43. Settlement of unresolved  disputes .—(1) If any dispute arises by reason of the dissolution of the 
existing University, such dispute shall be resolved in the first instance by the Vice -Chancellors of the 
corresponding Universities and in the event of the failure of such Vice -Chancellors to arrive at an agreed 
solution with regard to any such dispute, the matter shall be ref erred to the Secretary to the Government 
of India in the Ministry dealing with Agriculture and the decision thereon of such Secretary shall be final.  
(2) If, on the establishment of a University in the Union territory o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970.pdf - page 19]
ch Secretary shall be final.  
(2) If, on the establishment of a University in the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh, any dispute 
arise s with regard to the transfer of assets or liabilities pertaining to the Agricultural College at Palampur 
or the research, training and extension centres, or property, of the Punjab Agricultural University located 
in the said Union territory or with regard  to the transfer of the officers or other employees of such College 
or centres to the University established in the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh, such dispute shall be 
resolved in the first instance by the Vice -Chancellor of the Punjab Agricultural University and the      
<|CHUNK|>
[THE HARYANA AND PUNJAB AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 1970.pdf - page 20]
20 
 Chief Secretary to the Government of the Union territory of Himachal Pradesh and in the event of their 
failure to arrive at an agreed solution with regard to any such dispute, the matter shall be referred to the 
Secretary to the Gov ernment of India in the Ministry dealing with Agriculture and the decision thereon of 
such Secretary shall be final.  
44. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the President may, by order, do anything, not inconsistent with such provisions, which appears to 
him to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such power shall be exercised after the expiry of the period of two years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
45. Repeals and saving .—(1) The Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961  (Punjab                       
Act 32 of 1961), is hereby repealed.  
(2) The provisions of the General Clauses Act, 1897  (10 of 1897), shall apply to the repeal of the said  
Act as if the said Act were a Central Act.  
(3) The Haryana and Punjab Agricultural Universities Ordinance, 1970  (1 of 1970), is hereby 
repealed.  
(4) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to  have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE IMPROVEMENTS IN TOWNS ACT, 1850.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE IMPROVEMENTS IN TOWNS  ACT, 1850  
ACT NO. XXVI  OF 1850  
[Passed on  the 21st June,  1850 .] 
1. Repeals . Act 10, 1842.  
2. Act may be put in force by order of Local Government wherever inhabitants desire it.  
3, 4. Notice of application to Government to be advertised in order that inhabitants may declare their 
wishes, and (4) decision of Local Government herein to be final.  
5. Act to come in force from publication of order, and order to be conclusive, & c.  
6, 7. Commission formed of Magistrate and inhabitant s to be appointed by Government, who shall 
make rules, & c. for furtherance of Act : and (7) the rules shall be for objects in Act specified.  
8. Empowers Commissioners to make necessary contracts and apply the taxes . 
9. Commissioners not to be personally l aible on contracts but only for misapplication of monies and 
gross neglect.  
10. Act 10, 1839, for recovery of fines to apply to taxes, & c . under this Act.  
11. No rate or assessment to be invalid for defect of form, & c.  
12. All moveable property on the assessed premises to be liable for taxes.  
13. Account of receipts and disbursements to be submitted annually to Local Government.  
14. Empowers Government to suspend the operation of the Act.  
An Act to enable improvements to be made in Towns.  
Whereas Act X. 1842, was passed for enabling the inhabitants of any place of public resort or residence, 
under the Presidency of Fort William, not within the Town of Calcutta, to make better provision for 
purposes connected with public health and convenien ce, but the said Act has proved ineffectual for the 
purpose, and it is expedient to amend the provisions thereof, and to extend the like powers to the inhabitants 
of Town in the other Presidencies under the Government of the East india Company, It is enact ed as follows:  
I. Act X. 1842, is repealed.  
II. If it shall appear to the Governor or Governor in Council, or Lieutenant Governor, of any Presidency 
or Place within the T
<|CHUNK|>
[THE IMPROVEMENTS IN TOWNS ACT, 1850.pdf - page 1]
he Governor or Governor in Council, or Lieutenant Governor, of any Presidency 
or Place within the Territories under the Government of the East India Company, that the inhabitants of any  
Town or Suburb, not within the Town of Calcutta, Madras, or Bombay, are desirous of making better 
provision for making, repairing, cleaning, lighting, or watching any public streets, roads , drains, or tanks, 
or for the prevention of nuisances, or for impr oving the said Town or Suburb in any other manner, the said 
Governor or Governor in Council, or Lieutenant Governor, may order this Act to be put in force within 
such Town or Suburb.  
III. Whenever any application shall be made to the Government for putting  this Act in force in any 
Town or Suburb, notice thereof shall be given in the Government Gazette  of the P residency, or place, and 
also by proclamation within such Town or Suburb, setting forth the purposes of the application, and giving 
reasonable time fo r all inhabitants of such Town or Suburb, who are minded to declare themselves for or 
against the adoption of this Act therein, for such purposes or any of them.  
IV. The Governor or Governor in Council, or Lieutenant Governor, shall take all such declarations into 
due consideration, and after the time allowed for receiving the same, shall make a final order, which shall 
be published in the Govern ment Gazette , and also  notified by proclamation within such Town or Suburb, 
to the effect that the application appears, or does not appear, to be according to the wishes of the inhabitants, 
either wholly,  or in respect to one or more of the purposes in respect of which it is ma de ; and if the whole 
or any part of it shall appear to be according to the wishes of the inhabitants, then that this Act shall be 
thenceforth in force in such town or Suburb, for such purposes only as shall be mentioned in the Order.  
V. Whenever any such order shall order shall be made and published as aforesaid, this Act shall come 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE IMPROVEMENTS IN TOWNS ACT, 1850.pdf - page 1]
. Whenever any such order shall order shall be made and published as aforesaid, this Act shall come 
into force within the said Town or Suburb, for such purposes as are mentioned in the Order, and the making 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE IMPROVEMENTS IN TOWNS ACT, 1850.pdf - page 2]
2 
 and publication of the said Order shall be conclusive evidence that t he provisions of this Act have been 
complied with, and that it is thenceforth in force within the said Town or Suburb, for such purposes as are 
mentioned in the Order.  
VI. Whenever this Act shall come into force in any Town or Suburb, the Governor or Gover nor in 
Council, or Lieutenant Governor, shall appoint the Magistrate and such number of the inhabitants thereof 
as to him shall appear necessary, to be Commissioners for putting the Act in force, and shall give authority 
to them to prepare Rules for more e ffectually accomplishing the purposes for which they are appointed; 
which Rules, when approved by the Governor or Governor in Council, or Lieutenant Governors, shall be 
of the same force within the said Town or Suburb, until altered or rescinded as hereina fter provided, as if 
they were inserted  in this Act. And the said Governor or Governor  in Council, or Lieutenant Governor, may 
remove any of the Commissioners and appoint others, and may fill up vacancies occurring among the 
Commissioners in such manner as  may seem to him fit.  
VII. The Rules to be prepared by the said Commissioners shall provide, among other things, for those 
following, that is to say:  
1. The appointment and management of all necessary Officers and Servants of the Commissioners, and 
the sal aries to be allowed to them.  
2. The definition of the persons of property within the Town or Suburb to be taxed for raising the monies 
necessary for the purpose of this Act, whether by House Assessment or Town Duties, or otherwise, the 
amount or rate of th e taxes to be imposed, the manner of raising and collecting them, and ensuring the 
safety and due application of them when collected.  
3. The manner in which from time to time the Rules in force are to be amended or rescinded, and new 
Rules are to be made, with the approval in every case of the Governor or Governor in Council, or Lieutenant 
Governor.  
4
<|CHUNK|>
[THE IMPROVEMENTS IN TOWNS ACT, 1850.pdf - page 2]
with the approval in every case of the Governor or Governor in Council, or Lieutenant 
Governor.  
4. The definition and prohibition of nuisances within the Town or Sub urb. 
5. The imposition of reasonable penalties for breach of any Rule made by the Commissioners, not 
exceeding Fifty Rupees, or in the case of continuing nuisance, not exceeding Five Rupees for every day 
that such nuisance is continued.  
VIII.  The Commissioners appointed fr om time to time shall have full power to make all necessary 
contr acts, for the purposes of this Act, and apply the taxes raised as aforesaid in the necessary works, and 
in payment of their Officers and Servants, and in the other expenses incident to the execution of this Act 
within the said Town or Suburb.  
IX. No Commis sioner shall be personally liable for any contract made by the Commissioners on behalf 
of the inhabitants of such Town or Suburb ; but every Commissioner shall be laible for any misapplication 
of the monies collected, to which he shall have been knowingly party or privy, or which shall have happened 
through gross neglect of his duty and shall be liable to be sued for the same as for money due to, and the 
suit of the East india Company.  
X. The powers of Act II. 1839, for the recovery of fines, shall be appl ied for the recovery of all arrears 
of taxes and penalties under this Act ; and every Magistrate shall put in force the powers of the said Act II. 
1839 for that purpose, whenever thereunto required by the Commissioners, or any of their Officers deputed 
by them for the purposes of enforcing payment of arrears of taxed imposed under this Act.  
XI. No rate on property made under this Act shall be invalid for defect of form : and it shall be enough 
in any such rate on property, or any Assessment of value for the  purpose of making such rate, if the property 
rated or assessed shall be so described as to be generally known ; and it shall not be necessary to name the 
owner or occupier thereof.  

<|CHUNK|>
[THE IMPROVEMENTS IN TOWNS ACT, 1850.pdf - page 2]
 as to be generally known ; and it shall not be necessary to name the 
owner or occupier thereof.  
XII. All moveable property found in any house or building or upon any land  assessed under this Act 
may be seized and sold by warrant of a Magistrate for payment of any arrear of tax laid on such house, 
building or land under this Act.  
XIII.  All Commissioners acting in execution of this Act shall, on or before  the last day of Apr il in every 
year, make up and send to the Governor or Governor in Council, or Lieutenant Governor, an account of all 
works executed by them, and of all sums received and spent by them in the foregoing year, in such form 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE IMPROVEMENTS IN TOWNS ACT, 1850.pdf - page 3]
3 
 and with such vouchers as the Governor or Governor in Council, or Lieutenant Governor, shall from time 
order.  
XIV.  The Governor or Governor in Council, or Lieutenant Governor may, at any time, suspend the 
operation of this Act in any town or Suburb, and appoint any person or persons to  examine and report upon 
the behavior of the Commissioners, or any of them, or their Officers in the execution of this Act.     
__________  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN BILLS OF LADING ACT, 1856.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE INDIAN BILLS OF LADING ACT, 1856  
_____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
Preamble  
SECTIONS  
1. Rights under bills of lading to vest in consignee or endorsee.  
2. Not to affect right of stoppage in transitu or claims for freight.  
3. Bill of lading in hands of consignee, etc., conclusive evidence of the shipment as 
against master, etc . 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN BILLS OF LADING ACT, 1856.pdf - page 2]
2 
 1THE INDIAN BILLS OF LADING ACT, 1856  
ACT NO. 9 OF 1856  
[11th April , 1856.]  
An Act to amend the Law relating to Bills of La ding.  
Preamble. —WHEREAS  by the custom of merchants a bill of lading of goods being 
transfera ble by endorsement, the property in the goods may thereby pass to the endorsee, but 
nevertheless all rights in respect of the contract contained in the bill of lading continue in 
the original shipper or o wner, and it is expedient that such rights should pass with the 
property; and whereas it frequently happens that the goods in respect of which bills of 
lading purport to be signed have not been laden on board, and it is proper that such bills of 
lading in the hands of a bona fide holder for value should not be questioned by the master or 
other person signing the same, on the ground of the goods not having been laden as 
afore said: It is enacted as follows: — 
1. Rights under bills of lading to vest in consigne e or endorsee. —Every consignee 
of goods named in a bill of lading, and every endorsee of a bill of lading to whom the 
property in the goods therein mentioned shall pass, upon or by reason of such consignment 
or endorsement shall have t ransferred to and ves ted in him all rights of suit, and be subject 
to the same liabilities in respect of such goods as if the contract contained in the bill of 
lading had been made with himself.  
2. Not to affect right of stoppage  in transitu or claims for freight. —Nothing  herein 
contained shall prejudice or affect any right of stoppage in transit,2 or any right to claim 
freight against the original shipper or owner, or any liability of the consignee or endorsee by 
reason or in conse quence of his being such consignee or end orsee, or of his receipt of the 
goods by reason or in consequence of such consignment or endorsement.  
3. Bill of lading in hands of consignee, etc., conclusive evidence of the shipment as 
against master, etc. —Every  bill of lading in the hands of a cons
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN BILLS OF LADING ACT, 1856.pdf - page 2]
sive evidence of the shipment as 
against master, etc. —Every  bill of lading in the hands of a consignee or endorsee for 
valuable conside ration, representing goods to have been shipped on board a vessel, shall be 
conclusiv e evidence of such shipment as,  against the master or other  person signing the same, 
notwithstanding that such good or some part  thereof may not have been so shipped, unless 
such holder of the bill of lading shall have had actual notice at the time of receiving the same 
that the goods had not in fact been laden on board:  
Provided that the master or other person so signing may exone rate himself in respect of 
such misrepresentation, by showing that it was caused without any default on his part, and 
wholly by the fraud of the shipper, or of the holder, or some person under whom the 
holder claims.  
 
                                                      
1. Short title given by the Indian Short Titles Act, 1897 (14 of 1897), s. 2 and Sch.  
This Act is based on the Bills of Lading Act, 1855 (18 and 19 Vict., c. 111).  
It has been declared to be in force in the whole of India except Part B States and the Scheduled Districts, by the Laws Local 
Extent Act, 1874 (15 of 1874), s. 3.  
Extended to former Part B States by Act 18 of 1949, s. 4.  
Extended to Union territory of Pondicherry by Act 26 of 1968, s. 3 and Sch.  
It has been declared, by notification under s. 3(a) of the Scheduled Districts Act, 1874 (14 of 1874), to be in force in the 
following Scheduled Districts, namely : —  
West Jalpaiguri, see Gazette of India, 1881, Pt. I, p. 74.  
The Distri cts of Hazaribagh, Lohardaga (now the Ranchi district, see Calcutta Gazette, 1899, Pt. I, p. 44), and Manbhum, and 
Pargana Dhalbhum and the Kolhan in the District of Singhbhurn, see Gazette of India, 1881, Pt. I, p. 504 . 
Assam (except the North Lushai Hill s), see Gazette of India, 1897, Pt. I, p. 299.  
2. As to stoppage in transit, see the Indian Contract Act, 1872 (9 of 1872), s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN BILLS OF LADING ACT, 1856.pdf - page 2]
897, Pt. I, p. 299.  
2. As to stoppage in transit, see the Indian Contract Act, 1872 (9 of 1872), ss. 99 -106.  
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
 
PREAMBLE  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
Extent.  
2. [Repealed .]. 
3. Interpretation  clause . 
PART I 
THE PERSONS BY WHOM MARRIAGES MAY BE SOLEMNIZED  
4. Marriages to be solemnized according to Act . 
5. Persons by whom marriages may be solemnized . 
6. Grant and revocation of licenses to solemnize marriages . 
7. Marriage Registrars . 
Senior Marriage Registrar.  
Magistrate when to be marriage Registrar . 
8. [Repealed .]. 
9. Licensing of persons to grant certificates of marriage between Indian Christians.  
PART II  
TIME AND PLACE AT WHICH  MARRIAGES  MAY BE SOLEMNIZED  
10. Time for solemnizing marriage.  
Exceptions.  
11. Place for solemnizing marriage . 
Fee for special license.  
PART III  
MARRIAGES SOLEMNIZED BY MINISTERS O F RELIGION  LICENSED UNDER THIS ACT 
12. Notice of intended marriage.  
13. Publication of such notice.  
Return or transfer of notice.  
14. Notice of intended marriage in private dwelling.  
15. Sending copy of notice to Marriage Registrar when one party is a minor.  
16. Procedure on receipt of notice.  
17. Issue of certificate of notice given and declaration made.  
Proviso.  
18. Declaration before issue of certificate.  
19. Consent of father, or guardian, or mother.  
20. Power to prohibit by notice issue of certificate . 
21. Procedure on receipt of notice . 
22. Issue of certificate in case of minority.  
23. Issue of certificates to Indian Christians.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 2]
2 
 SECTIONS  
24. Form of certificate . 
25. Solemnization of marriage.  
26. Certificate void if marriage not solemnized within two months . 
PART IV  
REGISTRATION OF MARRIAGES SOLEMNIZED BY MINISTERS OF RELIGION  
27. Marriages when to be registered . 
28. Registration of marriages solemnized by Clergymen of Church of England.  
29. Quarterly returns to Archdeaconry.  
Contents of returns.  
30. Registration and returns of marriages solemnized by Clergymen of Church of  Rome.  
31. Registration and returns of marriages solemnized by Clergymen of Church of Scotland.  
32. Certain marriages to be registered in duplicate . 
33. Entries of such marriages to be signed and attested . 
34. Certificate to be forwarded to Marriage Registrar, copied and sent to Registrar General.  
35. Copies of certificates to be entered and numbered.  
36. Registrar to add number o f entry to certificate, and send  to Registrar General.  
37. Registration of marriages between Indian Christians, by persons referred to in clauses ( 1), (2) and 
(3) of section 5.  
Custody and disposal of register -book.  
PART V 
MARRIAGES SOLEMNIZED BY , OR IN THE PRESENCE OF, A  MARRIAGE REGISTRAR  
38. Notice of intended marriage before Marriage Registrar.  
39. Publication of notice.  
40. Notice to be filed and copy entered in Marriage Notice Book.  
41. Certificate of notice given and oath made.  
Proviso.  
42. Oath before issue of certificate.  
43. Petition to High Court to order certificate in less than fourteen days.  
Order on petition . 
44. Consent of father  or guardian.  
Protest against issue of certificate.  
Effect of protest.  
45. Petition where person who se consent is necessary is insan e, or unjustly withholds consent.  
Procedure on petition.  
46. Petition when Marriage Registrar refuses certificate.  
Procedure on peti tion.  
47. [Repealed .]. 
48. Petition when Registrar doubts authority of person for  bidding . 
Procedure on petition.  
49. Liability for frivolous protest aga
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 2]
authority of person for  bidding . 
Procedure on petition.  
49. Liability for frivolous protest against issue of certificate.  
50. Form of certificate . 
51. Solemnization of marriage after issue of certificate.  
52. When marriage  not had within two months after notice, new notice required . 
53. Marriage Registrar may ask for particulars to be registered.  
54. Registration of marriages solemnized under part V.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 3]
3 
 SECTIONS  
55. Certificates to be sent monthly to Registrar General . 
Custody of regist er-book . 
56. [Repealed .]. 
57. Registrars to ascertain that notice and certificate are understood by Indian Christians.  
58. Indian Christians to be made to understand declarations.  
59. Registration of marriages between Indian Christians.  
PART VI 
MARRIAGE OF INDIAN  CHRISTIANS  
60. On what conditions marriages of Indian Christians may be certified.  
61. Grant of certificate . 
62. Keeping of register -book and deposit of extracts there from with Registrar General . 
63. Searches in register -book and copies of entries.  
64. Books in which marriages  of Indian Christians under Part I or Part III are registered . 
65. Part VI not to apply to Roman Catholics.  
Saving of certain marriages.  
PART VII 
PENALTIES  
66. False oath, declaration, notice or certificate for procuring marriage . 
67. Forbidding, by false personation issue of certificate by Marriage Registrar . 
68. Solemnizing marriage without due authority . 
69. Solemnizing marriage out of proper time, or without witnesses.  
Saving of marriages solemnized under special li cense. 
70. Solemnizing without notice or within fourteen days after notice, marriage with minor.  
71. Issuing certificate, or marrying, without publication of notice;  
Marrying after expiry of notice;  
Solemnizing, marriage with minor within fourteen days, without authority of Court, or without 
sending copy of notice;  
issuing certificate against authori zed prohibition . 
72. Issuing certificate after expiry of notice, or, in case of minor, within fourteen days a fter notice, or 
against authoriz ed prohibition . 
73. Persons authorized to solemnize marriage (other than Clergy of Churches of England, Scotland or 
Rome) ; 
issuing certificate, or marrying, without publishing notice , or after expiry of                     
certificate;  
issuing certificate for,  or solemnizing, marriage with minor, within fourteen days after noti
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 3]
te;  
issuing certificate for,  or solemnizing, marriage with minor, within fourteen days after notice;  
issuing certif icate authorizedly forbidden ; 
solemnizing marriage authorizedly forbidden . 
74. Unlicensed person granting certificate pretending to be licensed.  
75.  Destroying or falsifying register -books.  
76. Limitation of prosecutions under Act . 
PART VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
77. What matters need not be proved in respect of marriage in accordance with Act.  
78. Corrections of errors . 
79. Searches and copies of entries.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 4]
4 
 SECTIONS  
80. Certified copy of entry in marriage -register, etc., to be evidence.  
81. Certificates of certain marriages to be sent to Ce ntral Government.  
82. State Government to prescribe fees.  
83. Power to make rules.  
84. [Repealed .]. 
85. Power to declare who shall be District Judge.  
86. [Repealed .]. 
87. Saving of Consular marriages.  
88. Non-validation of marriages within prohibited degrees.  
SCHEDULE I. —NOTICE OF MARRIAGE.  
SCHEDULE II. —CERTIFICATE OF RECEIPT OF NOTICE.  
SCHEDULE III. —FORM OR  REGISTER OF MARRIAGES . 
SCHEDULE IV. —MARRIAGE  REGISTER -BOOK. 
CERTIFICATE OF MARRIAGE . 
SCHEDULE V. —[Repealed. ]. 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 5]
5 
  
THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872  
ACT NO. 15 OF 1872  
[18th July, 1872.]  
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to the solemnization  in India of the marriages 
of Christians.  
PREAMBLE .—WHEREAS  it is expedient to consolidate and amend the law  relating to the solemnization 
in India of the marriages of persons  professing the Christian religion ;  It is hereby enacted as follows: — 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title. —This Act may be called the Indian Christian  Marriage Act, 1872.  
Extent .—1[It extends to the whole of India 2[except 3[the territories which, immediately before the 1st 
November, 1956, were  comprised in the States] of Travancore -Cochin, Manipur and 4***].]5 
6*    *   *    *    * 
2. [Enactments repealed .]—Rep. by the Repealing Act , 1938 (1 of 1938), s. 2 and the Schedule . 
3. Interpretation clause .—In this Act, unless there is something  repugnan t in the subject or 
context, — 
“Church  of England”  and “Anglican ”.—mean and apply  to the  Church of  England as by law 
established;  
“Church of Scotland ”.—means the Church of Scotland as by law  established ; 
“Church of Rome” and “Roman Catholic ”.—mean and apply to the Church  which regards the Pope 
of Rome as its spiritual head;  
“Church ”.—includes any chapel or other building generally used for  public Chr istian worship ; 
7[“India ”.—means the 8[territories] to which this Act extends;]  
“minor ”.—“minor ” means a person who has not completed the age of twenty -one years and who is 
not a widower or a widow;  
9*    *    *    *    *  
the expression “Christians”  means persons professing the Christian  religion;  
10[and the expression “Indian Christians ” includes the Christian  descendants of natives of India 
converted to Christia nity, as well a s such converts;]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by A.O. 1950 for the second para., as amended by A.O. 1937 and A.O. 1948 . [NOTE: --The Act does not extend to the 
State
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 5]
second para., as amended by A.O. 1937 and A.O. 1948 . [NOTE: --The Act does not extend to the 
State of Manipur, vide Act 30 of 1950, s. 3( 2A) and Sch. As amended by Act 68 of 1956, s. 2. The Act has been extended to and 
brought into force in Dadra and Nagar Haveli (w.e.f. 1 -7-1965) by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and Sch. I .] 
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for “except Part B States”.  
3. Subs. by the Adaption of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956, for “the States”.  
4. The words “State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule (w.e.f. 31 -10- 2019).  
5. In its application to Pondicherry, in section 1, the following proviso shall be added at the end of section 1 — 
“Provided that nothing contained in this Act shall apply to the Renoncants of the Union territory of Pondicherry.” —                 
(vide Act 26 of 1968).  
6. The commencement cl. rep. by Act 16 of 1874, s. 1 and the Schedule.  
7. Ins. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch.  
8. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956, for “territory comprised in the States”.  
9. The definition of “Nati ve State” omitted by the A.O. 1937.  
10. Subs. by A.O. 1950, for the definition.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 6]
6 
 1[“Registrar General of Births, Deaths and Marriages ”.—means a  Registrar General of Births, Deaths 
and Marriages appointed under the  Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration Act, 1886 (6 of 1886).]  
PART I 
THE PERSONS BY WHOM MARRIAGES MAY BE SOLEMNIZED  
4. Marriages to be solemnized according to Act .—Every marriage  between persons, one or both of 
whom is 2[or are] a Christian or  Christians, shall be solemnized in accordance with the provisions of  the 
next following section; and any such marriage solemnized otherwise  than in accordance with such 
provisions shall be void.  
5. Persons by whom marriages may be solemnized. —Marriages may be solemnized  in 3[India] — 
(1) by any person who ha s received episcopal ordination , provided that the marriage be 
solemnized according to the  rules, rites, ceremonies and customs of the Church of which he is a  
Minister ; 
(2) by any  Clergyman of the Church of Scotland, provided that such  marriage be solemnized 
according to the rules, rites, ceremonies and  customs of the Church of Scotland ; 
(3) by any Minister of Religion licensed under this Act to solemnize  marriages;  
(4) by, or in the presence of, a Marriage Registrar appointed under  this Act;  
(5) by any person licensed under this Act to grant certificates  of marriage between 4[Indian ] 
Christians.  
5[6. Grant and revocation of licenses to solemnize marriages .—The State Government, so far as 
regards the territories under its  administration, 6*** may, by notification in the Official Gazette 7***, 
grant licenses to Ministers of Religion to solemnize marriages  within such territories 8*** and may, by a 
like notification  revoke such licenses.]  
7. Marriage Registrars. —The State Government may appoint one or  more Christians, either by 
name or as holding any office for the time  being, to be the Marriage Registrar or Marriage Registrars for 
any district subject to its administra tion. 
Senior Marriage Registrar .—Where there are more M
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 6]
or 
any district subject to its administra tion. 
Senior Marriage Registrar .—Where there are more Marriage  Registrars than one in any district, the 
State Government shall  appoint one of them to be the Senior Marriage Registrar.  
Magistrate  when to be Marriage Registrar .—When there is only one  Marriag e Registrar in a 
district, and such Registrar is absent from  such district, or ill, or when his office is temporarily vacant, the  
Magistrate of the district shall act as, and be, Marriage Registrar  thereof during such absence, illness, or 
temporary vacancy . 
STATE AMENDMENT  
KARNATAKA  
In section 7, for the words, “Magistrate of the district” the words “District Magistrate” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Karnataka Act 13 of 19 65, s. 67 and Schedule .] 
8. [Marriage Registrars in Indian States. ]—Rep.,  by the A. O . 1950.  
9. Licensing of persons to grant certificates of marriage between  Indian Christians .—The State 
Government 9*** may grant a license to  any Christian, either by name or as holding any office for the 
time being, authorizing him to grant certificates of marriage between  4[Indian] Christians.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 6 of 1886, s. 30.  
2. Ins. by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and the Second Schedule.  
3. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for “Part A States and Part C States”.  
4. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “Native”.  
5. Subs. by Act 2 of 1891, s. 1, for s. 6.  
6. The words “and the Central Government, so far as regards any Indian State” omitted  by the A.O. 1950.  
7. The words “or in the Gazette of India, as the case may be” omitted  by the A.O. 1937.  
8. The words “and State, respectively,” omitted  by the A.O. 1950.  
9. The words  and brackets  “or (so far as regard any Indian State) the Central Government” omitted  by the A.O. 1950.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 7]
7 
  Any such license may be revoked by the authority by which it was  granted, and every such grant or 
revocation shall be notified in the  Official Gazette.  
PART II 
TIME AND PLACE AT WHICH  MARRIAGES  MAY BE SOLEMNIZED  
10. Time for solemnizing marriage .—Every marriage under this Act  shall be solemnized between 
the hours of six in the morning and seven  in the evening:  
Exceptions .—Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to — 
(1) a Clergyman of the Church of England so lemnizing a marriage under a special license 
permitting him to do so at any hour other than between six in the morning and seven in the 
evening, under the hand and seal of the Anglican Bishop of th e Diocese or his Commissary, or  
(2) a Clergyman of the Chur ch of Rome solemnizing a marriage between the hours of seven 
in the evening and six in the morning, when he has received a general or special license in that 
behalf from the Roman Catholic Bishop of the Diocese or Vicariate in which such marriage is so 
solemnized, or from such person as the same Bishop has authorized to grant such license, 1[or  
(3) a Clergyman of the Church of Scotland solemnizing a marriage according to the rules, 
rites, ceremonies and customs of the Church of Scotland.]  
11. Place for solemnizing marriage. —No Clergyman of the Church of  England shall solemnize a 
marriage in any place other than a church2[where worship is generally held according to the forms of the  
Church of England],  
unless there is no 2[such] church within five miles distance by  the shortest road from such place, or  
unless he has received a special license authorizing him to do so  under the hand and seal of the 
Anglican Bishop of the Diocese or his  Commissary.  
Fee for special license .—For such special license, the Registrar  of the Diocese may charge such 
additional fee as the said Bishop from  time to time authorizes . 
PART III 
MARRIAGES SOLEMNIZED BY MINISTERS OF RELIGION  LICENSED UNDER THIS ACT 
12. Notice
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 7]
izes . 
PART III 
MARRIAGES SOLEMNIZED BY MINISTERS OF RELIGION  LICENSED UNDER THIS ACT 
12. Notice of intended marriage .—Whenever a marriage is intended  to be solemnized by a Minister 
of Religion licensed to solemnize  marriages under this Act — 
one of the persons intending marriage shall give notice in  writing, according to the form contained in 
the First Schedule hereto  annexed, or to the like effect, to the Min ister of Religion whom he or  she desires 
to solemnize the marriage, and shall state  therein — 
(a) the name and surname, and the profession or condition, of each of the persons intending 
marriage,  
(b) the dwelling -place of each of them,  
(c) the time during which each has dwelt there, and  
(d) the church or private dwelling in which the marr iage is to be solemnized:  
Provided that, if either of such persons has dwelt in the place  mentioned in the notice during more 
than one month, it may be stated  therein that he or she has dwelt there one month and upwards.  
13. Publication of such notice .—If the persons intending marriage  desire it to be solemnized in a 
particular church, and if the Minister  of Religion to whom such notice has been delivered be entitled to  
officiate therein, he shall cause the notice to be affixed in some  conspicuous part of such church.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 2 of 1891, s. 2.  
2. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 8]
8 
 Return or transfer of notice .—But if he is not entitled to  officiate as a Minister in such church, he 
shall, at his option,  either return the notice, to the person who delivered it to him, or  deliver it to some 
other Minister entitled to officiate therein, who  shall thereupon cause the notice to be affixed as aforesaid.  
14. Notice of intended marriage in private dwelling. —If it be  intended that the marriage sh all be 
solemnized in a private dwelling,  the Minister of Religion, on receiving the notice prescribed in                 
section 12, shall forward it to the Marriage Registrar of the  district, who shall affix the same to some 
conspicuous place in his  own of fice. 
15. Sending copy of notice  to Marriage Registrar when one party is  a minor. —When one of the 
persons intending marriage is a minor, every  Minister receiving such notice shall, unless within                 
twenty -four hours after its receipt he returns the same under the provisions of  section 13, send by the post 
or otherwise a copy of such notice to the  Marriage Registrar of the district, or, if there be more than one  
Registrar of such district, to the Senior Marriage Registrar.  
16. Procedure on  receipt of notice. —The Marriage Registrar or  Senior Marriage Registrar, as the 
case may be, on receiving any such  notice, shall affix it to some conspicuous place in his own office,  and 
the latter shall further cause a copy of the said notice to be  sent t o each of the other Marriage Registrars in 
the same district,  who shall likewise publish the same in the manner above directed.  
17. Issue of certificate of notice given and declaration made. —Any Minister of Religion 
consenting or intending to solemnize any  such marriage as aforesaid, shall, on being required so to do by 
or on  behalf of the person by whom the notice was given, and upon one of the  persons intending marriage 
making the declaration herein  after required, issue under his hand a certificate of
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 8]
nding marriage 
making the declaration herein  after required, issue under his hand a certificate of su ch notice having  been 
given and of suc h declaration having been made:  
Proviso .—Provided — 
(1) that no such certificate shall be issued until the expiration of four days after the date of the 
receipt of the notice by such Minister;  
(2) that no lawful impediment be shown to his satisfaction why su ch certificate should not issue ; 
and  
(3) that the issue of such certificate has not been forbidden, in manner hereinafter mentioned, by 
any person authorized in that behalf.  
18. Declaration before issue of cer tificate .—The certificate  mentioned in section 17 shall not be 
issued until one of the persons  intending marriage has appeared personally before the Minister and  made 
a solemn declaration — 
(a) that he or she believes that there is not any impediment of kindred or affinity, or other lawful 
hindrance, to the said marriage,  
And, when either or both of the parties is or are a minor or minors,  
(b) that the consent o r consents required by law has or have been obtained thereto,  or that there is 
no person re sident in India having authority to give such consent, as the case may be.  
19. Consent of father, or guardian, or mother .—The father, if  living, of any minor, or, if the father 
be dead the guardian of the  person of such minor, and, in case there be no such guardian, then the  mother 
of such minor, may give consent to the minor ’s marriage,  
and such consent is hereby required for the same marriage, unless  no person authorized to give such 
conse nt be resident in India.  
20. Power to prohibit by notice issue of certificate .—Every  person whose consent to a marriage is 
required under section 19, is  hereby authorized to prohibit the issue of the certificate by any  Minister, at 
any time before the issu e of the same, by notice in  writing to such Min ister, subscribed by the person  so 
authorized with is or her name and place
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 8]
n  writing to such Min ister, subscribed by the person  so 
authorized with is or her name and place of abode and position with respect to either  of the persons 
intending marriage, by reason of which he or she is so  authorized as aforesaid.  
21. Procedure on receipt of notice. —If any such notice be  received by such Minister, he shall not 
issue his certificate and  shall not solemnize the said marriage until he has examined into the  matter of the 
said prohibition, and is satisfied tha t the person  prohibiting the marriage has no lawful authority for such 
prohibition,  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 9]
9 
 or until the said notice is withdrawn by the person who gave it.  
22. Issue of certificate in case of minority. —When either of the  persons intending marriage is a 
minor, an d the Minister is not  satisfied that the consent of the person whose consent to such  marriage is 
required by section 19 has been obtained, such Minister  shall not issue such certificate until the expiration 
of fourteen days  after the receipt by him of the notice of marriage.  
23. Issue of certificates to Indian Christians .—When any1[Indian ] Christian s about to be married 
takes a notice of marriage to  a Minister of Religion, or applies for a certificate from such  Minister under 
section 17, such Minister shall, before  issuing the certificate, ascertain whether such 1[Indian ] Christian s 
is cognizant of the purport and effect of the said notice or  certificate, as the case may be, and, if not, shall 
translate or cause  to be translated the notice or certificat e to such 1[Indian ] Christian into some language 
which he understands.  
24. Form of certificate .—The certificate to be issued by such  Minister shall be in the form contained 
in the Second Schedule hereto  annexed, or to the like effect.  
25. Solemnization of marriage .—After the issue of the certificate  by the Minister, marriage may be 
solemnized between the persons  therein described according to such form or ceremony as t he Minister 
thinks fit to adopt:  
Provided that the marriage be solemnized in the presence of at  least two witnesses besides the 
Minister.  
26. Certificate void if marriage not solemnized within two  months .—Whenever a marriage is not 
solemnized within two months after  the date of the certificate issued by such Minister as aforesaid, such  
certificate and all proceedings (if any) thereon shall be void,  
and no person shall proceed to solemnize the said marriage until  new notice has been given and a 
certificate thereof issued in manner  aforesaid.  
PART IV 
REGISTRATION OF MARR
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 9]
s been given and a 
certificate thereof issued in manner  aforesaid.  
PART IV 
REGISTRATION OF MARRIAGES SOLEMNIZED B Y MINISTERS OF RELIGION  
27. M arriages when to be registered. —All marriages hereafter  solemnized in 2[India] between 
persons one or both of whom professes  or profess the Christian religion, except marriages solemnized 
under  Part V or Part VI of this Act, shall be registered3 in manner  hereinafter prescribed.  
28. Registration of marriages solemnized by Clergymen of Church of  England .—Every 
Clergyman of  the Church of England shall keep a  register of marriages and shall register therein, 
according to the  tabular form set forth in the Third Schedule hereto annexed, every  marriage which he 
solemnizes under this Act.  
29. Quarterly returns to Archdeaconry. —Every Clergyman of the  Church of England shall send 
four times in every year returns induplicate, authenticated by his signature, of the entries in the  register of 
marriages solemnized at any place where he has any  spiritual charge, to the Registrar of the Archdeaconry 
to which he is  subject, or within the limits of which such place is situate.  
Content s of returns .—Such quarterly returns shall contain all the  entries of marriages contained in 
the said register from the first day  of January to the thirty -first day of March, from the first day of  April to 
the thirtieth day of June, from the first day of J uly to the  thirtieth day of September, and from the first day 
of October to the  thirty -first day of December, of each year, respectively, and shall be  sent by such 
Clergyman  within two weeks from the expiration of each of  the quarters above specified.  
The said Registrar upon receiving the said returns shall send one  copy thereof to the 4[Registrar 
General of Births, Deaths and  Marriages].  
                                                           
1. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “Native”.  
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for “a Part A State
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 9]
bs. by the A. O. 1950, for “Native”.  
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for “a Part A State or a Part C State”.  
3. As to the establishment of general registry offices of births, deaths and marriages, see the  Biths, Deaths and Marriages 
Registra tion Act, 1886 (6 of 1886), Ch. II.  
4. Subs. by Act 6 of 1886, s. 30 , for “Secretary to the L . G.”. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 10]
10 
 30. Registration and returns of marriages solemnized by Clergymen  of Church of Rome .—
Every marriage solemnized by a Clergyman of the  Church of Rome shall be registered by the person and 
according to the  form directed in that behalf by the Roman Catholic Bishop of the  Diocese or Vicariate in 
which such marriage is solemnized,  
and such person shall forward quarterly to t he 1[Registrar  General of Births, Deaths and Marriages] 
returns of the entries of all  marriages registered by him during the three months next preceding.  
31. Registration and returns of marriages solemnized by Clergymen  of Church of Scotland .—
Every Clergyman of the Church of Scotland shall  keep a register of marriages,  
and shall register therein, according to the tabular form set  forth in the Third Schedule hereto 
annexed, every marriage which he  solemnizes under this Act,  
and shall forward quarterl y to the 1[Registrar General of  Births, Deaths and Marriages], through the 
Senior Chaplain of the  Church  of Scotland, returns, similar to those prescribed in section 29, of  all such 
marriages.  
32. Certain marriages to be registered in duplicate .—Every  marriage solemnized by any person 
who has received episcopal ordination, but who is not a Clergyman of the Church of England, or of  the 
Church of Rome, or by any Minister of Religion licensed under this  Act to solemnize marriages, shall 
immediately after t he solemnization  thereof, be registered in duplicate by the person solemnizing the 
same; (that is to say) in a marriage -register book to be kept by him for  that purpose, according to the form 
contained in the Fourth Schedule  hereto annexed, and also in a c ertificate attached to the marriage -
register -book as a counterfoil.  
33. Entries of such marriages to be signed and attested .—The entry  of such marriage in both the 
certificate and marriage -register -book  shall be signed by the person solemnizing the marriag e, and also by  
the persons married,
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 10]
r -book  shall be signed by the person solemnizing the marriag e, and also by  
the persons married, and shall be attested by two credible witnesses,  other than the person solemnizing 
the marriage, present at its  solemnization.  
Every such entry shall be made in order from the beginning to the  end of the book, and the nu mber of 
the certificate shall correspond  with that of the entry in the marriage -register -book.  
34. Certificate to be forwarded to Marriage Registrar, copied and  sent to Registrar  General. —
The person solemnizing the marriage shall  forthwith separate the certificate from the marriage -register -
book and  send it, within one month from the time of the solemnization, to the  Marriage Registrar of the 
district in which the marriage was  solemnized, or, if there be more Marriage Registrars than one, to the  
Senior M arriage Registrar,  
who shall cause such certificate to be copied into a book to be  kept by him for that purpose,  
and shall send all the certificates which he has received during  the month, with such number and 
signature or initials added thereto as  are h ereinafter required, to the 1[Registrar General of Births,  Deaths 
and Marriages].  
35. Copies of certifica tes to be entered and numbered. —Such copies shall be entered in order from 
the beginning to the end of the  said book, and shall bear both the number of  the certificate as  copied, and 
also a number to be entered by the Marriage  Registrar, indicating the number of the entry of the said copy 
in the  said book, according to the order in which he receives each  certificate.  
36. Registrar to add number o f entry  to certificate, and send  to Registrar General .—The 
Marriage Registrar shall also add such last -mentioned number of the entry of the copy in the book to the  
certificate, with his signature or initials, and shall, at the end of  every month, send the same to the 
1[Registrar General of Births,  Deaths and Marriages].  
37. Registration of mar
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 10]
nd the same to the 
1[Registrar General of Births,  Deaths and Marriages].  
37. Registration of marriages between Indian Christians, by  persons referred to in clauses ( 1), 
(2) and ( 3) of section 5. —Whenany marriage between 2[India n] Christians is solemnized 3[by any  such 
person, Clergyman or Minister of Religion as is referred to in  clause ( 1), clause ( 2) or clause ( 3) of 
section 5],  the person  solemnizing the same shall, instead of proceeding in the manner  provided by 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 6 of 1886, s. 30, for “Secretary to the L. G.”. 
2. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “Native”.  
3. Subs. by Act 18 of 1928, s. 2 and the first Schedule , for “under Part I or Part III or this Act”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 11]
11 
 sections 28 to 36, both inclusive, register the marriage  in a separate register -book, and shall keep it safely 
until it is  filled, or, if he leave the district in which he solemnized the  marriage before the said book is 
filled, shall make over the same to  the person succeeding to  his duties in the said district.  
Custody and disposal of register -book .—Whoever has the control of  the book at the time when it is 
filled, shall send it to the Marriage  Registrar of the district, or, if there be more Marriage Registrars  than 
one, to the Senior Marriage Registrar, who shall send it to the  1[Registrar General of Births, Deaths and 
Marriages,] to be kept by  him with the records of h is office.  
PART V 
MARRIAGES SOLEMNIZED BY , OR IN THE PRESENCE OF, A MARRIAGE REGISTRAR  
38. Notice of intended marriage before Marriage Registrar .—When a  marriage is intended to be 
solemnized by, or in the presence of, a  Marriage Registrar, one of the parties to such marriage shall give  
notice in writing, in the form contained in the First Schedule hereto  annexed, or to the like effect, to any 
Marriage Registrar of the  district within which the parties have dwelt,  
or, if the parties dwell in different districts, shall give the  like notice to a Marr iage Registrar of each 
district,  
and shall state therein the name an d surname, and the profession  or condition, of each of the parties 
intending marriage, the dwelling -place of each of them, the time during which each has dwelt therein,  and 
the place at which th e marriage is to be solemnized:  
Provided that, if either party  has dwelt in the place stated in  the notice for more than one month, it 
may be stated therein that he  or she has dwelt there one month and upwards.  
39. Publication of notice. —Every Marriage Registrar shall, on  receiving any such notice, cause a 
copy there of to be affixed in some  conspicuous place in his office.  
When one of the parties intending marriage is a minor, ever
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 11]
some  conspicuous place in his office.  
When one of the parties intending marriage is a minor, every  Marriage Registrar shall, within twenty -
four hours after the receipt  by him of the notice of such marriage, send, by post or otherwise, a copy of  
such notice to each of the other Marriage Registrars (if any)  in the same district, who shall like wise affix 
the copy in some con spicuous place in his own office.  
40. Notice to be filed and copy entered in Marriage Notice Book. —The Marriage Registrar shall 
file all such notices and keep them with  the records of his office,  
and shall also forthwith enter a true copy of all such notices in a  book to be furnished to him for that 
purpose by the State Government,  and to be called the “Marriage Not ice Book ”, 
and the Marriage Notice Book shall be open at all reasonable times,  without fee, to all persons 
desirous of inspecting the same.  
41. Certificate  of notice given and oath made. —If the party by  whom the notice was given requests 
the Marriage Registrar to issue the  certificate next hereinafter mentioned, and if one of the parties 
intending  marriage has made oath as hereinafter required, the  Marriage Registrar shall issue under his 
hand a certificate of such  notice having been given an d of such oath having been made : 
Proviso .—Provided — 
that no lawful impediment be shown to his satisfaction why such  certificate should not issue;  
that the issue of such certificate has not been forbidden, in  manner hereinafter mentioned, by any 
person autho rized in that behalf by this Act ; 
that four days after the rec eipt of the notice have expired ; and further,  
that where, by such oath, it appears that one of the parties intending  marriage is a minor, fourteen 
days after the entry of such notice  have expired.  
42. Oath before issue of certificate .—The certificate mentioned in section  41 shall not be issued by 
any Marriage Registrar, until one of the  parties intending marriage appears p
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 11]
all not be issued by 
any Marriage Registrar, until one of the  parties intending marriage appears personally before such 
Marriage  Registrar, and makes oath2— 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 6 of 1886, s. 30, for “Secretary to the Local Government.”.  
2. As to the meaning of “oath”, see the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), s. 3(37) and s. 4.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 12]
12 
 (a) that he or she believes that there is not any impediment of kindred or affinity, or other lawful 
hindr ance, to the said marriage, and  
(b) that both the parties have, or (where they have dwelt in the districts of different Marriage 
Registrars) that the party making such o ath has, had their, his or her usual place of abode within the 
district of such Marriage Registrar,  
and, where either or each of the parties is a minor,  
(c) that the consent or consents to such marriage required by law has or have been obtained 
thereto, o r that there is no person resident in India authorized to give such consent, as the case may 
be. 
43. Petition to High Court to order certificate in less than fourteen  days .—When one of the 
parties intending marriage is a minor, and  both such parties are at the time resident in any of the towns of 
Calcutta , Madras and Bombay, and are desirous of being married in less than  fourteen days after the entry 
of such notice as aforesaid, they may apply by petition to a Judge of the High Cour t, for an order upon the  
Marriage Registrar to whom the notice of marriage has been given, directing  him to issue his certificate 
before the expiration of the said  fourteen days required by section 41.  
Order on petition .—And on sufficient cause being shown, the said Judge  may, in his discretion, 
make an order upon such Marriage Registrar , directing him to issue his certificate at any time to be 
mentioned  in the said order before the expiration of the fourteen days so  requi red.  
And the said Marriage Registrar, on receipt of the said order, shall  issue his certificate in accordance 
therewith . 
44. Consent of father or guardian. —The provisions of section 19  apply to every marriage under this 
Part, either of the parties to  whic h is a minor ;  
Protest against issue of certificate .—And any person whose consent  to such marriage would be 
required thereunder  may enter a  protest against the issue of the Marriage Registr
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 12]
rriage would be 
required thereunder  may enter a  protest against the issue of the Marriage Registrar ’s certificate, by 
writing , at any time before the issue of such certificate, the word  “forbidden ” opposite to the entry of the 
notice of such intended marriage  in the Marriage Notice Book, and by subscribing thereto his  or her name 
and place of abode, and his or her position with respect to  either of the parties, by reason of which he or 
she is so authorized . 
Effect of protest .—When such protest has been entered, no certificate  shall issue until the Marriage 
Registrar has examined into the  matter of the protest, and is satisfied th at it ought not to obstruct  the issue 
of the certificate for the said marriage, or until the  protest be withdrawn by the person who entered it.  
45. Petition where person who se consent is necessary is insan e, or unjustly  withholds consent .—
If any person whose consent is necessary to  any marriage under this Part is of unsound mind,  
or if any such person (other than the father) without just cause withholds  his consent to the marriage,  
the parties intending marriage may apply by petition, whe re the person  whose consent is necessary is 
resident within any of the towns of  Calcutta, Madras and Bombay, to a Judge of the High Court, or if he  
is not resident within any of the said towns, then to the District  Judge : 
Procedure on petition. —And the said Judge of the High Court, or District  Judge, as the case may be, 
may examine the allegations of the petition  in a summary way;  
and, if upon examination such marriage appears proper , such Judge of  the High Court or District 
Judge, as the case m ay be, shall declare the  marriage to be a proper marriage.  
Such declaration shall be as effectual as if the person whose consent  was needed had consented to the 
marriage;  
and, if he has forbidden the issue of the Marriage Registrar ’s certificate , such ce rtificate shall be 
issued and the like proceeding
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 12]
f the Marriage Registrar ’s certificate , such ce rtificate shall be 
issued and the like proceedings  may be had under this Part in relation to the marriage as if the issue of  
such cer tificate had not been forbidden.  
46. Petition when Marriage Registrar refuses certificate. —Whenever  a Marriage Registrar refuses 
to issue a certificate under this Part,  either of the parties intending marriage may apply by petition, where 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 13]
13 
 the district of such Registrar is within any of the towns of Calcutta, Madras  and Bombay, to a Judge of 
the High Court, or if such distric t is not within any of the said towns, then to the District Judge.  
Procedure on petition .—The said Judge of the High Court, or District  Judge, as the case may be, 
may examine the allegations of the petition  in a summary way, and shall decide thereon.  
The decision of such Judge of the High Court or District Judge, as  the case may be, shall be final, and 
the Marriage Registrar to whom the  application for the issue of a certificate was originally made shall  
proceed in accordance therewith.  
47. [Petition when  Marriage Registrar in Indian State refuses  certificate .] Omitted  by the A.O. 1950.  
48. Petition when Registrar doubts authority of person forbidding .—Whenever a Marriage 
Registrar, acting under the provisions of section  44, is not satisfied that the person forbidding the issue of 
the certificate is authorized by law so to do, the said Marriage Registrar  shall apply by petition, where his 
district is within any of the  towns of Calcutta, Madras and Bombay, to a Judge of th e High Court , or if 
such district be not within any of the said towns, then to  the District Judge.  
Procedure on petition. —The said petition shall state all the circumstances  of the case, and pray for 
the order and direction of the Court  concerning the sam e,  
and the said Judge of the High Court or District Judge, as thecae  may be, shall examine into the 
allegations of the petition and the  circumstances of the case,  
and if, upon such examination, it appears, that the person forbid ding the issue of such cer tificate is not 
authorized by law so to do, such  Judge of the High Court or District Judge, as the case may be, shall  
declare that the person forbidding the issue of such certificate  is not authorized as aforesaid,  
and thereupon such certificate sh all be i ssued, and the like pro ceedings may be had in
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 13]
oresaid,  
and thereupon such certificate sh all be i ssued, and the like pro ceedings may be had in relation to such 
marriage as if the issue had not  been forbidden.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
49. Liability for frivolous protest against issue of certificate .—Every person entering a protest with 
the Marriage Registrar, under this  Part, against the issue of any certificate, on grounds which such 
Marriage  Registrar, under section 44, or a Judge of the High Court or the  District Judge, under section 45 
or 46, decl ares to be frivolous and  such as ought not to obstruct the issue of the certificate, shall be  liable 
for the costs of all proceedings in relation thereto and for damages , to be recovered by suit by the person 
against whose marriage such  protest was entered . 
50. Form of certificate .—The certificate to be issued by the Marriage  Registrar under the provisions 
of section 41 shall be in the  form contained in the Second Schedule to this Act annexed or to the like  
effect,  
and the State Government shall furnish to  every Marriage Regis trar a sufficient number of forms of 
certificate.  
51. Solemnization of marriage after issue of certificate .—After  the issue of the certificate of the 
Marriage Registrar, or, where  notice is required to be given under this Act to the Ma rriage  Registrars for 
different district s, after the issue of the certi ficates of the Marriage Registrars for such districts,  
marriage may, if there be no lawful impediment to the marriage of the  parties described in such 
certif icate or certificates, be so lemnized between them, according to such form and ceremony as they 
think  fit to adopt.  
But every such marriage shall be solemnized in the presence of some  Marriage Registrar (to whom 
shall be delivered such certificate or  certificates as aforesaid), and of  two or more credible witnesses  
besides  the Marriage Registrar . 
And in some part of the ceremony each of the parties shall declare  as follows, or to t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 13]
Registrar . 
And in some part of the ceremony each of the parties shall declare  as follows, or to the like effect: — 
“I do solemnly declare that I know not of any lawful impediment why  I, A. B., may not be joined in 
matrimony to C. D. ” 
                                                           
1. Omitted  by the A. O. 1950.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 14]
14 
 And each of the parties shall say to the other as follows or to the  like effect :— 
“I call upon these persons here present to witness that I, A. B., do take thee, C. D ., to be my lawful 
wedded wife [or husband]. ” 
52.When marriage not had within two months after notice, new notice  required .—Whenever a 
marriage is not solemnized within two  months after the copy of the notice has been entered by the 
Marriage  Registrar, as required by section 40, the notice and the cer tificate , if any, issued thereupon, and 
all other proceedings thereupon , shall be void;  
and no person shall proceed to solemnize the marriage, nor shall any  Marriage Registrar enter the 
same, until new notice has been given , and entry made, and certificate  thereof given, at the time and in  the 
manner aforesaid.  
53. Marriage Registrar may ask for particulars to be registered .—A Marriage Registrar before 
whom any marriage is solemnized under this  Part may ask of the persons to be married the several 
particula rs required to be registered touching such marriage.  
54. Registration of marriages solemnized under part V .—After the  solemnization of any marriage 
under this Part, the Marriage Registrar  present at such solemnization shall forthwith register the marriage 
induplicate; that is to say, in a marriage -register -book, according to  the form of the Fourth Schedule 
hereto annexed, and also in a  certificate attached to the marriage -register -book as a  counterfoil.  
The entry of such marriage in both the certificate s and the  marriage -register -book shall be signed by 
the person by or before whom  the marriage has been solemnized, if there be any such person, and by  the 
Marriage Registrar present at such m arriage, whether or not it is  solemnized by him, and also by the 
parties married, and attested by  two credible witnesses other than the Marriage Registrar and person  
solemnizing the marriage.  
Every such entry shall be made in order from the beginning 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 14]
and person  
solemnizing the marriage.  
Every such entry shall be made in order from the beginning to t he end of the book, and the number of 
the certificate shall correspond  with that of the entry in the marriage -register -book.  
55. Certificates to be sen t monthly to Registrar General. —The Marriage Registrar shall forthwith 
separate the certificate from the marriage -register -book and send it, at the end of every month, to 
the1[Registrar General of Births, Deaths and Marriages].  
Custody of register -book .—The Marriage Registrar shall keep safely  the said register -book until it is 
filled, and shall then send it  to the 1[Registrar General of Births, Deaths and Marriages], to be kept  by him 
with the records of his office.  
56. [Officers to whom Registrars in Indian States shall send certificates .) Omitted by the A. O . 1950 . 
57. Registrars to ascertain that notice and certificate are understood  by Indian Christians .—
When any 2[Indian ] Christian s about  to be married gives a notice of marriage, or applies for a certificate  
from a Marriage Registrar, such Marriage Registrar shall ascertain  whether the said 2[Indian ] Christian s 
understands the English   language, and, if he does not, the Marriage Registrar shall translate,  or cause to 
be translated, such notice or certificate, or both of  them, as the case may be, to such 2[Indian ] Christian s 
into a language  which he understands;  
or the Marriage Registrar shall otherwise ascertain whether the2[Indian ] Christian s is cognizant of the 
purport and effect of the  said notice and certificate.  
58. Indian Christians to be made to understand declarations. —When  any 2[Indian ] Christian s is 
married under the provisions of this Part,  the person solemnizing the marriage shall ascertain whether 
such 2[Indian ] Christian s understands the English language, and, if he does  not, the person solemnizing 
the marriage shall, at the time of the  solemnization, translate, or cause to be t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 14]
rson solemnizing 
the marriage shall, at the time of the  solemnization, translate, or cause to be translated, to such  2[India n] 
Christian s, into a language which he understands, the  declarations made at such marriage in accordance 
with the provisions  of this Act.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 6 of 1886 , s. 30 , for “Secretary to the L. G.”. 
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “Native”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 15]
15 
 59. Registration of marriages between Indian Christians .—The registration of marriages between 
1[Indian ] Christians under this Part  shall be made in conformity with the rules laid down in section  37                              
(so far as they are applicable),  and not otherwise.  
PART VI2 
MARRIAGE OF 1[INDIAN ] CHRISTIANS  
60. On what conditions marriages of 1[Indian ] Christians may be  certified. —Every marriage 
between 1[Indian ] Christians applying for a  certificate, shall, without the preliminary notice required 
under Part  III, be certified under this Part, if the following conditions be  fulfilled, and not otherwise: — 
(1) the age of the man intending to be  married 3[shall not be under 4[twenty -one years] ], and the 
age of the woman intending to be married 5[shall not be under 6[eighteen years]];  
(2) neither of the persons intending to be married shall have a wife or husband still living;  
(3) in the presence of a person licensed under section 9, and of at least two credible witnesses 
other than such person, e ach of the  parties shall say to the other — 
“I call upon these persons here present to witness that. 1, A. B., in the presence of Almighty 
God, and in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, do take thee, C. D ., to be my lawful wedded wife 
[or husband] ” or words to the like effect:  
7*    *    *    *   * 
61. Grant of certificate .—When, in respect to any marriage solemnized  under this Part, the 
conditions prescribed in section 60  have been fulfilled, the person licensed as aforesaid, in whose 
presence  the said declaration has been made, shall, on the application  of either of the parties to such 
marriage, and, on the payment  of a fee of four annas, grant a certificate of the marriage.  
The certificate shall be signed by such licensed person, and shall  be received i n any suit touching the 
validity of such marriage  as conclusive proof of its having been performed.  
8[62. Keeping of register -book and deposit of ex
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 15]
s conclusive proof of its having been performed.  
8[62. Keeping of register -book and deposit of extracts therefrom  with Registrar General .—(1) 
Every person licensed under section 9  shall keep in English, or in the vernacular language in ordinary use  
in the district or State in which the marriage was solemnized, and in such  form as the State Government 
by which he was licensed may from time  to time prescribe, a register -book of all marriages solemnized 
under  this Part in his presence, and shall deposit in the office of the  Registrar General of Births, Deaths 
and Marriages for the territories  under the administration of the said State Government, in such  form and 
at such intervals as that Governme nt may prescribe, true and  duly authenticated extracts from his register -
book of all entries made  therein since the last of those intervals.]  
9*   *   *   *   * 
63. Searches in register  book  and copies of entries .—Every person licensed  under this Act to grant 
certificates of marriage, and keeping  a marriage -register -book under section 62, shall  at all reasonable 
times, allow search to be made in such book, and  shall, on payment of the proper fee, give a copy, 
certified under his  hand, o f any  entry therein.  
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by the Act A.O. 1950, for “Native ”. 
2. As to validation of post marriages solemnized under Part VI between persons of whom one only was an Indian Christian, and 
penalty for solemnizing such marriages under Part VI in future, see the  Marriages Validation Act, 1892  (2 of 1892).  
3. Subs. by Act 48 of 1952, s. 3 and the Second Schedule, for “shall exceed sixteen years”.  
4. Subs. by Act 2 of 1978, s. 6 and the Schedule , for “eighteen years” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1978).  
5. Subs. by Act 48 of 1952, s. 3 and the Second Schedule , for “shall exceed thirteen years”.  
6. Subs. by Act 2 of 1978, s. 6 and Schedule , for “fifteen years” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1978). 
7. Proviso 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 15]
6. Subs. by Act 2 of 1978, s. 6 and Schedule , for “fifteen years” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1978). 
7. Proviso omitted by s. 6 and the Schedule, ibid., (w.e.f. 1 -10-1978).  
8. Subs.  by Act 2 of 1891, s. 4, for s. 62.  
9. Sub -section ( 2) omitted by the A.O. 1950.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 16]
16 
 64. Books in which marriages  of Indian Christians under Part I or  Part III are registered .—The 
provisions of sections 62 and 63, as to  the form of the register -book, depositing extracts therefrom,  
allowing searches thereof, and giving copies of the entries therein, shall , mutatis mutandis , apply to the 
books kept under section 37.  
65. Part VI not to apply to Rom an Catholics.  
Saving of certain  marriages .—This Part of this Act, except so much of sections 62 and  63 as are 
referred to in section 64, shall not apply to marriages between  Roman Catholics. But nothing herein 
contained shall invalidate  any marriage celebrated between Roman Catholics under the provisions  of          
1[Part V of Ac t No. 25  of 1864 ], previous to the twenty -third day of February, 1865.  
PART VII 
PENALTIES  
2[66. False oath, declaration, notice or certificate for procuring marriage .—Whoever, for the 
purpose of procuring a marriage or licen se of marriage, intentionally, — 
(a) where an oath or declaration is required by this Act, or by any rule or custom of a Church 
according to th e rites and ceremonies of which  a marriage is intended to be solemnized, such Church 
being the Church of England or of Scotland or of Rome, makes a  false oath or declaration, or,  
(b) where a notice or certificate is required by this Act, signs a false notice or certificate,  
shall be deemed to have committed the offence punishable under section  193 of the Indian Penal Code     
(45 of 1860) with imprisonment of either description  for a term which may extend to three years and, at 
the discretion  of the Court, with fine.]  
67. Forbidding, by false personation issue of certificate by Marriage  Registrar .—Whoever 
forbids the issue, by  a Marriage Registrar , of a certificate, by falsely representing himself to be a person  
whose consent to the marriage is required by law, knowing or believing  such representation  to be false, or 
not having reason to believe it to be t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 16]
 knowing or believing  such representation  to be false, or 
not having reason to believe it to be true , shall be deemed g uilty of the offence described in section 205  of 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
3[68. Solemnizing  marriage without due authority. —Whoever, not  being authorized by section 5 of 
this Act to solemnize marriages,  solemnizes or professes to solemnize, in the absence of a Marriage  
Registrar of the district in which the ceremony takes place, a  marriage between persons one or both of 
whom is or are a Christian  or Christians, shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to  ten 
years, or (in lieu of a s entence of imprisonment for seven years  or upwards) with transportation for a term 
of not less than seven  years, and not exceeding ten years,  
4*    *    *    *    *  
and shall also be liable to fine.]  
69. Solemnizing marriage out of proper time, or without witnesses. —Whoever knowingly and 
wilfu lly solemnizes a marriage between  persons, one or both of whom is or are a Christian or Christians, 
at any time other than between the hours of six in the morning and seven  in the evening, or in the absence 
of at least two credible witnesses  other than the person solemnizing the marriage, shall be punished with  
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, and shall  also be liable to fine.  
Saving of marriages solemnized under special licence .—This section does not apply to marriages 
solemnized under special licen ses granted by the Anglican Bishop of the Diocese or by his Commissary,  
nor to marriages performed between the hours of seven in the evening  and six in the morning by a 
Clergyman of the Chur ch of Rome, when he  has received the general or special license in that behalf 
mentioned  in section 10.  
5[Nor does this section apply to marriages solemnized by a  Clergyman of the Church of Scotland 
according to the rules, rites,  ceremonies and customs of  the Church of Scotland.]  
             
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 16]

according to the rules, rites,  ceremonies and customs of  the Church of Scotland.]  
                                                           
1. Act 25 of 1864 had been rep. by Act 5 of 1855, which was rep. by this Act.  
2. Subs. by Act 2 of 1891, s. 5, for s. 66.  
3. Subs. by s. 6 , ibid., for s. 68.  
4. Omitted by the A. O. 1950.  
5. Ins. by Act 2 of 1891, s. 7.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 17]
17 
 70. Solemnizing without notice or within fourteen days after notice, marriage with minor .—Any 
Minister of Religion licensed to solemnize marriages under this Act, who, without a notice in writing, or, 
when one of the parties to t he marriage is a minor and the required consent of the parents or guardians to 
such marriage has not been obtained, within fourteen days after the receipt by him of notice of such 
marriage, knowingly and wilful ly solemnizes a marriage under Part III, shall be punished with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three  years, and shall also be liable to fine.  
71. Issuing certificate,  or marrying,  without publication of  notice. —A Marriage Registrar under 
this Ac t, who commits any of the  following offences: — 
(1) knowingly and wilfu lly issues any certificate for marriage, or solemnizes any marriage, 
without publishing the notice of such m arriage as directed by this Act ;  
1[(2) marrying after expiry of notice .—after the expiration of two months after the copy of the 
notice has been entered as required by section 40 in respect of any mar riage, solemnizes such 
marriage;]  
(3) solemnizing  marriage with minor within fourteen days, without authority of Court, or 
without se nding copy of n otice .—solemnizes, without an order of a competent Court authorizing 
him to do so, any marriage, when one of the parties is a minor, before the expiration of fourteen days 
after the receipt of the notice of such marriage, or without sending,  by the post or otherwise, a copy of 
such notice to the Senior Marriage Registrar of the district if there be more Marriage Registrars of the 
district than one, and if he himself be not  the Senior Marriage Registrar;  
(4) issuing certificate against authori zed prohibition .—issues any certificate the issue of which 
has been prohibited, as in this Act provided, by any person authorized to prohibit the issue thereof,  
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 17]
ed to prohibit the issue thereof,  
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to  five years, and shall also b e liable to 
fine. 
72. Issuing certificate after expiry of notice, or, in case of  minor, within fourteen days after 
notice, or against authori zed prohibition. —Any Marriag e Registrar knowingly and wilfu lly issuing any  
certificate for marriage after the expiration of 2[two months] after  the notice has been entered by him as 
aforesaid,  
or knowingly and wilfu lly issuin g, without the order of a compe tent Court authorizing him so to do, 
any certificate for marriage,  where o ne of the parties intending marriage is a minor, before the  expiration 
of fourteen days after the entry of such notice, or any  certificate the issue of which has been forbidden as 
aforesaid by any  person authorized in this behalf,  
shall be deemed to have committed an offence under section 166 of the  Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
73. Persons authorized to solemnize  marriage (other than Clergy of Churches of England, 
Scotland or Rome) .—Whoever, being authoriz ed under this Act to solemnize a marriage ,  
and not being a Clergyman of the Church of England solemnizing a  marriage after due publication of 
banns, or under a license from the  Anglican Bishop of the Diocese or a Surrogate duly authorized in that  
behalf,  
or, not being a Clergyman of the Church of Scot land, solemnizing  a marriage according to the rules, 
rites, ceremonies and customs of  that church,  
or, not being a Clergyman of the Church of Rome, solemnizing a  marriage according to the rites, 
rules, ceremonies and customs of that  church,  
issuing certificate, or marryi ng, without publishing notice , or after expiry of certificate ;—
knowingly and wilfu lly issues any  certificate for marriage under this Act, or solemnizes any marriage  
between such persons as aforesaid, without publishing, or causing to  be affixed, the notice of such 
marriage as directed in Part I
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 17]
d, without publishing, or causing to  be affixed, the notice of such 
marriage as directed in Part III of  this Act, or after the expiration of two months after the certificate  has 
been issued by him ;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 1891, s. 8( 1), for cl ause (2). 
2. Subs. by s. 8( 2), ibid., for “three months”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 18]
18 
 issuing certificate for, or solemnizing, marriage with minor, within fourteen days after notice .—
or knowingly and wilfully issues any certificate for marriage, or solemnizes a marriage between  such 
persons when one of the persons intending marriage is a minor,  before the expiration of fourteen days 
after the receipt of notice of  such marriage,  or without sending, by the post or otherwise, a copy of  such 
notice to the Marriage Registrar, or, if there be more Marriage  Registrars than one, to the Senior Marr iage 
Registrar of the district;  
issuing certificate authorizedly forbidden :—or knowingly and wilfu lly issues any certificate the 
issue of which has been forbidden,  under this Act, by any person authorized to forbid the issue ;  
solemnizing marriage authorizedly forbidden .—or knowingly and  wilfu lly solemnizes any 
marriage forbidden by any pers on authorized to  forbid the same ; 
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to  four years, and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
74. Unlicensed person granting certificate pretending to be  licensed .—Whoever, not being 
licensed to grant a certificate of  marriage under Part VI of this Act, grants such certificate intending  
there by to make it appear that he is  so licensed, shall be punished  with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to five years, and shall  also be liable to fine.  
1[Whoev er, being licensed to grant certificates of marriage under  Part VI of this Act, withou t just 
cause refuses, or wilful ly neglects  or omits, to perform any of the duties imposed upon him by that Part  
shall be punished with fine which may extend to one hundre d rupees .] 
75. Destroying or falsifying register -books .—Whoever, by him self or another, wilfu lly destroys or 
injures any register -book or the  counterfoil certificates thereof, or any part thereof, or any  authenticated 
extract therefrom,  
or falsely makes or counterfeits any part of such register -book  or co
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 18]
icated 
extract therefrom,  
or falsely makes or counterfeits any part of such register -book  or counterfoil certificates,  
or wilfully inserts any false entry in any such register -book or  counterfoil certificate or authenticated 
extract,  
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable 
to fine.  
76. Limitation of prosecutions under Act .—The prosecution for every offence punishable under 
this Act shall be commenced within two  years after the offence is committed.  
PART VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
77. What matters need not be proved in respect of marriage in  accordance with Act. —Whenever 
any marriage has been solemnized in  accordance with the provisions of sections 4 and 5, it shall not be  
void merely on account of any irregularity in respect of any of the  following matters, namely: — 
(1) any statement made in regard to the dwelling of the persons married, or to the consent of any 
person whose consent to su ch marriage is required by law;  
(2) the notice of the marriage;  
(3) the cert ificate or translation thereo f; 
(4) the time and place at which t he marriage has been solemnized ;  
(5) the registration of the marriage.  
78. Corrections of errors .—Every person charged with the duty of  registering any marriage, who 
discovers any error in the form or  substance of any such entry, may within one month next after the  
discovery of such error, in the presence of the persons married, or,  in case of their death or absence, in the 
presence of two other  credible witnesses, correct the error by entry in the margin, without  any a lteration 
of the original entry, and shall sign the marginal  entry, and add thereto the date of such correction, and 
such person  shall make the like marginal entry in the certificate thereof.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 2 of 1891, s. 9. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 18]
 Act 2 of 1891, s. 9. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 19]
19 
 And every entry made under this section shall be attested by th e witnesses in whose presence it was 
made . 
And, in case such certificate has been already sent to the 1[Registrar General of Births, Deaths and 
Marriages], such person shall  make and send in like manner a separate certificate of the original  
erroneous entry, and of the marginal correction therein made.  
79. Searches and copies of entries .—Every person solemnizing  a marriage under this Act, and 
hereby  required to register the same,  
and every Marriage Registrar or 1[Registrar General of Births,  Deaths and Marriages] having the 
custody for the time being of any  register of marriages, or of any certificate, or duplicate, or copies  of 
certificate, under this Act,  
shall, on payment of the proper fees, at all reasonable times, allow  searches to be made in such r egister, or 
for such certificate, or  duplicate or copies, and give a copy under his hand of any entry in  the same.  
80. Cert ified copy of entry in marriage -register, etc., to be  evidence .—Every certified copy, 
purporting to be signed by the person  entrusted  under this Act with the custody of any marriage -register 
or certificate, or duplicate, required to be kept or delivered under this  Act, of any entry of a marriage in 
such register or of any such certi ficate or duplicate, shall be received as evidence of t he marriage  
purporting to be so entered, or of the facts purporting to be so  certified therein, without further proof of 
such register or  certificate, or duplicate, or of any entry therein, respectively, or  of such copy.  
2[81. Certificates of certain marriages to be sent to Central  Government .—The Registrar General 
of Births, Deaths and Marriages 3*** shall, at the end of every quarter in each year, select, from the  
certificates of marriages forwarded to 4[him], during such quarter,  the certificates of the marriages of 
which 5[the Government by whom  he was appointed] may desire that evidenc
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 19]
cates of the marriages of 
which 5[the Government by whom  he was appointed] may desire that evidence shall be transmitted to  
England, and shall send the same certificates, signed by 4[him] to  the 6[Central Government] .] 
82. State Government to prescribe fees. —Fees shall be chargeable  under this Act for — 
receiving and publishing notices of marriages;  
issuing7[certificates for marriage] by Marriage Registrars, and registering marriages by the same;  
entering protests against, or prohibitions of, t he issue of 8[certificates for marriage] by the said 
Registrars;  
searching register -books or certificates, or  duplicates, of copies thereof;  
giving copies of entries in the same under sections 63 and 79.  
The State Government shall fix the amount of such f ees respectively,  
and may from time to time vary or remit them either generally or in  special cases, as to it may seem 
fit. 
83. Power to make rules .—9[(1)] The State Government 10[ may, by  notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules] in regard to the  disposal of the fees mentioned in section 82, the supply of register -
books, and the preparation and submission of returns of marria ges solemnized under this Act.  
11[(2) Every rule made by the State Government under this section  shall be laid, as soon as ma y be 
after it is made, before the State  Legislature.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 6 of 1886, s. 30, for “Secretary to a L.G. ”. 
2. Subs. by Act 13 of 1911, s. 2, for s. 81.  
3. The words  and figures “and the officers appointed under section 56” omitted  by Act 48 of 1952, s. 3 and the Second Schedule . 
4. Subs. by s. 3 and the Second Schedule , ibid., for “them  respectively”.  
5. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “the G. G. in C.”.  
6. Subs. by the A. O. 1948, for “Secretary of State for India”.  
7. Subs. by Act 1 of 1903, s. 3 and the Second Schedule,  for “certific ates of marriage”.  
8. Subs. by s. 3 and the Second Schedule , i
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 19]
he Second Schedule,  for “certific ates of marriage”.  
8. Subs. by s. 3 and the Second Schedule , ibid., for “marriage certificates”.  
9. Section 83 re -numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 20 of 1983, s. 2 and the Schedule  (w.e.f. 15 -3-1984).  
10. Subs. by s. 2 and the Schedule , ibid., for “may make rules” (w.e.f. 15 -3-1984).  
11. Ins. by s. 2 and the Schedule , ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -3-1984).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 20]
20 
 84. [Power to prescribe fees and rules for Indian States .] Omitted  by the A.O . 1950.  
85. Power to declare who shall be District Judge .—The State  Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, declare who  shall, in any place to which this Act applies, be deemed to be the  
District Judge.  
86. [Powers and functions exercisable as regards Indian States. ] Omitted  by the A. O. 1950.  
87. Saving of Consular marriages .—Nothing in this Act applies to  any marriage performed by any 
Minister, Consul, or Consular Agent  between subjects of the State which he represents and according to 
the laws of such State.  
88. Non-validation of marriages within prohibited degrees .—Nothing  in this Act shall be deemed 
to valid ate any marriage which the  personal law applicable to either of the parties forbids him or her to  
enter into . 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 21]
21 
 SCHEDULE I  
(See sections 12 and 38)  
NOTICE  OF MARRIAGE  
To          a Minister [ or Registrar] of  
I hereby give you notice that a marriage is intended to be had,  within three calendar months from the 
date hereof, between me and the  other party herein named  and described (that is to say) :— 
 
Name s. Condition . Rank or 
profession . Age. Dwelling place . Length of 
residence . Church, chapel or 
place of worship 
in which t he 
marriage is to be 
solemnized . District in which the 
other party resides, 
when the parti es 
dwell in different 
districts . James Smith.  
Window er. 
Carpenter.  
of full age.  
16, Clive Street.  
23 days.  
Free church of Scotland Church,  
Culcutta .  Martha Green.  
Spinster.  
… 
Minor.  
20, Hastings 
Street.  
More than a 
month.   
Witness my hand, this     day of     seventy -two 
(Signed ) JAMES SMITH . 
[The  italics  in this sch edule are to be filled up, as the case may be,  and the blank division thereof is 
only to be filled up when one of the  parties lives in another district.]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 22]
22 
 SCHEDULE II  
(See sections 24 and 50)  
CERTIFICATE OF RECEIPT OF NOTICE  
 
I,          do hereby certify that, on the  
day of ,  notice was  duly entered in my Marriage Notice Book of the marriage intended  between 
the parties therein named and described, delivered under the  hand of , one of the parties , (that is to say ):— 
 
Names . Condition . Rank or 
profession . Age. Dwelling 
place . Length of 
residence . Church, 
chapel or 
place of 
worship in 
which the 
marriage is 
to be 
solemnized . District in which 
the other party 
resides, when the 
parties dwell in 
different districts . James Smith. 
Widower . 
Carpenter . 
of full age . 
16, Clive Sreet. 
23 days . 
Free Church of Scotland  Church, 
Calcutta .  Martha Green . 
Spinster . 
……………….  
Minor . 
20, Hastings 
Street . 
More than a 
month .  
and that the declaration1[or oath ], required by section 17 or 41 of the Indian Christian Marriage               
Act, 1872 (15 of 1872), has been duly made by the said ( James Smith ). 
Date of notice entered  
Date of Certificate given  
 
Witness my hand, this  The issue of this certificate has not been prohibited by any person 
authorized to forbid the issue thereof.  
 
day of  seventy -two. 
(Signed ) 
This certificate will be void, unless the marriage is solemnized on or before the   day of  
[The italics  in the Schedule are to be filled up, as the case may be, and the blank division thereof is 
only to be filled up when one of the pa rties lives in another distr ict]. 
 
  
                                                           
1. Ins. b y Act 1 of 1903, s. 3, and the Second Schedule.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 23]
23 
 SCHEDULE III  
1[(See sections 28 and 31)]  
FORM OF  REGISTER OF MARRIAGES  
Quarterly Returns  
 of  
MARRIAGES  
FOR  
Calcutta . 
The Archdeaconry of   Madras.  
Bombay.  
 
I,     ,Registrar of the Archdeaconry of  Calcutta , 
         Madras ,  
         Bomb ay, 
do hereby certify that the annexed are correct copies of the  originals and Official Quarterly Returns of 
Marriage within the  Archdeaconry  
Calcutta,  
of   Madras,  as made and transmitted to me for the quarter  
  Bomba y,  
commencing  the     day of      ending the day 
of in the year of Our Lord  
[Signature of Registrar.]  
Calcutta.  
    Registrar of the Archdeaconry of    Madras.  
           Bombay . 
     Allahabad,  
MARRIAGES  solemnized at   Barrackpore,  
     Bareilly,  
     Calcutta, etc. , etc. 
 
when 
married .  Names of parties .          Year . 
Month . 
Day. 
Christian . 
Surname . 
Age. 
Condition . 
Rank or 
profession . 
Residence at 
the time of 
marriage . 
Father’s name 
and surname . 
By banns or 
license . 
Signatures of 
the parties . 
Signatures  
Of two or more 
witness es present . 
Signature of the 
person solemnizing 
the marriage . 
              
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and the Second Schedule , for “(see section 28)”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 24]
24 
 SCHEDULE IV  
(See sections 32 and 5 4) 
MARRIAGE REGISTER BOOK 
Number .   Names of Parties . Age. Condition . Rank or 
profession .. Residence 
at the time 
of 
marriage . Father ’s 
name and 
surname . When married . Christian 
name . Surname . 
  
 1 Day. Month . Year .   
        
  
  
  
  
 James.  
Martha .   
  
  
  
  
 White . 
Duncan .   
  
  
  
  
26 years . 
17 years .   
  
  
  
  
 Widower . 
Spinster .   
  
  
  
  
 Carpenter . 
……..    
  
  
  
  
 Agra… 
Agra…   
  
  
  
  
William 
White.  
John 
Duncan.  
Married in the        
This marriage was solemnized between us  James  
White , 
Martha 
Duncan , in the presence of us  John Smith . 
John Green . 
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 25]
25 
 CERTIFICATE OF  MARRIAGE  
 
Number . When married . Names of Parties. Age. Condition . Rank or 
profession . Residence at 
the time of 
marriage . Father ’s 
name and 
surname . Christian 
name . Surname . 
 
 
 
 
1 Day. Month . Year .        
   
 
James...  
Martha...   
 
White...  
 
Duncan...   
 
26 years . 
17 years . Widower
... 
Spinster  Carpenter  
……….  Agra......  
Agra......  William 
White  
Jhon 
Duncan  
Married in the        
This marriage was solemnized between us  James White , 
Martha Duncan , in the presence of us  John Smith . 
John Green . 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CHRISTIAN MARRIAGE ACT, 1872.pdf - page 26]
26 
 (SCHEDULE V.) 
SCHEDULE V .—[Enactments repealed .] Rep.by the Repealing Act , 1938 (1 of 1938), s. 2 and the 
Schedule . 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
SECTIONS  
PREAMBLE  
 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title.  
Extent.  
Commencement.  
Saving.  
2. Interpretation -clause.  
 
CHAPTER I  
OF THE COMMUNICATION, ACCEPTANCE AND  
REVOCATION OF PROPOSALS  
3. Communication, acceptance and revocation of proposals . 
4. Communication when complete . 
5. Revocation of proposals and acceptances . 
6. Revocation how made . 
7. Acceptance must be absolute . 
8. Acceptance by performing conditions, or receiving consideration . 
9. Promises, express and implied . 
 
CHAPTER II  
OF CONTRACTS, VOIDABLE CONTRACTS AND VOID  
AGREEMENTS  
10. What agreements are contracts . 
11. Who are competent to contract . 
12. What is a sound mind for the purposes of contracting . 
13. “Consent” defined . 
14. “Free consent” defined . 
15. “Coercion”  defined . 
16. “Undue influence” defined . 
17. “Fraud” defined . 
18. “Misrepresentation” defined . 
19. Voidability of agreements without free consent . 
19A. Power to set aside contract induced by undue influence . 
20. Agreement void where both parties are under mistake as to matter  of fact . 
21. Effect of mistakes as to law . 
22. Contract caused by mistake of one party as to matter of fact . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 2]
2 
 SECTIONS  
23. What considerations and objects are lawful , and what not . 
 
Void agreements  
24. Agreement void, if considerations and objects unlawful in part . 
25.  Agreement without consideration, void, unless it is in writing and registered, or is a promise to 
compensate for something done, or is a promise to pay a debt barred by limitation law . 
26. Agreement in restraint of marriage, void. 
27. Agreement in restraint of trade , void. 
Saving of agreement not to carry on business of which good -will is sold.  
28. Agreements in  restraint of legal proceeding void. 
Saving of contract to refer to arbitration dispute that may arise.  
Saving of contract to refer questions that have alrea dy arisen . 
Saving of a guarantee agreement of a bank or a financial institution.  
29. Agreements void for uncertainty . 
30. Agreements by way of wager, void.  
Exception in favour of certain prizes for horse -racing.  
Section 294A of the Indian Penal Code not affected.  
 
CHAPTER III  
OF CONTINGENT CONTRACTS  
31. “Contingent contract” defined . 
32. Enforcement of contracts contingent on an event happening . 
33. Enforcement of contracts contingent on an event not happening . 
34. When event on which contract is contingent to be deemed impossible , if it is the future conduct of 
a living person . 
35. When contracts become void which are contingent on happening of specified event within fixed 
time. 
When contracts may be enforced, which are contingent on specified event not happening within 
fixed time.  
36. Agreement contingent on impossible events void . 
 
CHAPTER IV  
OF THE PERFORMANCE OF CONTRACTS  
Contracts which must be performed  
37. Obligation of parties to contracts.  
38. Effect of refusal to accept offer of performance . 
39. Effect of refusal of party to perform promise wholly . 
By whom contracts must be performed  
40. Person by whom promise is to be performed . 
41. Effect of accepting performance from third person . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 2]
s to be performed . 
41. Effect of accepting performance from third person . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 3]
3 
 SECTIONS  
42. Devolution of joint liabilities . 
43. Any one of joint promisors may be compelled to perform . 
Each promisor may compel contribution.  
Sharing of loss by default in contribution.  
44. Effect of release of one joint promisor . 
45. Devolution of joint rights . 
Time and place for performance  
46. Time for performance of promise, when no application is to be made and no time  is specified . 
47. Time and place for performance of promise, where time is specified and no application to be 
made.  
48. Application for performance on certain day to be at proper time and place . 
49. Place for performance of promise, where no application to be made an d no place fixed for 
performance . 
50. Performance in manner or at time prescribed or sanctioned by promise e. 
Performance of reciprocal promises  
51. Promisor not bound to perform, unless reciprocal promisee ready and willing to perform.  
52. Order of performance of reci procal promises . 
53. Liability of party preventing event on which the contract is to take effect . 
54. Effect of default as to that promise which should be first performed, in contract consisting of 
reciprocal promises . 
55. Effect of failure to perform at fixed time, in contract in which time is essential . 
Effect of such failure when time is not essential.  
Effect of acceptance of performance at time other than that agreed upon.  
56. Agreement to do impossible act . 
Contract to do  an act afterwards becoming impossible or unlawful.  
Compensation for loss through non -performance of act known to be impossible or unlawful.  
57. Reciprocal promise to do things legal, and also other things illegal . 
58. Alternative promise, one branch being illegal . 
Appropriation of payments  
59. Application of  payment where debt to be discharged is indicated . 
60. Application of payment where debt to be discharged is not indicated . 
61. Application of payment where neither party appropriates . 
Contracts which need not be performe
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 3]

61. Application of payment where neither party appropriates . 
Contracts which need not be performed  
62. Effect of novation, rescission, and alter ation of contract . 
63. Promise e may dispense with or remit performance of promise . 
64. Consequences of rescission of voidable contract . 
65. Obligation of person who has received advantage under void agreement, or contract that becomes 
void. 
66. Mode of communicating or re voking rescission of voidable contract . 
67. Effect of neglect of promisee to afford promisor reasonable facilities for performance . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 4]
4 
 CHAPTER V  
OF CERTAIN RELATIONS RESEMBLING THOSE CREATED BY CONTRACT  
SECTIONS  
68. Claim for necessaries supplied to person incapable of contracting, or on his account . 
69. Reimbursement of person paying money due by another, in payment of which he is interested.  
70. Obligation of person enjoying benefit of non -gratuitous act . 
71. Responsibility of finder of goods . 
72. Liability of person to whom money is paid , or thing delivered , by mistake or under coercion . 
CHAPTER VI  
OF THE CONSEQUENCES OF BREACH OF CONTRACT  
73. Compensation for loss or damage caused by breach of contract . 
Compensation for failure to discharge obligation resembling those created by contract.  
74. Compensation for breach of contract where penalty stipulated for . 
75. Party rightfully rescinding contract , entitled to compensation . 
[CHAPTER VII SALE OF GOODS .][Repealed. ]. 
76. [Repealed. ]. 
77. [Repealed. ]. 
78. [Repealed. ]. 
79. [Repealed. ]. 
80. [Repealed. ]. 
81. [Repealed. ]. 
82. [Repealed. ]. 
83. [Repealed. ]. 
84. [Repealed. ]. 
85. [Repealed. ]. 
86. [Repealed. ]. 
87. [Repealed. ]. 
88. [Repealed. ]. 
89. [Repealed. ]. 
[DELIVERY .][Repealed. ]. 
90. Repealed. ]. 
91. [Repealed. ]. 
92. [Repealed. ]. 
93. [Repealed. ]. 
94. [Repealed. ] 
[SELLER’S LIEN .][Repealed. ]. 
95. [Repealed. ]. 
96. [Repealed. ]. 
97. [Repealed. ]. 
98. [Repealed. ] 
[STOPPAGE IN TRANSIT. ][Repealed. ]. 
 
99. [Repealed. ]. 
100. [Repealed. ]. 
101. [Repealed. ]. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 5]
5 
 SECTIONS  
102. [Repealed. ]. 
103. [Repealed. ]. 
104. [Repealed. ]. 
105. [Repealed. ]. 
106. [Repealed. ]. 
[RESALE .][Repealed. ]. 
107.  [Repealed. ]. 
[TITLE .][Repealed. ]. 
108. [Repealed. ]. 
[WARRANTY .]Repealed. ]. 
109. [Repealed. ]. 
110. [Repealed. ]. 
111. [Repealed. ]. 
112. [Repealed. ]. 
113. [Repealed. ]. 
114. [Repealed. ]. 
115. [Repealed. ]. 
116. [Repealed. ]. 
117. [Repealed. ]. 
118. [Repealed. ]. 
[MISCELLANEOUS .][Repealed. ]. 
119. [Repealed. ]. 
120. [Repealed. ]. 
121. [Repealed. ]. 
122. [Repealed. ]. 
123. [Repealed. ]. 
 
CHAPTERVIII  
OF INDEMNITY AND GUARANTEE  
124. “Contract of indemnity” defined.  
125. Rights of indemnity -holder when sued.  
126. “Contract of guarantee”, “surety”, “principal debtor” and “creditor” . 
127. Consideration for guarantee.  
128. Surety’s liability.  
129. “Continuing guarantee”.  
130. Revocation of  continuing guarantee . 
131. Revocation of continuing guarantee by surety’s death . 
132. Liability of two persons, primarily liable, not affected by arrangement between them that one shall be 
surety on other’s default.  
133. Discharge of surety by variance in terms of contr act. 
134. Discharge of surety by release or discharge of principal debtor.  
135. Discharge of surety when creditor compounds with, gives time to, or agrees not to sue, principal debtor.  
136. Surety not discharged when agreement made with third person to give time to princ ipal debtor.  
137. Creditor’s forbearance to sue does not discharge surety.  
138. Release of one co -surety does not discharge others.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 6]
6 
 SECTIONS  
139. Discharge of surety of creditor’s act or omission impairing surety’s eventual remedy.  
140. Rights of surety on payment or performance.  
141. Surety’s right to benefit of creditor’s securities.  
142. Guarantee obtained by misrepresentation invalid.  
143. Guarantee obtained by concealment invalid . 
144. Guarantee on contract that creditor shall not act on it until co -surety joins . 
145. Implied promise to i ndemnify surety . 
146. Co-sureties liable to contribute equally.  
147. Liability of co -sureties bound in different sums.  
 
CHAPTER IX  
OF BAILMENT  
148. “Bailment”, “bailor” and “bailee” defined.  
149. Delivery to bailee how made.  
150. Bailor’s duty to disclose faults in goods bailed.  
151. Care to be taken by bailee.  
152. Bailee when not liable for loss, etc., of thing bailed.  
153. Termination of bailment by bailee’s act inconsistent with conditions.  
154. Liability of bailee making unauthorized use of goods bailed.  
155. Effect of mixture, with bailor’s consent,  of his goods with bailee’s.  
156. Effect of mixture, without bailor’s consent, when the good s can be separated.  
157. Effect of mixture, without bailor’s consent, when the goods cannot be separated.  
158. Repayment, by bailor, of necessary expenses.  
159. Restoration of goods le nt gratuitously.  
160. Return of goods bailed on expiration of time or accomplishment of purpose.  
161. Bailee’s responsibility when goods are not duly returned.  
162. Termination of gratuitous bailment by death.  
163. Bailor entitled to increase or profit from goods bailed.  
164. Bailor’s responsibility to bailee.  
165. Bailment by several joint owners.  
166. Bailee not responsible on re -delivery to bailor without title.  
167. Right of third person claiming goods bailed.  
168. Right of finder of goods.  
May sue for specific reward offered.  
169. When finder of thing  commonly on sale may sell it.  
170. Bailee’s particular lien.  
171. General lien of bankers, factors
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 6]
mmonly on sale may sell it.  
170. Bailee’s particular lien.  
171. General lien of bankers, factors, wharfingers, attorneys and policy -brokers.  
Bailments of pledges  
172. “Pledge”, “Pawnor” and “Pawnee” defined.  
173. Pawnee’s right of retainer.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 7]
7 
 SECTIONS  
174. Pawnee not to retain for debt or promise other than that for which goods pledge d. 
Presumption in case of subsequent advances.  
175. Pawnee’s right as to extraordinary expenses incurred.  
176. Pawnee’s right where pawnor makes default.  
177. Defaulting pawnor’s right to redeem.  
178. Pledge by mercantile agent.  
178A. Pledge by person in possession under voidable contract.  
179. Pledge where pawnor has only a limited interest.  
Suits by bailees or bailors against wrong -doers  
180. Suit by bailor or bailee against wrong -doer.  
181. Apportionment of relief or compens ation obtained by such suits.  
CHAPTER X  
AGENCY  
Appointment and authority of agents  
182. “Agent” and “principal” defined.  
183. Who may employ agent.  
184. Who may be an agent.  
185. Consideration not necessary.  
186. Agent’s authority may be expressed or implied.  
187. Definitions of expres s and implied authority.  
188. Extent of agent’s authority.  
189. Agent’s authority in an emergency.  
Sub-agents  
190. When agent cannot delegate.  
191. “Sub -agent” defined.  
192. Representation of principal by sub -agent properly appointed.  
Agent’s responsibility for sub -agent.  
Sub-agent’s responsibility.  
193. Agent’s responsibility for sub -agent appointed without authority.  
194. Relation between principal and person duly appointed by agent to act in business of agency.  
195. Agent’s duty in naming such person.  
Ratification  
196. Right of person as to  acts done for him without his authority.  
Effect of ratification.  
197. Ratification may be expressed or implied.  
198. Knowledge requisite for valid ratification.  
199. Effect of ratifying unauthorized act forming part of a transaction.  
200. Ratification of unauthorized act can not injure third person.   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 8]
8 
 Revocation of authority  
SECTIONS  
201. Termination of agency.  
202. Termination of agency, where agent has an interest in subject -matter.  
203. When principal may revoke agent’s authority.  
204. Revocation where authority has been partly exercised.  
205. Compensation for revocation by principal, or renunciation by agent.  
206. Notice of revocation or renunciation.  
207. Revocation and renunciation may be expressed or implied.  
208. When termination of agent’s authority takes effect as to agent, and as to third persons.  
209. Agen t’s duty on termination of agency by principal’s death or insanity.  
210. Termination of sub -agent’s authority.  
Agent’s duty to principal  
211. Agent’s duty in conducting principal’s business.  
212. Skill and diligence required from agent.  
213. Agent’s accounts.  
214. Agent’s duty to communicate with principal.  
215. Right of principal when agent deals, on his own account, in business of agency without 
princi pal’s consent.  
216. Principal’s right to benefit gained by agent dealing on his own account in business of agency.  
217. Agent’s right of retainer  out of sums received on principal’s account.  
218. Agent’s duty to pay sums received for principal.  
219. When agent’s remuneration becomes due.  
220. Agent not entitled to remuneration for business misconducted.  
221. Agent’s lien on principal’s property.  
Principal’s duty to ag ent 
222. Agent to be indemnified against consequences of lawful acts.  
223. Agent to be indemnified against consequences of acts done in good faith.  
224. Non-liability of employer of agent to do a criminal act.  
225. Compensation to agent for injury caused by principal’s neglec t. 
Effect of agency on contracts with third persons  
226. Enforcement and consequences of agent’s contracts.  
227. Principal how far bound, when agent exceeds authority.  
228. Principal not bound when excess of agent’s authority is not separable.  
229. Consequences of notice given to agent.  
230.
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 8]
n excess of agent’s authority is not separable.  
229. Consequences of notice given to agent.  
230. Agent cannot personally enforce, nor be bound by, contracts on behalf of principal.  
Presumption of contract to contrary.  
231. Rights of parties to a contract made by agent not disclosed.  
232. Performance  of contract with agent supposed to be principa l. 
233. Right of person dealing with agent personally liable.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 9]
9 
 SECTIONS  
234. Consequence of inducing agent or principal to act on belief that principal or agent will be held 
exclusively liable.  
235. Liability of pretended agent.  
236. Person falsely contracting as agent  not entitled to performance.  
237. Liability of principal inducing belief that agent’s unauthorized acts were authorized.  
238. Effect, on agreement, of misrepresentation or fraud by agent.  
 
CHAPTER XI  
OF PARTNERSHIP  
239. [Repealed .]. 
240. [Repealed .]. 
241. [Repealed .]. 
242. [Repealed .]. 
243. [Repealed .]. 
244. [Repealed .]. 
245. [Repealed .]. 
246. [Repealed .]. 
247. [Repealed .]. 
248. [Repealed .]. 
249. [Repealed .]. 
250. [Repealed .]. 
251. [Repealed .]. 
252. [Repealed .]. 
253. [Repealed .]. 
254. [Repealed .]. 
255. [Repealed .]. 
256. [Repealed .]. 
257. [Repealed .]. 
258. [Repealed .]. 
259. [Repealed .]. 
260. [Repealed .]. 
261. [Repealed .]. 
262. [Repealed .]. 
263. [Repealed .]. 
264. [Repealed .]. 
265. [Repealed .]. 
266. [Repealed .]. 
  SCHEDULE —[Repealed .] 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 10]
10 
 THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT,  1872  
ACT NO. 9 OF 18721 
 [25th April , 1872.]  
Preamble —WHEREAS  it is expedient to define and amend certain parts o f the law relating to 
contracts;  
It is hereby enacted as follows: — 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title .—This Act may be called  the Indian Contract Act, 1872.  
Extent, Commencement .—It extends to the whole of India 2[ 3***]; and it shall come into force on 
the first day of September, 1872.  
Saving —4*** Nothing herein contained shall affect the provisions of any Statute, Act or Regulation 
not hereby expressly repealed, nor any usage or custom of trade, nor any incident of any contract, not 
inconsistent w ith the provisions of this Act.  
2. Interpretation -clause .—In this Act the following words and expressions are used in the following 
senses, unless a contrary intent ion appears from the context: — 
(a) When one person signifies to another his willingness to do or to abstain from doing anythin g, 
with a view to obtaining the assent of that other to such act or abstinence,  he is said to make a 
proposal;  
                                                           
1. For the Statement of Objects and Reasons for the Bill which was based on a a report of Her Majesty’s Commissioners 
appointed to prepare a body of substantive law for India, dated 6th July, 1866 , see Gazette of India, 1867 Extraordinary, p. 34; for 
the Report of the Select Committee, see ibid ., Extraordinary, dated 28th March, 1872; for discussions in Council, see ibid ., 1867, 
Supplement, p. 1064; ibid., 1871, p. 313, and ibid., 1872, p. 527. It has been amended in C.P. by C.P. Act 1 of 1915 and in C.P. 
and Berar by C.P. and Berar Act 15 of 1938.  
 
The Chapters and sections of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (4 of 188 2), which relate to contracts are, in places in which 
that Act is in force, to be taken as part of this Act —see Act 4 of 1882, s. 4. 
 
This Act has been extended to Berar by the Berar Laws Act, 1941 (4 of 1941) to 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 10]
 4 of 1882, s. 4. 
 
This Act has been extended to Berar by the Berar Laws Act, 1941 (4 of 1941) to Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963,  
   s. 2 and Sch. I to Goa, Daman and Diu by Reg. 11 of 1963, s. 3 and Sch.,  (w.e.f. 1 -10-1965)  to Laccadive, Minicoy and 
Amindivi Islands by  
   Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 and Sch., to Pondicherry by Act 26 of 1968, s. 3 and Sch. and has been declared to be in f orce in — 
 
the Sonthal  Parganas —see Sonthal  Pargana s Settlement Regulation, 1872 ( 3 of 1872), s. 3, as amended by the Sonthal  
Parganas Justice and Laws Regulation, 1899 (3 of 1899), s. 3.  
 
Panth  Piploda —see the Panth  Piploda Law Regulation , 1929 (1 of 1929) , s. 2.  
 
It has been declared, by notification under s. 3( a) of the Scheduled Districts Act, 1874 (14 of 1874), to be in force in — 
 
The Tarai of the Province of Agra —see Gazette of India, 1876, Pt. I, p. 505;  
 
the Districts of Hazari bagh, Lohardaga and Manbhum, and Pargana Dhalbhum and the Kolhan in the District of Singhbhum —
see Gazette of India, 1881, pt. I, p. 504. —The District of Lohardaga included at this time the present District of Palamau which 
was separated in 1894. The District of Lohardaga is n ow called the Ranchi District —see Calcutta Gazette, 1899, pt. I, p. 44.  
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for “except Part B States.”  
3. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule                                   
(w.e.f. 31 -10- 2019).  
4. The words “The enactments mentioned in the Schedule hereto are repealed to the extent specified in the third column thereof , 
but” rep. by Act 10 of 1914, s. 3 and the Second Schedule . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 11]
11 
 (b) When the person to whom the proposal is made signifies his assent thereto, the proposal is 
said to be accepted. A proposal, wh en accepted, be comes a promise;  
(c) The person maki ng the proposal is called the “promisor ”, and the person accepting the 
propos al is called the “ promise e”; 
(d) When, at the desire of the promisor, the promisee or any other person has done or abstained 
from doing, or does or abstains from doing, or promises to do or to absta in from doing, something, 
such a ct or abstinence or promise is called a consideration for the promise;  
(e) Every promise and every set of promises, forming the consideration f or each other, is an 
agreement;  
(f) Promises which form the  consideration or part of the consideration for each other are called 
reciprocal promises;  
(g) An agreement not enforce able by law is said to be void;  
(h) An agreement en forceable by law is a contract;  
(i) An agreement which is enforceable by law at the option  of one or more of the parties thereto, 
but not at the option of the other or others, is a voidable contract;  
(j) A contract which ceases to be enforceable by law becomes void wh en it ceases to be 
enforceable.  
CHAPT ER I 
OF THE COMMUNICATION, ACCEPTANCE AND REVOCATION OF PROPOSALS  
3.Communication, acceptan ce and revocation of proposals. —The communication of proposals , 
the acceptance of proposals, and the revocation of proposals and acceptances, respectively, are deemed to 
be made by any act or omission of the party proposing, accepting or revoking by which he i ntends to 
communicate such pro posal , accep tance or revocati on, or which has the effect of communicating it.  
4. Communication when complete .—The communication of a proposal is complete when it comes 
to the knowledge of  the person to whom it is made.  
The communication of an acceptance is complete, — 
as against the proposer, when it is put in a course of transmission to him, so as to be out of the 
power of the acce
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 11]
oposer, when it is put in a course of transmission to him, so as to be out of the 
power of the acceptor;  
as against the acceptor, when it comes to the knowledge of the proposer.  
The communication  of a revocation is complete, — 
as against the person who m akes it, when it is put into a course of transmission to the p erson to 
whom it is made, so as to be out of the po wer of the person who makes it;  
as against the person to whom it is made, w hen it comes to his knowledge.  
Illustrations  
(a) A proposes, by letter, to sell a house to B at a certain pri ce. 
The communication of the proposal is complete  when B receives the letter.  
(b) B accepts A ’s pro posal by a letter sent by post.  
The communication  of the acceptance is complete,  
as aga inst A when the letter is  posted; 
as against B, when the letter is r eceived by A.  
(c) A re vokes his proposal by telegram.  
The revocation is complete as against A when the telegram is despatched. It is complete a s against B when B receives it.  
B revokes his acceptance by telegram. B’s revocation is complete as against B when the telegram is despatched, and as  
against A when it reaches him.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 12]
12 
 5. Revocatio n of proposals and acceptances .—A proposal may be revoked at any time before the 
communication of its acceptance is complete as against th e proposer, but not afterwards.  
An acceptance may be revoked at any time before the communication of the acceptance is complete 
as against th e acceptor, but not afterwards.  
Illustration  
A proposes, by a letter sent b y post, to sell his house to B . 
B accepts the pro posal by a letter sent by post.  
A may revoke his proposal at any time before or at the moment when B posts his letter of acceptance, but not afterwards.  
B may revoke his acceptance at any time before or at the moment when the letter comm unicating it  reaches A, but not 
afterwards.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 5 of Act (9 of 1872). —In section 5 of Indian contract Act, 1872, hereinafter 
in this Chapter referred to as the principal Act, at the end of the first paragraph,  the following explanation 
shall inserted, namely: -- 
“Explanation —Where an invitation to a proposal contains a condition that any proposal made in 
response to such invitation shall be kept open for a specified time and a proposal is thereupon made 
acceptin g such condition, such proposal may not be revoked within such time.”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act, 57 of 1976, s. 2]  
6. Revocation how made .—A proposal is revoked — 
(1) by the communication of notice of revocation by t he pro poser to the other party ; 
(2) by the lapse of the time prescribed in such proposal for its acceptance, or, if no time is so 
prescribed, by the lapse of a reasonable time, without c ommunication of the acceptance;  
(3) by the failure of the acceptor to fulfil a co ndition precedent to acceptance;  or 
(4) by the death or insanity of the proposer, if the fact of his death or insanity comes to the 
knowledge of the acceptor before acceptance.  
7. Acceptance must be absolute .—In order to convert a proposal into a promise, the acceptance 
must— 
(1) be abso
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 12]
must be absolute .—In order to convert a proposal into a promise, the acceptance 
must— 
(1) be absolute and unqualifi ed; 
(2) be expressed in some usual and reasonable manner, unless the proposal prescribes the manner 
in which it is to be accepted. If the proposal prescribes a manner in which it is to be accepted, and the 
acceptance is not made in such manner, the proposer may, within a reasonable time after the 
acceptance is communicated to him, insist that his proposal shall be accepted in the prescribed 
manner, and not otherwise; but if he fails to do  so, he accepts the acceptance.  
8. Acceptance by performing conditio ns, or receiving consideration .—Performance of the 
conditions of a proposal, or the acceptance of any consideration for a reciprocal promise which may be 
offered with a proposal, is an acc eptance of the proposal.  
9. Promises, express and implied .—In so far as the proposal or acceptance of any promise is made 
in words, the promise is said to be express. In so far as such proposal or acceptance is made otherwise 
than in words, the  promise is said to be implied.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 13]
13 
 CHAPTER II  
OF CONTRACTS,  VOIDABL E CONTRACTS AND VOID AGREEMENTS  
10. What agreements are contracts .—All agreements are contracts if they are made by the free 
consent of parties competent to contract, for a lawful consideration and with a lawful object, and are not 
hereby  expressly  declared to be void.  
Nothing herein contained sha ll affect any law in force in 1[India] and not hereby expressly repealed 
by which any contract is required to be made in writing2 or in the presence of witnesses, or any law 
relating to  the registration of documents.  
11. Who are competent to contract .—Every person is competent to contract who is of the age of 
majority according to th e law to which he is subject3, and who is of sound mind , and is not disqualified 
from contracting by any l aw to which he is subject.  
12. What is a sound mind f or the purposes of contracting .—A person is said to be of sound mind 
for the purpose of making a contract , if, at the time when he makes it, he is capable of understanding it 
and of forming a rational judgment as to  its effect upon his interests.  
A person who is usually of unsound mind, but occasionally of sound mind, may make a con tract 
when he is of sound mi nd. 
A person who is usually of soun d mind, but occasionally of un sound mind, may not make a contr act 
when he is of unsound mind.  
Illustrations  
(a) A patient in a lunatic asylum, who is at intervals of sound mind, may c ontract during those intervals.  
(b) A sane man, who is delirious from fever or who is so drunk that he cannot understand the terms of a contract , or form a 
rational judgment as to its effect on his interests, cannot contract whilst such  delirium or drunkenness lasts.  
13. “ Consent ” defined .—Two or more persons are said to consent when they agree upon th e same 
thing in the same sense.  
14. “Free consent ” defined .—Consent is said to be  free when it is not caused by — 
(1) coercio n, as defined in section 15, or  
(2) undue i
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 13]
id to be  free when it is not caused by — 
(1) coercio n, as defined in section 15, or  
(2) undue influenc e, as defined in section 16, or  
(3) frau d, as defined in section 17, or  
(4) misrepresentatio n, as defined in section 18, or  
(5) mistake, subject to the provis ions of sections 20, 21 and 22.  
Consent is said to be so caused when it would not have been given but for the exist ence of such 
coercion, undue influence, fraud , misrepresentation or mistake.  
15. “Coercion ” defined .—“Coercion ” is the committing, or threatening to commit, any act forbidden 
by the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860 )or the unlawful detaining, or threatening to detain, any property, to 
the prejudice of any person whatever, with the intention of causing any person to enter into an agreement.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 o f 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for “Part A States and Part C States” which had been subs. by the A.O. 1950, for  
“the Provinces”.  
2. See e.g. , s. 25, infra ; the C opyright Act, 1957 (14 of 1957), s . 19; the Carriers Act, 1865 (3 of 1865) ss. 6 and 7;  
the Companies  Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) , ss. 12, 30, 46 and 109.  
3. See the Indian Majority Act, 1875 (9 of 1875).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 14]
14 
 Explanation .—It is immaterial whether the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) is or is not in force in the 
place where the coercion is employed.  
Illustration  
A, on board an English ship on the high seas, causes B to enter into an agreement by an act amounting to criminal 
intimidat ion under the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860 ). 
A afterwards sues B for breach of contract at Calcutta.  
A has employed coercion, although his act is not an offence by the law of England, and although section 506 of the Indian 
Penal Code  (45 of 1860) was not in force at the time when or place where the act was done.  
1[16.“Undue influence ” defined .—(1) A contract is said to be induced by “undue influence ” where 
the relations subsisting between the parties are such that one of the parties is in a position to dominate the 
will of the other and uses that position to obtain an u nfair advantage over the other.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the gene rality of the foregoing principle, a person is deemed 
to be in a position t o dominate the will of another — 
(a) where he holds a real or apparent authority over the other , or where he stands in a fiduciary 
relation to the other; or  
(b) where he makes a contract with a person whose mental capacity is temporarily or permanently 
affected by reason of age, illness, or mental  or bodily distress.  
(3) Where a person who is in a position to dominate the will of another, enters into a contract with 
him, and the t ransaction appears, on the face of it or on the evidence adduced, to be unconscionable, the 
burden of proving that such contract was not induced by undue influence shall lie upon the person in a 
position to dominate the will of the other.  
Nothing in this s ub-section shall affe ct the provisions of section 111  of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872  
(1 of 1872 ). 
Illustrations  
(a) A having advanced money to his son, B, during his minority, upon B ’s coming of age obtains, by misuse of parental influenc
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 14]
 to his son, B, during his minority, upon B ’s coming of age obtains, by misuse of parental influence, a bond 
from B  for a greater amount than the sum due in respect of the adva nce. A employs undue influence.  
(b) A, a man enfeebled by disease or age, is induced, by B ’s influence over him as his medical attendant, to agree to pay B an unreasonable 
sum for his professional servi ces. B employs undue influence.  
(c) A, being in debt to B, the money -lender of his village, contracts a fresh loan on terms which appear to be unconscionable. It lies on B to 
prove that the contract was not induced by undue influence.  
(d) A applies to a banker for a loan at a time when there is stringency in the money market. The banker declines to make the loan  except at 
an unusually high rate of interest. A accepts the loan on these terms. This is a transaction in the ordinary course of business, and the contract is 
not induced by undue influence.]  
17. “Fraud ” defined .—“Fraud ” means and includes any of the following acts committed by a party 
to a contract, or with his  connivance, or by his agent2, with intent to deceive another party thereto of his 
agent, or to induce h im to enter into the contract: — 
(1) the suggestion, as a fact, of that which is not true, by one who does not bel ieve it to be true ; 
(2) the active concealment of a fact by one having knowledge or belief of the fact;  
(3) a promise made without  any intention of performing it;  
(4) any other act fitted to deceive;  
(5) any such act or omission as the law specially decl ares to be fraudulent.  
Explanation .—Mere silence as to facts likely to affect the willingness of a person to enter into a 
contract is not fraud, unless the circumstances of the case are such that, regard being had to them, it is the 
duty of the p erson keeping silence to speak3, or unless his silence is, in itself, equivalent to speech.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 6 of 1899, 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 14]
to speech.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 6 of 1899, s. 2 , for the original s. 16.  
2. Cf. s. 238, infra . 
3. See s. 143, infra . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 15]
15 
 Illustrations  
(a)  A sells, by auction, to B, a horse which A knows to be unsound. A says nothing to B about the horse ’s unsou ndness. 
This is not fraud in A.  
(b) B is A ’s daughter and has just come of age. Here, the relation between the parties would make it A ’s duty to tell B if the 
horse is unsound.  
(c) B says to A —“If you do not deny it, I shall assume that the horse is sound. ” A says nothing. Here, A ’s silence is 
equivale nt to speech.  
(d) A and B, being traders, enter upon a contract. A has private information of a change in prices which would affect B ’s 
willingness to proceed with the contra ct. A is not bound to inform B . 
18. “Misrepresentation ” defined .—“Misrepresentation ” means and includes — 
(1) the positive assertion, in a manner not warranted by the information of the person making it, 
of that which is not true, t hough he believes it to be true;  
(2) any breach of duty which, without an intent to deceive, gains an advantage to the person 
committing it,  or any one claiming under him; by misleading another to his pr ejudice , or to the 
prejudice  of any one claiming under him;  
(3) causing, however innocently, a party to an agreement , to make a mistake as to the substance 
of the thing which i s the subject of the agreement.  
19. Voidability of a greements without free consent .—When consent to an agreement is caused by 
coercion,1*** fraud or misrepresentation, the agreement is a contract voidable at the option of the party 
whose consent was so caused.  
A party to a contract whose cons ent was caused by fraud or mis represen tation, may, if he thinks fit, 
insist that the contract shall be performed, and that he shall be put in the position in which he would have 
been if the representations made had  been true.  
Exception .—If such consent was caused by misrepresentation or by silence, fraudulent within the 
meaning of section 17, the contract, nevertheless, is not voidable, if the party whose consent was so 
ca
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 15]
ng of section 17, the contract, nevertheless, is not voidable, if the party whose consent was so 
caused had the means of discovering the truth with ordinary diligence . 
Explanation .—A fraud or misrepresentation which did not cause the consent to a contract of the party 
on whom such fraud was practised, or to whom such misrepresentation was made, does not render a 
contract voidable.  
Illustrations  
(a) A, intending to dece ive B, falsely represents that five hundred maunds of indigo are made annually at A ’s factory, and 
thereby induces B to buy the factory. The contract is voidable at the option of B.  
(b) A, by a misrepresentation, leads B erroneously to believe that, five hundred maunds of indigo are made annually at A ’s 
factory. B examines the accounts of the factory, which show that only four hundred maunds of indigo have been made. After thi s 
B buys the factory. The contract is not voidable on account of A ’s misrepresent ation.  
(c) A fraudulently informs B that A ’s estate is free from in  cumbrance. B thereupon buys the estate. The estate is subject to a 
mortgage. B may either avoid the contract, or may insist on its being carried out and the mortgage d ebt redeemed.  
(d) B, having discovered a vein of ore on the estate of A, adopts means to conceal, and does conceal, the existence of the ore 
from A. Through A ’s ignorance B is enabled to buy the estate at an under -value. The contract is voidable at the opt ion of A.  
(e) A is en titled to succeed  to an estate at the death of B ; B dies: C, having received intelligence of B ’s death, preven ts the 
intelligence reaching A, and thus induces A to sell him his interest in the estate. The sale is voidable at the optio n of A.  
2[19A. Power to set aside contra ct induced by undue influence .—When consent to an agreement is 
caused by undue influence, the agreement is a contract voidable at the option of the par ty whose consent 
was so caused.  
                                               
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 15]
option of the par ty whose consent 
was so caused.  
                                                           
1. The words “undue influence” rep. by Act 6 of 1899, s. 3. 
2. Ins. by Act 6 of 1899, s. 3.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 16]
16 
 Any such contract may be set aside either absolutely or, if the party who was entitled to avoid it has 
received any benefit thereunder, upon such terms and conditions  as to the Court may seem just.  
Illustrations  
(a) A’s son has forged B ’s name to a promissory note. B under threat of prosecuting A ’s son, obtains a bond from A for the 
amount of the forged note. If B sues on this bond, the Court may set the bond aside.  
(b) A, a money -lender, advances Rs. 100 to B, an agriculturist, and, by undue influence, induces B to execute a bond for  
Rs. 200 with interest at 6 per cent. per month. Th e Court may set the bond aside,  ordering B to repay the Rs. 100 with s uch 
interest as may seem just.]  
20.Agreement void where both parties are under mistake as to  matter of fact .—Where both the 
parties to an agreement a re under a mistake as to a matter of fact essential to the ag reement, the agreement 
is void.  
Explanation .—An erroneous opinion as to the value of the thing which forms the subject -matter of 
the agreement , is not to be deemed a mistake as to a matter of fact. 
Illustrations  
(a) A agrees to sell to B a specific cargo of goods supposed to be on its way from England to Bombay. It turns out that, 
before the day of the bargain, the ship conveying the cargo had been cast away and the goods lost. Neither party wa s aware of th e 
these  facts. The agreement is void.  
(b) A agrees to buy from B a certain horse. It turns out that the ho rse was dead at the time of  the bargain, though neither 
party was aware of the fact. The a greement is void.  
(c) A, being entitled to an estate for the life of B, agrees to sell it to C. B was dead at the time of the agreement, but both  
parties were ignorant of the fact. The agreement is void.  
21. Effect of mist akes as to law .—A contract is not voidable because it  was caused by a mist ake as 
to any law in force in 1[India]; but a mistak e as to a law not in force in 1[India] has the sa me effect a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 16]
law in force in 1[India]; but a mistak e as to a law not in force in 1[India] has the sa me effect as a 
mistake of fact.  
2*   *   *   *   * 
Illustration  
A and B make a contract grounded on the erroneous belief that a particular debt is barred by the Indian Law of Limitation : 
the contract is not voidable.  
3*   *   *   *   * 
22. Contract caused by mistake of one party as to matter  of fact .—A contract is not voidable 
merely because it was caused by one of the parties to it being under a mistake as to a matter of fact.  
23. What considerations and o bjects are lawful , and what not .—The consideration or object of an 
agreement is lawful, unless — 
it is forbidden  by law4; or 
is of such a nature that if permitted, it would defea t the provisions of any law; or  
is fraudulent ; or  
involves or implies injury to the p erson or property of another; or  
the Court regards it as immora l, or opposed to public policy.  
                                                           
1. The original words ‘British India” have successively been amended by the A.O. 1948 and the A.O. 1950 to read as above.  
2. Para graph 2, ins. by the A.O. 1937, and as amended by the A. O. 1948 was Rep. by the A. O. 1950.  
3. The second Illustration  to s. 21 rep. by Act 24 of 1917, s. 3 and  the Second  Schedule . 
4. See ss. 26, 27, 28 and 30, infra . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 17]
17 
 In each of these cases, the consideration or object of an agreement is said to be unlawful. Every 
agreement of which the object or con sideration is unlawful is void.  
Illustrations  
(a) A agrees to sell his house to B for 10,000 rupees. Here B ’s prom ise to pay the sum of 10,000 rupees is the consideration 
for A ’s promise to sell the house, and A ’s promise to sell the house is the consideration for B ’s promise to pay the 10,000 rupees. 
These are lawful considerations.  
(b) A promises to pay B 1,000 rupe es at the end of six months, if C, who owes that sum to B, fails to pay it. B promises to 
grant time to C accordingly. Here, the promise of each party is the consideration for the promise of the other party , and they are 
lawful considerations.  
(c) A promises, for a certain sum paid to him by B, to make good to B the value of his ship if it is wrecked on a certain 
voyage. Here , A’s promise is the consideration for B ’s payment and B ’s payment is the consideration for A ’s promise and t hese 
are lawful con siderations.  
(d) A promises to maintain B ’s child , and B promises to pay A 1,000 rupees yearly for the purpose. Here , the promise of 
each party is the consideration for the promise of the other party. They are lawful considerations.  
(e) A, B and C enter in to an agreement for the division am ong them of gains acquired or to be acquired, by them by fraud. 
The agreement is v oid, as its object is unlawful.  
(f) A promises to obtain for B an em ployment in the public service and B promises to pay 1,000 rupees to A.  The agreement 
is void, as the co nsideration for it is unlawful.  
(g) A, being agent for a landed proprietor, agrees for money, without the knowledge of his principal, to obtain for B a lease 
of land belonging to his principal. The agreement between A and B  is void , as it implies a fraud by conce alment, by A, on his 
principal.  
(h) A promises B to drop a prosecution which he has instituted against B for robbery, and
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 17]
incipal.  
(h) A promises B to drop a prosecution which he has instituted against B for robbery, and B promises to restore the value of 
the things taken. The agreement is v oid, as its object is u nlawful.  
(i) A’s estate is sold for arrears of revenue under the provisions of an Act of the Legislature, by which the defaulter  is 
prohibited from purchasing the estate. B, upon an understanding with A, becomes the purchaser, and agrees to convey the estate 
to A upon receiving from him the price which B has paid. The agreement is void, as it renders the transaction, in effect , a 
purchase by the defaulter, and would so defeat the object of the law.  
(j) A, who is B ’s mukhtar, promises to exercise his in fluence, as such, with B in favour of C, and C promises to pay 1,000 
rupees to A. The agreement is voi d, because it is immoral.  
(k) A agrees to let her daughter to hire to B for concubinage. The agreement is void, because it is immoral, though the letting  
may not be punishable under the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) .  
Void agreements  
24.Agreement s void, if consideration s and objects unlawful in part .—If any part of a single 
consideration for one or more objects, or any one or any part of any one of several  considerations for a 
single object, is u nlawful, the agreement is void.  
Illustration  
A promises to superintend, on behalf of B, a legal manufacture of indigo, and an illegal traffic in other articles. B promises 
to pay to A a salary of 10,000 rupees a yea r. The agreement is void, the object of A ’s promise, and the consideration for B ’s 
promise, being in part unlawful.  
25. Agreement without consideration, void, unless i t is in writing and registered ,or is a promise 
to compensate for something done or is a promise to pay a debt barred by li mitation law .—An 
agreement made without consideration is void, unles s— 
(1) it is expressed in writing and registered under the law for the time being in force for the 
registration of 1[docu
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 17]
 in writing and registered under the law for the time being in force for the 
registration of 1[documents], and is made on account of  natural love and affection  between parties 
standing in a near rel ation to each other ; or unless  
(2) it is a promise to compensate, wholly or in part, a person who has already voluntarily done 
something for the promisor, or something which the promiso r wa s legally compellable to do; or 
unless ; 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 12 of  1891, s. 2 and the Second Schedule, Pt. I, for “assurances”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 18]
18 
 (3) it is a promise, made in writing and signed by the person to be charged therewith, or by his 
agent generally or specially authorized in that behalf, to pay wholly or in part a debt of which the 
creditor might hav e enforced payment but for the l aw for the limitation of suits.  
In any of these cases, such an agree ment is a contract.  
Explanation  1.—Nothing in this section shall affect the validity, as between the donor and do nee, of 
any gift actually made.  
Explanation  2.—An agreement to which the consent of the promisor is freely given is not void 
merely because the  consideration is inade quate ; but the inadequacy of the consideration may be taken into 
account by the Court in determining the question whether the consent  of the promisor was freely given.  
Illustrations  
(a) A promises, for no consideration, to give to B Rs. 1 ,000. This is a void agreement.  
(b) A, for natural love and affection, promises to give his son, B, Rs. 1,000. A puts his promise to B into writing and  registers it. This is a 
contract.  
(c) A finds B ’s purse and gives it to him. B promises to giv e A Rs. 50. This is a contract.  
(d) A supports B ’s infant son. B promises to pay A ’s expenses i n so doing. This is a contract.  
(e) A owes B Rs. 1,000, but the de bt is barred by the Limitation Act. A signs a written promise to pay B Rs. 500 on account o f the debt. 
This is a contract.  
(f) A agrees to sell a horse worth Rs. 1,000 for Rs. 10. A ’s consent to the agreement was freely given. The agreement is a contract 
notwithstanding the i nadequacy of the consideration.  
(g) A agrees to sell a horse worth Rs. 1,000 for Rs. 10. A denies that his consent to the agreement was freely given.  
The inadequacy of the consideration is a fact which the Court should take into accoun t in considering whether or not A ’s consent was freely 
given.  
26. Agreement  in restraint of marriage, void.—Every agreement in restraint of the marriage of any 
perso n, other than a mi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 18]
int of marriage, void.—Every agreement in restraint of the marriage of any 
perso n, other than a minor, is void.  
27. Agreem ent in restraint of trade, void.—Every agreement by which any one is restrained from 
exercising a lawful profession, trade or business of any kind, is to that extent void.  
Exception 1.—Saving of agreement not to carry on business of which good -will is sold .—One 
who sells the good -will of  a business may agree with the buyer to refrain from carrying on a similar 
business, within specified local limits, so long as the buyer, or any person deriving title to the good -will 
from him, carries on a like business therein, provided that such limits appear to the Court reasonable, 
regard being had  to the nature of the business.  
1*    *    *    *  *.  
28.Agreements in restra int of legal proceedings , void.—2[Every agreement, — 
(a) by which any party thereto is restricted absolutely from enforcing his rights under or in 
respect of any contract, by the usual legal proceedings in the ordinary tribunals, or which limits the 
time within which he may thus enforce his rights; or  
(b) which extinguishes the rights of any party thereto, or discharges any party t hereto, from any 
liability, under or in respect of any contract on the expiry of a specified period so as to restrict any 
party from enforcing his rights,  
is void to the extent.]  
Exception  1.—Saving of contract to refer to arbit ration dispute that may arise .—This section 
shall not render illegal a contract, by which two or more persons agree that any dispute which may arise 
between them in respect of any subject or class of subjects shall be referred to arbitration, and that only 
the amount awarded in s uch arbitration shall be recoverable in respect of the dispute so referred.  
3*****  
Exception  2.—Saving of contract to refer questions that have already arisen .—Nor shall this 
section render illegal any contract in writing, by which two or more persons agre e to refer
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 18]
l this 
section render illegal any contract in writing, by which two or more persons agre e to refer to arbitration 
any question between them which has already arisen, or affect any provision of any law in force for the 
time being a s to references to arbitration4. 
                                                           
1. Exceptions  2 and 3 rep. by Act 9 of 1932, s. 73 and  the Second  Schedule . 
2. Subs. by Act 1 of 1997, s. 2, for certain words (w.e.f. 8 -1-1997).  
3. The second clause of Exception 1 to section 28 rep. by Act 1 of 1877, s. 2 and Sch.  
4. Cf. the Arbitration Act, 1940 (10  of 1940) and the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), s. 389.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 19]
19 
 1[Exception  3.—Saving of a guarantee agreement of a bank or a financial institution .—This 
section shall not render illegal a contract in writing by which any bank or financial institution stipulate a 
term in a guarantee or any agreement making a provision for guarantee for extinguishment of the rights or 
discharge of any party  thereto from any liability under or in respect of such guarantee or agreement on the 
expiry of a specified period which is not less than one year from the date of occurring or non -occurring of 
a specified event for extinguishment or discharge of such part y from the said liability.  
Explanation .—(i) In Exception 3, the expression “bank ” means — 
(a) a “banking company ” as defined in clause ( c) of section 5 of the Banking Regulation  
Act, 1949(10 of 1949);  
(b) “a corresponding new bank ” as defined in clause ( da) of section 5 of the Banking Regulation 
Act, 1949(10 of 1949);  
(c) “State Bank of India ” constituted under section 3 of the State Bank of India Act, 1955  
(23 of 1955);  
(d) “a subsidiary bank ” as defined in clause ( k) of section 2 of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary 
Banks) Act, 1959(38 of 1959);  
(e) “a Regional Rural Bank ” established under section 3 of the Regional Rural Banks  
Act, 1976(21 of 1976);  
(f) “a Co -operative Bank ” as defined in clause ( cci) of section 5 of the Banking Regulation  
Act, 19 49(10 of 1949);  
(g) “a multi -State co -operative bank ” as defined in clause ( cciiia ) of section 5 of the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949(10 of 1949); and  
(ii) In Exception  3, the expression “a financial institution ” means any public financial institution 
withi n the meaning of section 4A of the Companies Act, 1956(1 of 1956).]  
29. Agreements void for uncertainty .—Agreements, the meaning of which is not certain, or capable 
of being made certain, are void.  
Illustrations  
(a) A agrees to sell to B “a hundred tons of  oil”. There is nothing whatever to show what kind of oil was inten
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 19]
 to sell to B “a hundred tons of  oil”. There is nothing whatever to show what kind of oil was intended. The 
agreement is void for uncertainty.  
(b) A agrees to sell to B one hundred tons of oil of a specified  description, known as an article of commerce. There is no 
uncertainty h ere to ma ke the agreement void.  
(c) A, who is a dealer in cocoanut -oil only, agrees to sell to B “one hundred tons of oil ”. The nature of A ’s trade affords an 
indication of the meaning of the words, and A has entered into a contract for the sale of on e hundred tons  of cocoanut -oil. 
(d) A agrees to sell to B “all the grain in my granary at Ramnagar ”. There is no uncertainty h ere to make the agreement void.  
(e) A agrees to sell B “one thousand maunds of rice at a price  to be fixed by C ”. As the price is capable of being made 
certain, there is no uncertainty h ere to make the agreement void.  
(f) A agrees to sell to B “my white horse for rupees five hundred or rupees one thousand ”. There is nothing to show which of 
the two prices was to be given. The agreement is void.  
30. Agreements by way of wager void .—Agre ements by way of wager are void ; and no suit shall be 
brought for recovering anything alleged to be won on any wager, or entrusted to any person to abide the 
result of any game or other uncertain ev ent on which any  wager is made.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 4 of 2013, s. 17 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 18 -1-2013).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 20]
20 
 Exception in favour of c ertain prizes for horse -racing .—This section shall not be deemed to 
render unlawful a subscription or contribution, or agreement to subscribe or contribute, made or entered 
into for or toward any plate, prize or sum of money, of the value or amount of five hundred rupees or 
upwards, to be awarded to the winner or winners of any horse -race.  
Section 294A of the Indian Penal Code not affected .—Nothing in this section shall be deemed to 
legalize any transaction connected with horse -racing, to which the provisions of section 294A of the 
Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860)  apply.  
CHAPTER III  
OF CONTINGENT CONTRACTS  
31. “Contingent contract ” defined .—A “contingent contract is a contract to do or not to do 
something, if some event, collateral to such con tract, does or does not happen.  
Illustration  
A  contracts to pay B Rs. 10,000 if B ’s house is burnt. This is a contingent contract.  
32. Enforcement of contracts con tingent on an event happening .—Contingent contracts to do or 
not to do anything if an uncertain future event happens cannot be enforced by law unless and  until that 
event has happened.  
If the event becomes impossib le, such contracts become void.  
Illustrations  
(a) A makes a contract with B to buy B ’s horse if A survives C. This contract cannot be enforced by law unless and until C 
dies in A ’s lifetime.  
(b) A makes a contract with B to sell a horse to B at a specified price, if C, to whom the horse has been offered, refuses to 
buy him. The contract cannot be enfor ced by law unless and un til C refuses to buy the horse.  
(c) A contracts to pay B a sum of money when B marries C. C dies without being married t o B. The contract becomes void.  
33. Enforcement of contracts conting ent on an event not happening .—Contingent contracts to do 
or not to do anything if an uncertain future event does not happen can be enforced when the happening of 
that event beco mes impossible, and not before.  
Il
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 20]
t happen can be enforced when the happening of 
that event beco mes impossible, and not before.  
Illustration  
A agrees to pay B a sum of money if a certain ship does not return. The ship is sunk. The contract can b e enforced when the 
ship sinks.  
34.When event on which contract is contingent to be deemed impossible, if it is the future 
conduct of a living person .—If the future event on which a contract is contingent is the way in which  a 
person will act at an u nspecified time, the event shall be considered to become impossible when such 
person does anything which renders it impossible that he should so act within any definite time, or 
otherwise tha n under further contingencies.  
Illustra tion 
A agrees to pay B a sum of money if B marries C. C marries D. The marriage of B to C must now be considered impossible, 
although it is possible that D may die and  that C may afterwards marry B.  
35.When contracts become void which are contingent on hap pening of spe cified event within 
fixed time .—Contingent contracts to do or not to do anything if a specified uncertain event happens 
within a fixed time become void if, at the expiration of the time fixed, such event has not happened, or if, 
before the time fixed,  such event becomes impossible.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 21]
21 
 When contracts may be enforced , which are contingent on specified event not  happening within 
fixed time .—Contingent contracts to do or not to do anything , if a specified uncertain event does not 
happen within a fi xed time may be enforced by law when the time fixed has expired and such event has 
not happened or, before the time fixed has expired, if it becomes certain that such event will not happen.  
Illustrations  
(a) A promises to pay B a sum of money if a certain ship returns within a year. The contract may be enforced if the ship 
returns within the year, and becomes void if the ship is burnt within the year.  
(b) A promises to pay B a sum of money if a certain ship does not return within a year. The contract may be enforced if the 
ship does not return within the yea r, or is burnt within the year.  
36. Agreement contin gent on impossible events void .—Contingent agreements to do or not to do 
anything, if an impossible ev ent happens, are void, whether the impossibility of the event is known or not 
to the parties to the agreement at the time when it is made.  
Illustrations  
(a) A agrees to pay B 1,000 rupees if two straight lines should enclose a space. The agreement is void.  
(b) A agrees to pay B 1,000 rupees if B will marry A ’s daughter C. C was dead at the time of the agreement. The agre ement 
is void.  
CHAPTER IV  
OF THE PERFORMANCE OF CONTRACTS  
Contracts which must be performed  
37. Obli gation of parties to contracts .—The parties to a contract must either perform, or offer to 
perform, their respective promises, unless such performance  is dispensed with or excused under the 
provisions of  this Act, or of any other law.  
Promises bind the representatives of the promisors in  case of the death of such promisors before 
perfor mance, unless a contrary inten tion appears from the contract.  
Illustrations  
(a) A promises to deliver goods to B on a certain day on payment of Rs. 1,000. A dies before that day. A ’s representati
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 21]
liver goods to B on a certain day on payment of Rs. 1,000. A dies before that day. A ’s representatives 
are bound to deliver the goods to B, and B is bound to pay the Rs. 1,000 to A ’s representatives.  
(b) A promises to paint a picture for B by a certain day, at a certain price. A dies before the day. The contract cannot be 
enforced either by A ’s representatives or by B.  
38. Effect of refusal to accept offer of performance .—Where a promisor has made an offer of 
performance to the promisee, and the offer has not been accepted, the promisor is not responsible for  
non-performance, nor does he thereby lose  his rights under the contract.  
Every such offer must fu lfil the following conditions: — 
(1) it must be unconditional;  
(2) it must be made at a proper time and place, and under such circumstances that the person to 
whom it is made may have a reasonable oppo rtunity of ascertaining that the person by whom it is made is 
able and willing there and then to do the whole of what h e is bound by his promise to do;  
(3) if the offer is an offer to deliver anything to the promisee, the promisee must have a 
reasonable op portunity of seeing that the thing offered is the thing which the promisor is b ound by his 
promise to deliver.  
An offer to one of several joint promisees has the same legal conseque nces as an offer to all of them.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 22]
22 
 Illustration  
A contracts to deliver to B  at his warehouse, on the 1st March, 1873, 100 bales of cotton of a particular quality. In order to 
make an offer of a performance with the effect stated in this section, A must bring the cotton to B ’s warehouse, on the appointed 
day, under such circumstan ces that B may have areasonable opportunity of satisfying himself that the thing offered is cotton of 
the quality contracted for , and that there are 100 bales.  
39. Effect of refusal of party to p erform promise wholly .—When a party to a contract has refused  
to perform, or disabled himself from performing, his promise in its entirety, the promisee may put an end 
to the contract, unless he has signified, by words or conduct, his acquiescence in its c ontinuance.  
Illustrations  
(a) A, a singer, enters into a contract with B, the manager of a theatre, to sing at his theatre two nights in every week during 
the next two months, and B engages to pay her 100 rupees for each night ’s performance. On the sixth night A wilfully absents 
herself from the theatre. B is at  liberty to put an end to the contract.  
(b) A, a singer, enters into a contract with B, the manager of a theatre, to sing at h is theatre two night ’s in every week during 
the next two months, and B engages to pay her at the rate of 100 rupees for  each night. On the sixth night, A wilfully absents 
herself. With the assent of B, A sings on the seventh night. B has signified his acquiescence in the continuance of the contr act, 
and cannot now put an end to it, but is entitled to compensation for the d amage sustained by him through A ’s failure to sing on 
the sixth night.  
By w hom contracts must be performed  
40.Person by w hom promise is to be performed .—If it appears from the nature of the case that it 
was the intention of the parties to any contract that any promise contained in it should be performed by 
the promisor himself, such promise must be performed by the promisor. In other c
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 22]
ld be performed by 
the promisor himself, such promise must be performed by the promisor. In other cases, the promisor or  
his representatives may employ a competent person to perform it.  
Illustrations  
(a) A promises to pay B a sum of money. A may perform this promise, either by personally paying the money to B or by 
causing it to be paid to B by another ; and, if A dies before the time appointed for payment, his representatives must perform the 
promise, or empl oy some proper person to do so.  
(b) A promises to paint a picture for B. A must p erform this promise personally.  
41. Effect of accepting  performance from third pers on.—When a promisee accepts performance 
of the promise from a third person, he cannot afterwards e nforce it against the promisor.  
42. Devolution of joint liabilities .—When two or more persons have made a joint promise, then, 
unless a contrary intention appears by the contract, all such persons, during their joint lives, and, after the 
death of any of them, his representative jointly with the survivor or survivors, and, after the death of the 
last survivor, the representatives of all jo intly, must fulfil the promise.  
43.Any one of joint promiso rs may be compelled to perform .—When two or more persons make a 
joint promise, the promisee may, in the absence of express agreemen t to the contrary, compel any 1[one o r 
more] of such joint promisors to pe rform the whole of the promise.  
Each pr omisor may compel contribution .—Each of two or more joint promisors may compel every 
other joint promisor to contribute equally with himself to the performance of the promise, unless a 
contrary inten tion appears from the contra ct. 
Sharing of l oss by default in contribution .—If any one of two or more joint promisors makes 
default in such contribution, the remaining joint promisors must bear the loss arising from such def ault in 
equal shares.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 12 of 1
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 22]

equal shares.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and the Second Schedule, Pt. I, for “one”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 23]
23 
 Explanation .—Nothing in this section shall prevent a surety from recovering from his principal, 
payments made by the surety on behalf of the principal, or entitle the principal to recover anything from 
the surety on account of payment s made by the principal.  
Illustrations  
(a) A, B and C jointly promise to pay D 3,000 rupees. D may compel either A or B or C to pay him 3,000 rupees.  
(b) A, B and C jointly promise to pay D the sum of 3,000 rupees. C is compelled to pay the whole. A is insolvent, but his 
assets are sufficient to pay one -half of his debts. C is entitled to receive 500 rupees from A ’s estate, and 1,250 rupees from B.  
(c) A, B and C are under a joint promise to pay D 3,000 rupees. C is unable to pay anything, and A is compelled to pay the 
whole. A is entitled to rece ive 1,500 rupees from B.  
(d) A, B and C are under a joint promise to pay D 3,000 rupees, A and B being only sureties for C. C fails to pay. A and B 
are compelled to pay the whole sum. They are entitled to recover it from C.  
44.Effect of  release of one join t promisor .—Where two or more persons have made a joint promise, 
a release of one of such joint promisors by the promisee does not discharge the other join t promisor or 
joint promisors ; neither does it free the joint promisors so released from responsibility to the other jo int 
promisor or joint promisors.1 
45. Devolution of joint rights .—When a person has made a promise to two or more persons jointly, 
then, unless a contrary intention appears from the contract, the right to claim performance res ts, as 
between him and them, with them during their joint lives, and, after the death of any of them, with the 
represent ative of such deceased person j ointly with the survivor or survivors, and, after the death of the 
last survivor, with the representative s of all jointly.2 
Illustration  
A, in consideration of 5,000 rupees, lent to him by B and C, promises B and C jointly to repay them that sum with intere
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 23]
of 5,000 rupees, lent to him by B and C, promises B and C jointly to repay them that sum with interest 
on a day specified. B dies. The right to claim performance rests with B ’s representative jointly with  C during C ’s life, and after 
the death of C with the repr esentatives of B and C jointly.  
Time and place for performance  
46. Time for performance of promise, when no application is to be made and no time is 
specified .—Where, by the contract, a promisor is to perform his promise without application by the 
promisee, and no time for performance is specified, the engagement must be perf ormed within a 
reasonable time.  
Explanation .—The question “what is a reasonable time” is, in each parti cular case, a question of fact.  
47.Time and place for performance of promise, where time is specified  and no application to be 
made .—When a promise is to be performed on a certain day, and the promisor has undertaken to perform 
it without application by the promisee, the promiso r may perform it at any time during the usual hours of 
business on such day and at the place at which the promise o ught to be performed.  
Illustration  
A promises to deliver goods at B ’s warehouse on the first January. On that day A brings the goods to B ’s warehouse, but 
after the usual hour for closing it, and they are not received. A has not performed his promise.  
48. Application for performance on certain day to be at proper time and place .—When a 
promise is to be performed on a certain day, and the pr omisor has not undertaken to perform it without 
application by the p romisee, it is the duty of the promisee to apply for performance at a proper place and 
within the usual hours of business.  
                                                           
1. See s. 138, infra . 
2. For an Exception  to s. 45 in case of Government securities, see the Publ ic Debt Act, 1944 (18 of 1944), s. 8. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 23]
 1944), s. 8. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 24]
24 
 Explanation .—The question “what is a proper time and place ” is, in each particular case, a question 
of fact.  
49. Place for performance of promise, where no application to be made and no place fixed for 
performance .—When a promise is to be performed without application by the promisee, and no place is 
fixed for the performance of it, it is the duty of the promisor to apply to the promisee to appoint a 
reasonable place for the performance of the promise, a nd to perform it at such place.  
Illustration  
A undertakes to deliver a thousand maunds of jute to B on a fixed day . A must apply to B to appoint a reasonable place for 
the purpose of receiving it, and must d eliver it to him at such place.  
50. Performance in manner or at time prescr ibed or sanctioned by promisee .—The performance 
of any promise may be made in any manner , or at any time which the promisee prescribes or sanctions.  
Illustrations  
(a) B owes A 2,000 rupees. A desires B to pay the amount to A ’s account with C, a banker. B, who also banks with C, 
orders the amount to be transferred from his account to A ’s credit, and this is done by C. Afterwards, and before A knows of the 
transfer, C fails. There has been a good payment by B . 
(b) A and B are mutually indebted. A and B settle an account by setting off one item against another, and B pays A the 
balance found  to be due from him upon such settlement. This amounts to a payment by A and B, respectively, of the sums which 
they ow ed to each other.  
(c) A owes B 2,000 rupees. B accepts some of A ’s goods in reduction of the debt. The delivery of go ods operates as a pa rt 
payment.  
(d) A desires B, who owes him Rs. 100, to send him a note for Rs. 100 by post. The debt is discharged as soon as B puts into 
the post a letter containin g the note duly addressed to A.  
Performance of reciprocal promises  
51.Promisor not bound to perform, unless reciprocal promise e ready and willing to  
perform .—When a contract consists of
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 24]
to perform, unless reciprocal promise e ready and willing to  
perform .—When a contract consists of reciprocal promises to be simultaneously performed, no promisor 
need perform his promise unless the promisee is ready and willing to perform his reciprocal promi se. 
Illustrations  
(a) A and B contract that A shall deliver goods to B t o be paid for by B on delivery.  
A need not deliver the goods, unless B is ready and willing to  pay for the goods on delivery.  
B need not pay for the goods, unless A is ready and willing to deliver them on payment . 
(b) A and B contract that A shall deliver goods to B at a price to be paid by instalments, the first ins talment to be paid on 
delivery.  
A need not deliver, unless B is ready and willing to pay the first instalment on del ivery.  
B need not pay the first instalment, unless A is ready and willing to deliver the goods on p ayment of the first instalment . 
52.Order of perf ormance of reciprocal promises .—Where the order in which reciprocal promises 
are to be performed is expressl y fixed by the contract, they shall b e performed in that order; and where the 
order is not expressly fixed by the contract, they shall be performed in that order which the natu re of the 
transaction requires.  
Illustrations  
(a) A and B contract that A shall build a house for B at a fixed price. A ’s promise to build the house m ust be performed 
before B ’s promise  to pay for it.  
(b) A and B contract that A shall make over his stock -in-trade to B at a fixed price,  and B promises to give security for the 
payment of the money. A ’s promise need not be performed until the security is given, for the nature of the transaction requires 
that A should have security b efore he delivers up his stock.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 25]
25 
 53. Liability of party preventing event on which the contract is to take effect .—When a contract 
contains reciprocal promises, and one party to the contract prevents the other from performing his 
promise, the contract becomes voidable at the option of the party so prevented; and he is e ntitled to 
compensation 1from the other party for any loss which he may sustain in consequence of the n on-
performance of the contract.  
Illustration  
A and B contract that B shall execute certain work for A for a thousand rupees. B is ready and willing to execute the work 
accordingly, but A preven ts him from doing so. The contract  is voidable at the option of B ; and, if he elects to rescind it, he is 
entitled to recover from A compensation for any loss which he has i ncurred by its non -performance.  
54. Effect of default as to that promise which should be first performed, in contract con sisting 
of reciprocal promises .—When a contract consists of reciprocal promises, such that one of them cannot 
be performed, or that its performance cannot be claimed till the other has been performed, and the 
promi sor of the promise last mentioned fails to perform it, such promisor cannot claim the performance of 
the reciprocal promise, and must make compensation to the other party to the contract for any loss which 
such other party may sustain by the n on-performanc e of the contract.  
Illustrations  
(a) A hires B ’s ship to take in and convey, from Calcutta to the Mauritius, a cargo to be provided by A, B receiving a certain 
freight for its conveyance. A does not provide any cargo for the ship. A cannot claim the performance of B ’s promise, and must 
make compensation to B for the loss which B sustains by the n on-performance of the contract.  
(b) A contracts with B to execute certain builder ’s work for a fixed price, B supplying the scaffolding and timber necessary 
for the work. B refuses to furnish any scaffolding or timber, and the work cannot be executed. A nee
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 25]
for the work. B refuses to furnish any scaffolding or timber, and the work cannot be executed. A need not execute the work, an d 
B is bound to make compensation to A for any loss caused to him by the n on-performance of the contract.  
(c) A contracts with B to  deliver to him, at a specified price, certain merchandise on board a ship which cannot arrive for a 
month, and B engages to pay for the merchandise within a week from the date of the contract. B does not pay within the week. 
A’s promise to deliver need no t be performed , and B must make compensation.  
(d) A promises B to sell him one hundred bales of merchandise, to be delivered next day, and B promises A to pay for them 
within a month. A does not deliver according to his promise. B ’s promise to pay need not  be performed , and A must make 
compensation.  
55. Effect of failure to perform at fixed time, in contr act in which time is essential .—When a 
party to a contract promises to do a certain thing at or before a specified time, or certain things at or 
before specified times, and fails to do any such thing at or before the specified time, the contract, or so 
much of it as has not been performe d, becomes voidable at the option of the promisee, if the intention of 
the parties was that time should be of the essence of the contract.  
Effect of such fail ure when time is not essential .—If it was not the intention of the parties that time 
should be of the essence of the contract, the contract does not become voidable by the failure to do such 
thing at or before the specified time ; but the promisee is entitled to compensation from the promisor for 
any loss occ asioned to him by such failure.  
Effect of acceptance of performance at ti me other than that agreed upon .—If, in case of a 
contract voidable on account of the promisor ’s failure to perform his promise at the time agreed, the 
promisee accepts performance of such promise at any time other than that a greed, the promisee cannot 
claim 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 25]
accepts performance of such promise at any time other than that a greed, the promisee cannot 
claim compensation for any loss occasioned by the non -performance of the promise at the time agreed, 
unless,  at the time of such acceptance, he gives notice to the promisor of his intention to do so.2 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Prades h 
Amendment of section 55 .—In section 55 of the Principal Act, in the third paragraph, for the words 
“unless at the time of such acceptance he gives notice to the promiser of his intention to do so”, the words 
“where at the time of such acceptance he has waived his right to do so” shall be substituted.”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh 57 of 1976, s. 26]  
                                                           
1. See s. 73, infra.  
2. C.f. ss. 62 and 63, infra . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 26]
26 
 56. Agreement to do impossible act .—An agreement to do an act impossible in itself is void.  
Contract to do an act afterwards be coming impossible or unlawful .—A contract to do an act 
which, after the contract is made, becomes impossible, or, by reason of some event which the promisor 
could not prevent, unlawful, becomes void when the act becomes impossible or unlawful.1 
Compensation for loss through non -performa nce of act known to be impossible or unlawful .—
Where one person has promised to do something which he knew, or, with reasonable diligence, might 
have known, and which the promisee did not know, to be impossible or unlawful, such promisor must 
make compensa tion to such promisee for any loss which such promisee sustains through the non-
performance of the promise.  
Illustrations  
(a) A agrees with B to discover treasure b y magic. The agreement is void.  
(b) A and B contract to marry each other. Before the time fixed for the marriage,  A goes mad. The contract becomes void.  
(c) A contracts to marry B, being already married to C, and  being forbidden by the law to which he is subject to p ractise 
polygamy, A must make compensation to B for the loss caused to her by the non-performance of his promise.  
(d) A contracts to take in cargo for B at a foreign port. A ’s Government afterwards declares war against the country in which 
the port is situ ated. The contract becomes void when war is decla red. 
(e) A contracts to act at a theatre for six months in consideration of a sum paid in advance by B. On several occasions A is 
too ill to act. The contract to act o n those occasions becomes void.  
57.Recip rocal promise to do things legal,  and also other things illegal .—Where persons 
reciprocally promise, firstly, to do certain things which are legal, and, secondly, under specified 
circumstances , to do certain other things which are illegal, the first set of promises is a contract, but the 
second is a void agreement.  
Illustration  
A
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 26]
al, the first set of promises is a contract, but the 
second is a void agreement.  
Illustration  
A and B agree that A shall sell B a house for 10,000 rupees, but that, if B uses it as a gambling house, he sh all pay A 50,000 
rupees for it.  
The first set of reciprocal promises, namely, to sell the house and to pay 10,00 0 rupees for it, is a contract.  
The second set is for an unlawful object, namely, that B may use the house as a gambling house, and is a void agreement.  
58. Alternative pro mise, one branch being illegal .—In the case of an alternative promise, one 
branch of which is legal and the other illegal, the legal branch alone can be enforced.  
Illustration  
A and B agree that A shall pay B 1,000 rupees , for which B shall afterwards deliver to A  either rice or smuggled opium.  
This is a valid contract to deliver rice, and a void agreement as to the o pium.  
Appropriation of payments  
59.Application of payment where debt  to be discharged is indicated .—Where a debtor, owing 
several distinct debts to one person, makes a payment to him, either with express intimation, or under 
circumstances implying , that the payment is to be applied to the discharge of some particular debt, the 
payment, if accepte d, must be appli ed accordingly.  
  
                                                           
1. See s. 65, infra . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 27]
27 
 Illustrations  
(a) A owes B, among other debts, 1,000 rupees upon a promissory note which falls due on the  first June. He owes B no other debt of that 
amount. On the first June , A pays to B 1,000 rupees. The payment is to be applied to the  discharge of the promissory note.  
(b) A owes to B, among other debts, the sum of 567 rupees. B writes to A and demands payment  of this sum. A sends to B 567 rupees. This 
payment is to be applied to the discharge of the debt of which B had demanded payment . 
60. Application of payment where debt to be discharged is not indicated .—Where the debtor has 
omitted to intimate and th ere are no other circumstances indicating to which debt the payment is to be 
applied, the creditor may apply it at his discretion to any lawful debt actually due and payable to him from 
the debtor, whether its recovery is or is not barred by the law in force for the time being a s to the 
limitation of suits.  
61. Application of payment whe re neither party appropriates .—Where neither party  makes any 
appropriation , the payment shall be applied in discharge of the debts in order of time,  whether they are or 
are not barred by the law in force for the time being as to the limitation of suits. If the debts are of equal 
standing, the payment shal l be applied in di scharge of each proportionably . 
Contracts which need not be perfo rmed  
62. Effect of novation, rescissio n, and alteration of contract .—If the parties to a contract agree to 
substitute a new contract for it, or to rescind or alter it, the original contract , need not be performed.  
Illustrations  
(a) A owes money to B under a contract. It is agreed between A, B and C that B shall thenceforth accept C as his debtor, instea d of A. The 
old debt of A to B is at an end, and a new debt f rom C to B has been contracted.  
(b) A owes B 10,000 rupees. A enters into an arrangement with B and gives B a mortgage of his (A ’s) estate for 5,000 rupees in place of the 
debt of 10,0
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 27]
nt with B and gives B a mortgage of his (A ’s) estate for 5,000 rupees in place of the 
debt of 10,000 rupees. This is a new con tract and extinguishes the old.  
(c) A owes B 1,000 rupe es under a c ontract. B owes C 1,000 rupees B orders A to credit C with 1,000 rupees in his books, but C does not 
assent to the arrangement. B still owes C 1,000 rupees, and no new contract has been entered into.  
63. Promise e may dispense with or  remit performance of promise e.—Every  promisee may 
dispense with or re mit, wholly or in part, the performance of the promise e made to him, or may extend the 
time for such performance1,or may accept instead of it any sa tisfaction which he thinks fit.  
Illustrations  
(a) A promises to paint a picture for B. B afterwards forbids him to do so. A is no longe r bound to perform the promise.  
(b) A owes B 5,000 rupees. A pays to B, and B accepts, in satisfaction of the whole debt, 2,000 rupees paid at the time a nd place at which 
the 5,000 rupees were payable. The whole debt is discharged.  
(c) A owes B 5,000 rupees. C pays to B 1,000 rupees, and B accepts them, in satisfaction of his claim on A. This payment is a d ischarge of 
the wh ole claim2. 
(d) A owes B, under.  a contract, a sum of money, the amount of which has not been ascertained. A , without ascertaining the amount, gives 
to B, and B, in satisfaction thereof, accepts, the sum of 2,000 rupees. This is a discharge of the whole de bt, whatever may be its amount.  
(e) A owes B 2,000 rupees, and is also indebted to other creditors. A makes an arrangement with his creditor s, including B, to pay them a 
3[composition] of eight annas in the rupee upon their respective demands. Payment to B of 1,000 rupees is a discharge of B’s demand.  
64. Consequences of r escission of voidable contract .—When a person at whose option a contract is 
voidable rescinds it, the other party thereto need not perform any promise therein contained in which he is 
promisor. The party rescinding a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 27]
reto need not perform any promise therein contained in which he is 
promisor. The party rescinding a  voidable contract shall, if he have received any benefit thereunder from 
another party to such contract, restore such benefit, so far as may be, to the person from whom it was 
received.4 
                                                           
1. But see s. 135, infra . 
2. See s. 41, supra . 
3. Subs. by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and the Second Schedule, Pt. I,  for “compensation”.  
4. See s. 75, infra . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 28]
28 
 65. Obligation of person who has received advantage under void agreem ent, or contract that 
becomes void .—When an agreement is discovered to be void, or when a contract becomes void, any 
person who has received any advantage under such agreement or contract is bound to restore it, or to 
make compensation for it to the p erson  from whom he received it.  
Illustrations  
(a) A pays B 1,000 rupees  in consideration of B ’s promising to marry C, A ’s daughter. C is dead at the time of the promise. 
The agreement is void, but B  must repay A the 1,000 rupees.  
(b) A contracts with B to deliver to him 250 maunds of rice before the first of May. A delivers 130 maunds only before that 
day,  and none after. B retains the 130 maunds after the first of May.  He is bound to pay A for them.  
(c) A, a singer, contracts with B, the manager of a theatre, to sing at his theatre for two nights in every week during the next 
two months, and B engages to pay her a hundred rupees for each night ’s performance. On the sixth night, A wilfully absents 
herself from the theatre, and B, in consequence, rescinds the contract. B must pay A for the fiv e nights on which she had sung.  
(d) A contracts to sing for B at a concert for 1,000 rupees, which are paid in advance. A is too ill to sing. A is not bound to  
make compensation to B for the loss of the profits which B would have made if A had been able to sing, but must refund to B the 
1,000 r upees paid in advance.  
66. Mode of communicating or revoking r escission of voidable contract .—The rescission of a 
voidable contract may be communicated or revoked in the same manner, and subject to the same rules, as 
apply to the communication or revocation of a proposal1. 
67. Effect of neglect of promisee to afford promisor reasonable facilities f or performance .—If 
any promisee neglects or refuses to afford  the promisor reasonable facilities for the performance of his 
promise, the promisor is excused by such neglect or refusa
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 28]
le facilities for the performance of his 
promise, the promisor is excused by such neglect or refusal as to any non -performance caused thereby.  
Illustration  
A contracts with B to repair B ’s house.  
B neglects or refuses to point out to A the places in w hich his house requires repair.  
A is excused for the non -performance of the contract if it is caused by such neglector refusal.  
CHAPTER V  
OF CERTAIN RELATIONS RESEMBLING THOSE CR EATED BY CONTRACT  
68. Claim for necessaries supplied to person incapable of contracting, or on hi s account .—If a 
person, incapable of entering into a contract, or any one whom he is legally bound to support,  is supplied 
by another person with necessaries suited to his condition in life, the person who has furni shed such 
supplies is entitled to be reimbursed from the property of such incapable person.2 
Illustrations  
(a) A supplies B, a lunatic, with necessaries suitable to his condition in life. A is entitled to be reimbursed from B ’s 
property.  
(b) A supplies the  wife and children of B, a lunatic, with necessaries suitable to their condition in life. A is entitled to be 
reimbursed from B ’s property.  
69.Reimbursement of person paying money due by another, in pay ment of which he is 
interested .—A person who is interested in the payment of money which another is bound by law to pay, 
and who therefore pays it, is entitled  to be reimbursed by the other.  
  
                                                           
1. See ss. 3 and 5, supra . 
2. The prope rty of a Government ward in Madhya Pradesh  is not liable under this section, see the C.P. Court of Wards Act, 1899 
(24 of 1899), s. 31( 1). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 29]
29 
 Illustration  
B holds land in Bengal, on a lease granted by A, the zamindar. The revenue payable by A to the Government being in arrear, 
his land is advertised for sale by the Government. Under the revenue law, the consequence of such sale will be the annulment of 
B’s lease. B, to prevent the sale and the consequent annulment of his own lease, pays to the Governm ent the sum due from A. A 
is bound to mak e good to B the amount so paid.  
70.Obligation of person enjoying benefit of non -gratuitous act .—Where a person lawfully does 
anything for another person, or delivers anything to him, not intending to do so gratuitou sly, and such 
other person enjoys the benefit thereof, the latter is bound to make compensation to the former in respect 
of, or to restore, the thing so done or delivered1. 
Illustrations  
(a) A, a tradesman, leaves goods at B ’s house by mistake. B treats the goods as his own.  He is bound to pay A for them.  
(b) A saves B ’s property from fire. A is not entitled to compensation from B, if the circumstances show that h e intended to 
act gratuitously.  
71.Res ponsibility of finder of goods .—A person who finds goods belonging to another, and takes 
them into his custody, is subject to the same responsibility as a bailee2. 
72. Liability of person to whom money is paid , or thing delivere d, by mistake or under 
coercion .—A person to whom money has been paid, or anyth ing delivered, by mistake or under coe rcion, 
must repay or return it.  
Illustrations  
(a)A and  B jointly owe 100 rupees to C, A alone pays the amount to C, and B, not knowing this fact, pays 100 rupees over 
again to C. C is bound to repay the amount to B.  
(b)A railway company refuses to deliver up certain goods to the consignee, except upon the payment of an illegal charge for 
carriage. The consignee pays the sum charged in order to obtain the goods. He is entitled to recover so much of the cha rge as was 
illegally excessive.  
CHAPTER VI  
OF THE CON SEQUENCES
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 29]
d to recover so much of the cha rge as was 
illegally excessive.  
CHAPTER VI  
OF THE CON SEQUENCES OF BREACH OF CONTRACT  
73.Compensation for loss or damage  caused by breach of contract .—When a contract has been 
broken, the party who suffers by such breach is entitled to receive, from the party who has broken the 
contract, compensation for any loss or damage caused to him thereby, which naturally arose in the usual 
course of things from such breach, or which the parties knew, when they made the contract, to be likely t o 
result from the breach of it.  
Such  compensation is not to be given for any remote and indirect loss or damage sus tained by reason 
of the breach.  
Compensation for failure to discharge obligation resemb ling those created by contract .—When 
an obligation resembling those created by contract ha s been incurred and has not been discharged, any 
person injured by the failure to discharge it is entitled to receive the same compensation from the party in 
default, as if such person had contracted to discharge it and had broken his contract.  
Explanation .—In estimating the loss or damage arising from a breach of contract, the means which 
existed of remedying the incon venience caused by the non -performance of the contr act must be taken into 
account.  
  
                                                           
1. As to suits by minors under s. 70 in Presidency Small Cause Courts, see the Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882  
(15 of 1882), s. 32.  
2. See ss. 151 and 152, infra . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 30]
30 
 Illustrations  
(a)A contracts to sell and deliver 50 maunds of saltpetre to B, at a certain price to be paid on delivery. A breaks his promise. 
B is entitled to receive from A, by way of compensation, the sum, if any, by which the contract price falls short of the pric e for 
which B might have obtained 50 mau nds of saltpetre of like quality at the time when the saltpetr e ought to have been delivered.  
(b)A hires B ’s ship to go to Bombay, and there take on board, on the first of January , a cargo , which A is to provide, and to 
bring it to Calcutta, the freight to  be paid when earned. B ’s ship does not go to Bombay, but A has opportunities of procuring 
suitable conveyance for the cargo upon terms as advantageous as those on which he had chartered the ship. A avails himself of  
those opportunities, but is put to trou ble and expense in doing so. A is entitled to receive compensation from B in respe ct of such 
trouble and expense.  
(c)A contracts to buy of B, at a stated price, 50 maunds of rice, no time being fixed for delivery. A afterwards informs B that  
he will not ac cept the rice if tendered to him. B is entitled to receive from A, by way of compensation, the amount, if any, by 
which the contract price exceeds that which B can obtain for the rice at the time when A inform s B that he will not accept it.  
(d) A contracts  to buy B ’s ship for 60,000 rupees, but breaks his promise. A must pay to B, by way of compensation, the 
excess, if any, of the contract price over the price which B can obtain for the ship at the  time of the breach of promise.  
(e) A, the owner of a boat, contracts with B to take a cargo of jute to Mirzapur, for sale at that place, starting on a specified 
day. The boat, owing to some avoidable cause, does not start at the time appointed, whereby the arrival of the cargo at Mirza pur 
is delayed beyond the tim e when it would have arrived if the boat had sailed according to the contract. After that date, and before 
the
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 30]
ould have arrived if the boat had sailed according to the contract. After that date, and before 
the arrival of the cargo, the price of jute falls. The measure of the compensation payable to B by A is the difference betwee n the 
price which B coul d have obtained for the cargo at Mirzapur at the time when it would have arrived if forwarded in due course, 
and its market price at the  time when it actually arrived.  
(f) A contracts to repair B ’s house in a certain manner, and receives payment in advance . A repairs the house, but not 
according to contract. B is entitled to recover from A the cost of making the r epairs conform to the contract.  
(g) A contracts to let his ship to B for a year, from the first of January, for a certain price. Freights rise, an d, on the first of 
January, the hire obtainable for the ship is higher than the contract price. A breaks his promise. He must pay to B, by way o f 
compensation, a sum equal to the difference between the contract price and the price for which B could hire a similar ship for a 
year on  and from the first of January.  
(h) A contracts to supply B with a certain quantity of iron at a fixed price, being a higher price than that for which A could 
procure and deliver the iron. B wrongfully refuses to receive the iron. B must pay to A, by way of compensation, the differen ce 
between the contract price of the iron and the sum for which A could have obtained and delivered it.  
(i) A delivers to B, a common carrier, a machine, to be conveyed, without delay, to A ’s mill   informing B that his mill is 
stopped for want of the machine. B unreasonably delays the delivery of the machine, and A, in consequence, loses a profitable 
contract with the Government. A is entitled to receive from B, by way of compensation, the average amount of profit which 
would have b een made by the working of the mill during the time that delivery of it was delayed, but not the loss sustained 
through the l oss of the Government contract
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 30]
delivery of it was delayed, but not the loss sustained 
through the l oss of the Government contract.  
(j) A, having contracted with B to supply B with 1,000 tons of iron at 100 rupees a ton, to be delivered at a stated time, 
contracts with C for the pur chase of 1,000 tons of iron at 80 rupees a ton, telling C that he does so for the purpose of performing 
his contract with B. C fails to perform his contract with A, who cannot procure other iron, and B, in consequence, rescinds the 
contract. C must pay to A 20,000 rupees, being the profit which A would have made by the perf ormance of his contract with B.  
(k) A contracts with B to make and deliver to B, by a fixed day, for a specified price, a certain piece of machinery. A does 
not deliver the piece of machinery at the time specified, and in consequence of this, B is obliged to procure another at a high er 
price than that which he was to have paid to A, and is prevented from performing a contract which B had made with a third 
person  at the time of his contract with A (but which had not been then communicated to A), and is compelled to make 
compensation for breach of that contract. A must pay to B, by way of compensation, the differ ence between the contract price of 
the p iece of machi nery and the sum paid by B for another, but not the sum paid by B to the third  person by way of compensation.  
(l)A, a builder, contracts to erect and finish a house by the first of January, in order that B may give possession of it at th at 
time to C, to wh om B has contracted to let it. A is informed of the contract between B and C. A builds the house so badly that, 
before the first of January, it falls down and has to be re -built by B, who, in consequence, loses the rent which he was to have 
received from C , and is obliged to make compensation to C for the breach of his contract. A must make compensation to B for 
the cost of rebuilding the house, for the rent lost, and for the compensation made to C.  
(m)A sell
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 30]
the cost of rebuilding the house, for the rent lost, and for the compensation made to C.  
(m)A sells certain merchandise to B, warranting it to be of a particular quality, and B, in reliance upon this warranty, sells it 
to C with a similar warranty. The goods prove to be not according to the warranty, and B becomes liable to pay C a sum of 
money by way of compensation. B is entitled to be reimbursed this sum by A.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 31]
31 
 (n)A contracts to pay a sum of money to B on a day specified. A does  not pay the money on that day , B, in consequence of 
not receiving the money on that day, is unable to pay his debts, and is totally ruined. A is not liable to make good to B anything 
except the principal sum he contracted to pa y, together with interest up to the day of payment.  
(o)A contracts to deliver 50 maunds of saltpetre to B on the first of January, at a certain pr ice. B afterwards, before the first 
of January, contracts to sell the saltpetre to C at a price higher than the market price of the first of January. A breaks hi s promise.  
In estimating the compensation payable by A to B, the market price of the first of January, and not the profit which would 
have arisen to B from the sale to C, is to be taken into account.  
(p)A contracts to sell and deliver 500 bales of cotton to B on a fixed day. A knows nothing of B ’s mode of conducting his 
business. A breaks his promise, and B, having no cotton, is obliged to close his mill. A is not responsible to B for the loss caused 
to B by the closing of the mill.  
(q)A contracts to sell and deliver to B, on the first of January, certain cloth which B intends to manufacture in to caps of a 
particular kind, for which there is no demand, except at that season. The cloth is not delivered till after the appointed tim e, and 
too late to be used that year in making caps. B is entitled to receive from A, by way of compensation, the diff erence between the 
contract price of the cloth and its market price at the time of delivery, but not the profits which he expected to obtain by making 
caps, nor the expenses which he has been put to in making p reparation for the manufacture.  
(r)A, a ship -owner, c ontracts with B to convey him from Calcutta to Sydney in A ’s ship, sailing on the first of January, and 
B pays to A, by way of deposit, one -half of his passage -money. The ship does not sail on the first of January, and B, after being 
i
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 31]
e -half of his passage -money. The ship does not sail on the first of January, and B, after being 
in consequence detained in Calcutta for some time and thereby put to some expense, proceeds to Sydney in another vessel, and, 
in consequence, arriving too late in Sydney, loses a sum of money. A is l iable to repay to B his deposit, with interest, and the 
expense to which  he is put by his detention in Calcutta, and the excess, if any, of the passage -money paid for the second ship over 
that agreed upon for the first, but not the sum of money which B lost by arriving in Sydney too late.  
74. Compensation for breach of contrac t where penalty stipulated for .—1[When a contract has 
been broken, if a sum is named in the contract as the amount to be paid in case of such breach, or if the 
contract contains any other stipulation by  way of penalty, the party complaining of the breach is entitled, 
whether or not actual damage or loss is proved to have been caused thereby, to receive from the party who 
has broken the contract reasonable compensation not exceeding the amount so named or, as the case may 
be, the p enalty stipulated for.  
Explanation .—A stipulation for increased interest from the date of default may be a stipulation by 
way of penalty.]  
Exception .—When any person ente rs into any bail -bond, recogni zance or other instrument of the 
same nature, or, under the provisions of any la w, or under the orders of the 2[Central Government] or of 
any 3[State Government ], gives any bond for the performance of any public duty or act in which the 
public are interested, he shall be liable, upon breach of the condition of any such instrument, to pay t he 
whole sum mentioned therein.  
Explanation .—A person who enters into a contract with Government does not necessarily thereby 
undertake any public duty, or promise to do an act in w hich the public are interested.  
Illustrations  
(a)A contracts with B to pay B Rs. 1,000, if he fails to pay B Rs. 500 on a gi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 31]
ed.  
Illustrations  
(a)A contracts with B to pay B Rs. 1,000, if he fails to pay B Rs. 500 on a given day. A fails to pay B Rs. 500  on that day. B 
is entitled to recover from A such compensation, not exceeding Rs. 1,000, as the Court considers reasonable.  
(b)A contracts with B that, if Apractises as a surgeon within Calcutta, he will pay B Rs. 5,000. A practises as a surgeon in 
Calcutta. B is  entitled to such compensation ; not exceeding Rs. 5,000, as the Court considers reasonable.  
(c)A gives a recognizance binding him in a pe nalty of Rs. 500 to appear in Court on a certain day. He forfeits his 
recognizance. He is l iable to pay the whole penalty.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 6 of 1899, s. 4, for the first paragraph of s. 74.  
2. Subs. by the A. O. 1937, for “Government of India”.  
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “Provincial Government”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 32]
32 
 1[(d)A gives B a bond for the repayment of Rs. 1,000 with interest at 12 per cent. at the end of six months, with a stipulation 
that, in case of default, interest shall be paya ble at the rate of 75 per cent. from the date of default. This is a stipulation by way of 
penalty, and B is only entitled to recover from A such compensation as t he Court considers reasonable.  
(e) A, who owes mone y to B a money -lender, undertakes to repay him by delivering to him 10 maunds of grain on a certain 
date, and stipulates that, in the event of his not delivering the stipulated amount by the stipulated date, he shall be liabl e to deliver 
20 maunds. This is  a stipulation by way of penalty, and B is only entitled to reasonable c ompensation in case of breach.  
(f) A undertakes to repay B a loan of Rs. 1,000 by five equal monthly instalments, with a stipulation that  in default of 
payment of any instalment, the w hole shall become due. This stipulation is not by way of penalty, and the contract may be 
enforced according to its terms.  
(g) A borrows Rs. 100 from B and gives him a bond for Rs. 200 payable by five yearly instalments of Rs. 40, with a 
stipulation that, in defau lt of payment of any instalment, the whole shall become due. This is a stipulation by way of penalty.]  
75.Party rightfully rescinding cont ract, entitled to compensation .—A person who rightfully 
rescinds a contract is entitled t o com pensation for any damage which he  has sustained through the  
non-fulfilment of the contract.  
Illustration  
A, a singer, contracts with B, the manager of a theatre, to sing  at his theatre for two nights i n every week during the next two 
months, and B engages to pay her 100 rupees for each night ’s performance. On the sixth night, A wilfully absents herself from 
the theatre, and B, in cons equence, rescinds the contract.  B is entitled to claim compensation for the damage which he has 
sustained through the non-fulfilment of the contract.  
[CHAPTER VII.—
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 32]
 for the damage which he has 
sustained through the non-fulfilment of the contract.  
[CHAPTER VII.—SALES OF GOODS. ] Rep.by the Indian Sale of Goods Act , 1930 (3 of 1930), s. 65. 
76.[‘Goods’ of defined .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
77.[‘Sale defined. ] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
78.[Sale how effected .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
79.[Transferofownershipofthingsold,whichhasyettobeascertained,madeorfinished .]Rep.bys . 65, ibid.  
80. [Completion of sale of goods which the seller is to put into state in which buyer is to take them .] 
Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
81. [Completion of sale of goods, when seller has to do anything thereto in order to as certain 
price .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
82. [Completion of sale, when goods are uncertained at date of contrac t.] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
83. [Ascertainment of goods by subsequent appropriation .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
84. [Ascertainment of goods by seller’s selection. ] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
85. [Transfer of ownership of mov eable property, when sold together with immov eable.] Rep. by     
s. 65, ibid.  
86. [Buyer to bear loss after good have become his property .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
87. [Transfer of ownership of goods agreed to be sold while non existent .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
88. [Contract to sell and deliver, at a future day , goods not in seller’s possession at date of 
contract .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
89. [Determination of pr ice not fixed by contract .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
[DELIVERY .]Rep. by s . 65, ibid.  
90. [Delivery how made .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
                                                           
1. Added by Act 6 of 1899, s. 4.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 33]
33 
 91. [Effect of delivery to wharfinger or carrier .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
92. [Effect of part -delivery .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
93. [Seller not bound to deliver until buyer applies for delivery .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid . 
94.[Place of delivery .] Rep.by the Indian Sale of Goods Act , 1930 (3 of 1930), s.65. 
[SELLER’S LIEN.]Rep. by s . 65, ibid. 
95.[Seller’s lien.]Rep. by s . 65,ibid . 
96. [Lien where payment to be made at a future day, but no time fixed for delivery .] Rep. by s . 65, 
ibid. 
97. [Seller’s lien where payment to be made at future day, and buyer allows goods to remain in 
seller’s possession .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
98. [Seller’s lien against subsequent buyer .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
[STOPPAGE IN TRANSIT .] Rep. by s . 65, ibid.  
99. [Power of seller to stop in transit .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
100.[When goods are to be deemed in transit .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
101. [Continuance of right of stoppage .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
102. [Cessation of right on assignment, by buyer, of document showing title .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
103. [How seller may stop where instrument of title assigned to secure specific advance .] Rep. by s . 
65, ibid.  
104. [Stoppage h ow effected .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
105. [Notice of seller’s claim .] Rep. by s . 65, ibid.  
106.[Right of seller on stoppage .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
[RESALE .] Rep. by s . 65, ibid.  
107.[Resale on buyer’s failure to perform .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
[TITLE .] Rep. by s . 65, ibid.  
108. [Title conveyed by seller of goods to buyer .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
[WARRANTY .] Rep. by s . 65, ibid.  
109.[Seller’s responsibility for badness of title .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
110. [Establishment of implied warranty of goodness or quality .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
111. [Warranty of soundness implied on sale of provisions .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
112. [Warranty of bulk implied on sale of goods by sample .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
113.[Warranty implied where goods are sold as being of a cer
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 33]
ods by sample .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
113.[Warranty implied where goods are sold as being of a certain denominatio n.] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
114. [Warranty where goods ordered for a specified purpose .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
115.[Warranty on sale of article of well known ascertained kind .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
116. [Seller when not responsible for latent defects .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
117. [Buyer’s right on breach of warranty .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
118. [Right of buyer on breach of warranty in respect of goods not ascertained. ] Rep. by s . 65,ibid.  
[MISCELLANEOUS .] Rep. by s . 65, ibid. 
119. [When  buyer  may refused  to accept,  if goods  not ordered  are sent with goods  ordered. ]Rep. by    
s. 65, ibid.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 34]
34 
 120. [Effect of wrongful refusal to accept .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid. 
121. [Right of seller as to rescission, on failure of buyer to pay price at time fixed .] Rep.by the 
Indian Sale of Goods  Act, 1930 (3 of 1930), s.65. 
122. [Sale and transfer of lots sold by auction .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid. 
123. [Effect of use, by seller, of pretended biddings to raise price .] Rep. by s . 65,ibid. 
 
CHAPTER VIII  
OF INDEMNITY AND GUARANTEE  
124.“Contract of indemnity ” defined .—A contract by which one party promises to save the other 
from l oss caused to him by the con duct of the promisor himself, or by the conduct of any other person, is 
called a “contract of indemnity ”.  
Illustration  
A contracts to indemnify  B against the consequences of any proceedings which C may take against B in respect of a certain 
sum of 200 rupees. T his is a contract of indemnity.  
125.Rights of indemnity -holder wh en sued .—The promisee in a contract of indemnity, acting 
within the scope  of his authority, is entitle d to recover from the promisor — 
(1) all damages which he may be compelled to pay in any suit in respect of any matter to which 
the promise to indemnify ap plies;  
(2) all costs which he may be compelled to pay in any such suit if , in bringing or defending it, he 
did not contravene the orders of the promisor, and acted as it would have been prudent for him to act 
in the absence of any contract of indemnity, or if the promisor authorized him to bring or defend the 
suit; 
(3) all sums  which he may have paid under the terms of any compromise of any such sui t, if the 
compromise was not contrary to the orders of the promisor, and was one which it would have been 
prudent for the promisee to make in the absence of any contract of indemnity,  or if the promisor 
authori zed him to compromise the suit.  
126. “Contract of guarantee ”, “surety ”, “principal debtor ” and “creditor ”.—A “contract of 
guarantee” is a contract to perform the promise, or discharge the lia
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 34]
d “creditor ”.—A “contract of 
guarantee” is a contract to perform the promise, or discharge the liability, of a third person in case of his 
default. The person who gives the guarantee is called the “surety ”; the person in respect of whose default 
the guarantee is given is called the “principal de btor”, and the person to whom the guarantee is given is 
called the “creditor ”. A guarantee  may be either oral or written.  
127. Consideration for guarantee .—Anything done, or any promise made, for the benefit of the 
principal debtor, may be a sufficient consideration to the s urety for giving the guarantee.  
Illustrations  
(a) B requests A to sell and deliver to him goods on credit. A agrees to do so, provided C will guarantee the payment of the 
price of the goods. C promises to guarantee the payment in cons ideration of A ’s promise to deliver the goods. This is a sufficient 
consideration for C ’s promise.  
(b) A sells and delivers goods to B. C afterwards requests A to forbear to sue B for the debt for a year, and promises that, if  
he does so, C will pay for them in default of payment by B. A agrees to forbear as requested. This is a sufficient consideration for 
C’s promise.  
(c) A sells and delivers goods to B. C afterwards, without consideration, agrees to pay for them in defau lt of B. The 
agreement is void.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 35]
35 
 128. Surety ’s liability .—The liability of the surety is co - extensive with that of the principal debtor, 
unless it is otherwise provided by t he contract.  
Illustration  
A guarantees to B the payment of a bill of exchange by C, the acceptor. The bill is dishonoured by C. A is liable , not only 
for the amount of the bill , but also for any interest and charges w hich may have become due on it.  
129. “Continuing guarantee ”.—A guarantee which extends to a series of transactions , is called a 
“continuing guarantee ”. 
Illustrations  
(a) A, in consideration that B will employ C in collecting the rent of B ’s zamindari, promises B to be responsible, to the 
amount of 5,000 rupees, for the due collection and payment by C of those rents. This is a continuing guarantee.  
(b) A guarantees payment to B, a tea -dealer, to the amount of £100, for any tea he may from time to time supply to C. B 
supplies C with tea to above the value of  £100, and C pays B for it. Afterwards , B supplies C with tea to the value of  £200. C 
fails to pa y. The guarantee given by A was a continuing guarantee, and he is accordingly liable to B to the exten t of £100. 
(c) A guarantees payment to B of the price of five sacks of flour to be delivered by B to C and to be paid for in a month. B 
delivers five sack s to C. C pays for them. Afterwards B delivers four sacks to C, which C does riot pay for. The guarantee given 
by A was not a continuing guarantee, and accordingly he is not liable f or the price of the four sacks.  
130.Revo cation of continuing guarantee .—A continuing guarantee may at any time be revoked by 
the surety,  as to future transacti ons, by notice to the creditor.  
Illustrations  
(a) A, in consideration of B ’s discounting, at A ’s request, bills of exchange for C, guarantees to B, for twelve months, the 
due payment of all such bills to the extent of 5,000 rupees. B discounts bills for C to the extent of 2,000 rupees. Afterward s, at the 
end of three months,
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 35]
es. B discounts bills for C to the extent of 2,000 rupees. Afterward s, at the 
end of three months, A revokes the guarantee. This revocation discharges A from all liability to B for any subsequent dis count. 
But A is liable to B for the 2,000 rupees, on d efault of C.  
(b) A guarantees to B, to the extent of 10,000 rupees, that C shall pay all the bills that B shall draw upon him. B draws upon 
C. C accepts the bill. A gives notice of revocation. C dishono urs the bill at maturity. A is liable upon his guarant ee. 
131.Revocation of continuing guarantee by surety ’s death .—The death of the surety operates, in 
the absence of any contract to the contrary, as a revocation of a continuing guarantee, so far as regar ds 
future transactions.  
132. Liability of two persons, primarily liable, not affected by arrangement between them that 
one shall be surety on other ’s default .—Where two persons contract with a third person to undertake a 
certain liability, and also contract with each other that one of them shall be liable only on the default of 
the other, the third person not being a party to such contract, the liability of each of such two persons to 
the third person under the first contract is not affected by the e xistence of the second contract, although 
such third person may ha ve been aware of its existence.  
Illustration  
A and B make a joint and several promissory note to C. A makes it, in fact, as surety for B, and C knows this at the time 
when the note is made. The fact that A, to the knowledge of C, made the note as surety for B, is no answer to a suit by C against 
A upon the note . 
133.Discharge of surety by  variance in terms of contract .—Any variance, made without the 
surety ’s consent, in the terms of the contract between the principal 1[debtor] and the creditor, discharges 
the surety as to transacti ons subsequent to the variance.  
Illustrations  
(a) A becomes surety to C for B ’s conduct as a manager in C ’s bank. Afterwards, B and C 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 35]
rations  
(a) A becomes surety to C for B ’s conduct as a manager in C ’s bank. Afterwards, B and C contract, without A ’s consent, 
that B ’s salary shall be raised, and that he shall become liable for one -fourth of the losses on overdrafts. B allows a customer to 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 24 of 1917, s. 2 and  the first  Schedule . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 36]
36 
 overdraw, and the bank loses a sum of money. A is discharged from his suretyship by the variance made without his c onsent, and 
is not  liable to make good this loss.  
(b) A guarantees C against the misconduct of B in an office to which B is appointed by C, and of which the duties are 
defined by an Act of the Legislature. By a subsequent Act, the nature of the office is m aterially altered. Afterwards, B 
misconducts himself. A is discharged by the change from future liability under his guarantee, though the misco nduct of B is in 
respect  of a duty  not affected by the later Act.  
(c) C agrees to appoint B as his clerk to sell goods at a yearly salary, upon A ’s becoming surety to C for B ’s duly accounting 
for moneys received by him as such clerk. Afterwards, without A ’s knowledge or consent, C and B agree that B should be paid 
by a commission on the goods sold by him and not by a fixed salary. A is not liable for subsequent misconduct of B.  
(d) A gives to C a continuing guarantee to the extent of 3,000 rupees for any oil supplied by C to B on credit. Afterwards B 
becomes embarrassed, and, without the knowledge of A, B and C contr act that C shall continue to supply B with oil for ready 
money, and that the paymen ts shall be applied to the then, existing debts between B and C. A is not liable on his guarantee for 
any goods suppli ed after : this new arrangement.  
(e) C contracts to lend  B 5,000 rupees on the 1st March. A guarantees repayment. C pays the 5,000 rupees to B on the 1st 
January. A is discharged from his liability, as the contract has been varied, inasmuch as C might sue B for the  money before the 
1st of March.  
134.Discharge o f surety by release or  discharge of principal debtor .—The surety is discharged by 
any contract between the creditor and the principal debtor, by which the principal debtor is released , or by 
any act or omission of the creditor, the legal consequence of which is the dis charge of the principal 
debtor.
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 36]
omission of the creditor, the legal consequence of which is the dis charge of the principal 
debtor.  
Illustrations  
(a) A gives a guarantee to C for goods to be supplied by C to B. C supplies goods to B, and afterwards B becomes 
embarrassed and contracts with his creditors (including C) to assign to them his property in consideration of their releasing him 
from their demands. Here B is released from his debt by the contract with C, and A is discharged from his suretyship.  
(b) A contracts w ith B to grow a crop of indigo o n A’s land and to deliver it to B at a fixed rate, and C guarantees A ’s 
performance of this contract. B diverts a stream of water which is necessary for  the irrigation of A ’s land and thereby prevents 
him from raising the indigo. C is no longer liable on his guarantee.  
(c) A contracts with B for a fixed price to build a house for B within a stipulated time, B supplying the necessary timber. C 
guarantees A ’s performance of the  contract. B omits to supply the timber. C is discharged from his suretyship . 
135. Discharge of surety when creditor compounds with, gives time to, or agree s not to sue, 
principal debtor .—A contract between the creditor and the principal debtor, by which the creditor makes 
a composition with, or promises to give time to, or not to sue, the principal debtor, discharges the surety, 
unless the s urety assents to such contract.  
136. Surety not discharged when agreement made with third person to give time to pri ncipal 
debtor .—Where a contract to give time to the principal debtor is made by the creditor with a third 
person, and not with the principal debtor , the surety is not discharged.  
Illustration  
C, the holder of an overdue bill of exchange drawn by A as suret y for B, and accepted by B, contracts with M to give time to 
B. A is not discharged.  
137. Creditor ’s forbearance to sue does not discharge surety .—Mere forbearance on the part of 
the creditor to sue the principal debtor or to enforce
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 36]
rge surety .—Mere forbearance on the part of 
the creditor to sue the principal debtor or to enforce any other remedy against him does not, in the absence 
of any provision in the guarantee to the contrary, discharge the surety.  
Illustration  
B owes to C a debt guaranteed  by A. The debt becomes payable. C does not sue B for a year after the debt has become 
payable. A is not discharged from his suretyship.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 37]
37 
 138.Release of one co -surety does not discharge others .—Where there are co -sureties, a release by 
the creditor of one of them does not discharge the others; neither does it free the surety so released from 
his respons ibility to the other sureties1. 
139. Discharge of surety by creditor ’s act or omission impairing surety ’s eventual remedy .—If 
the creditor does any act which  is inconsistent with the rights of the surety, or omits to do any act which 
his duty to the surety requires him to do, and the eventual remedy of the surety himself against the 
principal debtor is thereby impa ired, the surety is discharged.  
Illustrations  
(a) B contracts to build a ship for C for a given sum, to be paid by instalments as the work reaches certain stages. A becomes 
surety to C for B ’s due performance of the contract. C, without the knowledge of A, prepays to B the last two instalments. A is  
discharged by this prepayment.  
(b) C lends money to B on the security of a joint and several promissory note made in C ’s favour by B, and by A as surety 
for B, together with a bill of sale of B ’s furniture, which gives power to C to sell the furniture, and apply the proceeds in 
discharge of the note. Subsequently, C sells the furniture, but, owing to his misconduct and wilful negligence, only a small price 
is realized. A is dischar ged from liability on the note.  
(c) A puts M as apprentice to B, and gives a guarantee to B for M ’s fidelity. B promises on his part that he will, at least once 
a month, see M make up the cash. B omits to see this done as promised, and M embezzles. A is no t liable to B on his guarantee.  
140.Rights of su rety on payment or performance .—Where a guaranteed debt has become due, or 
default of the principal debtor to perform a guaranteed du ty has taken place, the surety upon payment or 
performance of all that he is liable for, is invested with all the rights which the creditor ha d against the 
principal debtor.  
141.Surety ’s rig
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 37]
ested with all the rights which the creditor ha d against the 
principal debtor.  
141.Surety ’s right to benefit of creditor ’s securities .—A surety is entitled to the benefit of every 
security which the creditor has against the principal debtor at the time when the contract of suretyship is 
entered into, w hether the surety knows of the ex istence of such security or not ; and if the creditor loses, 
or, without the consent of the surety, parts with such security, the surety is discharged to the exten t of the 
value of the security.  
Illustrations  
(a)C, advances to B, his tenant, 2,000 rupees on the guarantee of A. C has also a further security for the 2,000 rupees by a 
mortgage of B ’s furniture. C cancels the  mortgage. B becomes insolvent and C sues A on his guarantee. A is discharged from 
liability to the amount  of the value of the furniture.  
(b)C, a creditor, whose advance to B is secured by a decree, receives also a guarantee for that advance from A. C afterwards 
takes B ’s goods in execution under the decree, and then, without the knowledge of A, withdraws the execution. A is discharged.  
(c)A, as surety for B, makes a bond jointly with B to C, to secure a loan from C to B. Afterwards, C obtains from B a further 
security for the same debt. Subsequently, C gives up the further  security. A is not discharged.  
142. Guarantee obtained b y misrepresentation invalid .—Any guarantee which has been obtained 
by means of misrepresentation made by the creditor, or with his knowledge and assent, concerning a 
material part of the transaction, is invalid.  
143. Guarantee o btained by concealment invalid .—Any guarantee which the creditor has obtained 
by means of keeping silence as to mat erial circumstances , is invalid.  
Illustrations  
(a)A engages B as clerk to collect money for him. B fails to account for some of his receipts, and A in consequence calls 
upon him to furnish security for his duly accounting. C gives his guarantee for B ’s duly ac
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 37]
 calls 
upon him to furnish security for his duly accounting. C gives his guarantee for B ’s duly accounting. A does not acquaint C with 
B’s previous conduct. B afterwards makes def ault. The guarantee is invalid.  
                                                           
1. See s. 44, supra . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 38]
38 
 (b)A guarantees to C payment fo r iron to be supplied by him to B to the amount of 2,000 tons. B and C have privately 
agreed that B should pay five rupees per ton beyond the market price, such excess to be applied in liquidation of an old debt . This 
agreement is concealed from A. A is no t liable as a surety.  
144. Guarantee on contract that creditor shall not a ct on it until co -surety joins .—Where a 
person gives a guarantee upon a contract that the creditor shall not act upon it until another person has 
joined in it as co -surety, the guarantee is not valid if t hat other person does not join.  
145.Implied promise to indemnify surety .—In every contract of guarantee there is an implied 
promise by the principal debtor to indemnify the surety, and the surety is entitled to recover from the 
principal debtor whatever sum he has rightfully paid under the guarantee, but, no sums which he has paid 
wrongfully.  
Illustrations  
(a)B is indebted to C, and A is surety for the debt. C demands payment from A, and on his refusal sues him for the amount. 
A defends the suit, having reasonable grounds for doing so, but is compelled to pay the amount of the debt with costs. He can 
recover from B the amount paid by him for costs,  as well as the principal debt.  
(b)C lends B a sum of money, and A, at the request of B, accepts a bill of exchange drawn by B upon A to secure the 
amount. C, the holder of the bill, demands payment of it from A, and, on A ’s refusal to pay, sues him upon the bill. A, not having 
reasonable grounds for so doing, defends the suit, and has t o pay the amount of the bill and costs. He can recover from B the 
amount of the bill, but not the sum paid for costs, as there was no real g round for defending the action.  
(c)A guarantees to C, to the extent of 2,000 rupees, payment for rice to be supplied  by C to B. C supplies to B rice to a less 
amount than 2,000 rupees, but obtains from A payment of the sum of 2,000 rupees i n respect of th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 38]
s 
amount than 2,000 rupees, but obtains from A payment of the sum of 2,000 rupees i n respect of the rice supplied. A cannot 
recover from B more than the price  of the rice actually supplied.  
146. Co -suretie s liable t o contribute equally .—Where two or more persons are co -sureties for the 
same debt or duty, either jointly or severally, and whether under the same or different contracts, and 
whether with or without the knowledge of each other, the co -sureties, in the absence of any contract to the 
contrary, are liable, as between themselves, to pay each an equal share of the whole debt, or of that part of 
it which remains un paid by the principal debtor1. 
Illustratio ns 
(a)A, B and C are sureties to D for the  sum of 3, 000 rupees lent to E. E makes default in payment. A, B and C are l iable, as 
between them selves, to pay 1,000 rupees each.  
(b)A, B and C are sureties to D for the sum of 1,000 rupees lent to E, and there is a contract between A, B and C that A is to 
be responsible to the extent of one -quarter, B to the extent of one - quarter, and C to the extent of one-half. E makes default in 
payment. As between the sureties, A is liable to pay 250 rupees, B 250 rupees, and C 500 rupees.  
147.Liability of co -sureties bound in different sums .—Co-sureties who are bound in different sums 
are liable to pay equally as far as the limits of their  respective obligations permit.  
Illustrations  
(a)A, B and C, as sureties for D, enter into three several bonds, each in a different penalty, namely, A in the penalty of each 
10,000 rupees, B in that of 20,000 rupees, C in that of 40,000 rupees, conditioned for D ’s duly accounting to E. D makes default 
to the extent of 30,000 rupees. A, B and C a re each liable to pay 10,000 rupees.  
(b)A, B and C, as sureties for D, enter into three several bonds, each in a different penalty, namely, A in the penalty of 
10,000 rupees, B in that of 20,000 rupees, C in that of 40,000 rupees, conditioned for D ’s dul
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 38]
 of 
10,000 rupees, B in that of 20,000 rupees, C in that of 40,000 rupees, conditioned for D ’s duly accounting to E. D makes default 
to the extent of 40,000 rupees. A is liable to pay 10,000 rupees, and B and C 15,000 rupees each.  
(c)A, B and C, as sureties for D, enter into three several bonds, each in a different penalty, namely, A in the penalty of 
10,000 rupees, B in that of 20,000 rupees , C in that of 40,000 rupees, conditioned for D ’s duly accounting to E. D makes default 
to the extent of 70,000 rupees. A, B and C have to pay each the full penalty of his bond.  
  
                                                           
1. See s. 43, supra . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 39]
39 
 CHAPTER IX  
OF BAILMENT  
148.“Bailment ”“bailor ” and “bailee ” defined .—A “bailment” is the delivery of goods by one 
person to another for some purpose, upon a contract that they shall, when the purpose is accomplished, be 
returned or otherwise disposed of according to the directions of the person delivering them. The person 
delivering the  goods is called the “bailor ”. The person to whom they are delivered is called, the “bailee ”. 
Explanation .—If a person already in possession of the goods of another contracts to hold them as a 
bailee, he thereby becomes the bailee, and the owner becomes th e bailor of such goods, although they 
may not have bee n delivered by way of bailment.  
149. Delivery to bailee how made .—The delivery to the bailee may be made by doing anything 
which has the effect of putting the goods in the possession of the intended bai lee or of any person 
authori zed to hold them on his behalf.  
150.Bailor ’s duty to d isclose faults in goods bailed .—The bailor is bound to disclose to the bailee 
faults in the goods bailed, of which the bailor is  aware, and which materially interfere with the use of 
them, or expose the bailee to extraordinary risks; and if he does not make such disclosure, he is 
responsible for damage arising to the ba ilee directly from such faults.  
If the goods are bailed for hire, the bailor is responsible for such damage , whether he was or was not 
aware of the existence of s uch faults in the goods bailed.  
Illustrations  
(a)A lends a horse, which he knows to be vicious, to B. He does not disclose the fact that the horse is vicious. The horse 
runs away. B is thrown and injured. A is respons ible to B for damage sustained.  
(b)A hires a carriage of B. The carriage is unsafe, though B is not aware of it, and A is injured. B is r esponsible to A for the 
injury.  
1151. Care to be taken by bailee .—In all cases of bailment the bai lee is bound to take as much care 
of the goods bailed to him as a man of
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 39]
 cases of bailment the bai lee is bound to take as much care 
of the goods bailed to him as a man of ordinary prudence would, under similar circumstances, take of his 
own goods of the same bulk, quality and value as the goods bailed2. 
152.Bailee when not liable for loss,  etc., of thing bailed. —The bailee, in the absence of any special 
contract, is not responsible for the loss, destruction or deterioration of the thing bailed, if he has taken the 
amount of care of it described in section 151.  
153. Termination of bailment by bailee ’s act inconsistent with conditions .—A contract of 
bailment is avoidable at the option of the ba ilor, if the bailee does any act with regard to the goods bailed, 
inconsistent with the conditions of th e bailment.  
Illustration  
A lets  to B, for hire, a horse for his own riding. B drives the horse in his carriage. This is, at the ‘option of A,  a termination 
of the bailment.  
154. Liability of bailee making un authorized use of goods bailed .—If the bailee mak es any use of 
the goods bailed which is not according to the conditions of the bailment, he is liable to make 
compensation to the bailor for any damage arising to the goods from or during such use of them.  
                                                           
1. The responsibility of the Trustees of the Port of Madras constituted under the Madras Port Trust Act, 1905 (Madras Act  
2 of 1905), in regard to goods has been declared to be that of a bailee under these sections, without the qualifying words “i n the 
absence of any special contract” in s. 152, see s. 40( 1) of that Act.  
2.As to railway contracts see the Indian Railways Act, 1890 (9 of 1890), s. 72. As to the liability of common carriers, see the 
Carriers Act, 1865 (3 of 1865), s. 8.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 40]
40 
 Illustrations  
(a)A lends a horse to B for his own riding only. B allows C, a member of his family, to ride the horse. C rides with c are, but 
the horse accidentally falls and is injured. B is liable to make compensation to A fo r the injury done to the horse.  
(b)A hires a horse in Calcutta from B expressly to marc h to Benares. A rides with due care, but marches to Cuttack instead. 
The horse accidentally falls and is injured. A is liable to make compensation to B for the injury to the horse.  
155. Effect of mixture, with bailor ’s consent, of his goods with bailee ’s.—If the bailee, with the 
consent of the bailor, mixes the goods of the bailor with his own goods, the bailor and the bailee shall 
have an interest, in proportion to their respective shares , in the mixture thus produced.  
156.Effect of mixture without bailor ’s consent, w hen the goods can be separated .—If the bailee, 
without the consent of the bailor, mixes the goods of the bailor with his own goods, and the goods can be 
separated or divide d, the property in the goods re mains in the parties respectively ; but th e bailee is bound 
to bear the expense of separation or division, and any d amage arising from the mixture.  
Illustration  
A bails 100 bales of cotton marked with a particular mark to B. B, without A ’s consent, mixes the 100 bales with other bales 
of hi s own, bearing a different mark : A is entitled to have his 100 bales returned, and B is bound to bear all the expense incurred 
in the separation of the bales, a nd any other incidental damage.  
157. Effect of mixture, without bailor ’s consent, when  the goods cannot  be separated .—If the 
bailee, without the consent of the bailor, mixes the goods of the bailor with his own goods, in such a 
manner that it is impossible to separate the go ods bailed from the other goods, and deliver them back, the 
bailor is entitled to be  compensated by the ba ilee for the loss of the goods.  
Illustration  
A bails a barrel of Cape
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 40]
 be  compensated by the ba ilee for the loss of the goods.  
Illustration  
A bails a barrel of Cape flour worth Rs. 45 to B. B, without A ’s consent, mixes the flour with country flour of his own, 
worth only Rs. 25 a barrel. B must compensa te A for the loss of his flour.  
158. Repayment, by  bailor, of necessary expenses .—Where, by the conditions of  the bailment, the 
goods are to be kept or to be carried, or to have work done upon them by the bailee for the bailor, and the 
bailee is to receive no remuneration, the bailor shall repay to the bailee the necessary expenses incurred 
by him f or the purpose of the bailment.  
159.Restorat ion of goods lent gratuitously .—The lender of a thing for use may at any time require 
its return, if the loan was gratuitous, even though h e lent it for a specified time or purpose. But if, on the 
faith of such loan made for a specified time or purpose, the borrowe r has acted in such a manner that the 
return of the thing lent before the time agreed upon would cause him loss exceeding the bene fit actually 
derived by him from the loan, the lender must, if he compels the return, indemnify the borrower for the 
amount in which the loss so occasioned exceeds the benefit so derived.  
160.Return of goods bailed , on expiration of time or acc omplishment of purpose .—It is the duty 
of the bailee to return, or deliver according to the bailor ’s directions, the goods bailed, without demand, as 
soon as the time for which they were bailed has expired, or the purpose for which they were bailed has 
been accomplish ed. 
1161. Bailee ’s responsibility wh en goods are not duly returned .—If, by the default of the bailee, 
the goods are not returned, delivered or tendered at the proper time, he is responsible to the bailor for any 
loss, d estruction or deterioration of the goods from that time.2 
                                                           
1. S. 161 has been declared to apply to the responsibility of the Trustees of t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 40]
                    
1. S. 161 has been declared to apply to the responsibility of the Trustees of the Port of Madras as to goods in their possess ion 
seethe Madras Port Trust Act, 1905 (Madras Act 2 of 1905).  
2. As to Railway contracts, see the Indian Railways Act, 1890 (9 of 1890), s. 72.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 41]
41 
 162. Termination o f gratuitous bailment by death .—A gratuitous bailment is terminated by the 
death either of the bailor or of the bailee.  
163. Bailor entitled to increa se or profit from goods bailed .—In the absence of any contract to  the 
contrary, the bailee is bound to deliver to the bailor, or according to his directions, any increase or profit 
which may have  accrued from the goods bailed.  
Illustration  
A leaves a cow in the custody of B to be taken care of. The cow has a calf. B is bound to deliver th e calf as well as the cow 
to A.  
164. Bailor ’s responsibility to bailee .—The bailor is responsible to the bailee for any loss which the 
bailee may sustain by reason that the bailor was not entitled to make the bailment, or to receive back  the 
goods , or to give directi ons respecting them.  
165.Ba ilment by several joint owners .—If several joint owners of goods bail them, the bailee may 
deliver them back to, or according to the directions of, one joint ow ner without the consent of all in the 
absence of  any agreement to the contrary.  
166.Bailee not responsible on re -delivery to bailor without title .—If the bailor has no title to the 
goods, and the bailee, in good faith, delivers them back to, or acco rding to the directions of, the bailor, the 
bailee is not responsible to the owner  in respect of such delivery1. 
167.Right of thir d person claiming goods bailed .—If a person, other than t he bailor, claims goods 
bailed he may apply to the Court to stop the delivery of the goods to the bailor, and to  decide the title to 
the goods.  
168.Right of finder of goods, may s ue for specific reward offered .—The finder of goods has no 
right to sue the owner for com pensation for trouble and expense voluntarily incurred by him to preserve 
the goods and to find out the owner; but he may retain the goods against the owner until he receives such 
compensation; and, where the owner has offered a specific reward for the ret urn of goods lo
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 41]
s such 
compensation; and, where the owner has offered a specific reward for the ret urn of goods lost, the finder 
may sue for such reward, and may retain the goods until he receives it.  
169.When finder of thin g commonly on sale may sell it .—When a thing which is commonly the 
subject of sale is lost, if the owner cannot with reasonable dil igence be found, or if he refuses, upon 
demand, to pay the lawful charges of the finder, the finder may sell it — 
(1) when the thing is in danger of perishing or of losing the  greater part of its value, or,  
(2) when the lawful charges of the finder, in resp ect of the thing found, amo unt to two -thirds of 
its value.  
170. Bailee ’s particular li en.—Where the bailee has, in accordance with the purpose of the 
bailment, rendered any service involving the exercise of labour or skill in respect of the goods bailed, he 
has, in the absence of a contract to the contrary, a right to retain such goods until he receives due 
remuneration for the services he h as rendered in respect of them.  
Illust rations  
(a) A delivers a rough diamond to B, a jeweller, to be cut and polished, which is accordingly done. B is entitled to retain the 
stone till he is paid fo r the services he has rendered.  
(b) A gives, cloth to B, a tailor, to make into a coat. B promises A to deliver the coat as soon as it is finished, and to give  a 
three  months ’ credit for the price. B is not entitled to retain the coat until he is paid.  
                                                           
1. See the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), s. 117.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 42]
42 
 171.General li en of bankers, factors, wharfinger s, attorneys and policy -brokers .—Bankers, 
factors, wharfingers, attorneys of a High Court and policy -brokers may, in the a bsence  of a contract to the 
contrary, retain as a security for a general balance of account, any goods bailed t o them ; but no other 
persons have a right to retain, as a security for such balance, goods bailed to them, unless there is an 
express contract to  that effect1. 
Bailments of Pledges  
172.“Pledge ”“pawnor ”,and “pawnee ” defined .—The bailment of goods as security for payment of 
a debt or performance of a promise is called “pledge ”. The bailor is in this case called the “pawnor” . The 
bailee is called the “pawnee ”. 
173.Pawnee ’s right of retainer .—Thepawnee may retain the goods pledged, not only for payment of 
the debt or the performance of the promise, but for the interest of the debt, and all necessary expenses 
incurred by him in respect of the possession or for the pre servation of the goods pledged.  
174.Pawnee not to retain for debt or promise other than that for which goods pledged. 
Presumption in case of subsequent advances .—The pawnee shall not, in the absence of a contract to 
that effect, retain the goods pledged for any debt or promise other than the debt or promise for which they 
are pledged; but such contract, in the absence of anything to the contrary, shall be presumed in regard to 
subseque nt advances made by the pawnee.  
175. Pawnee ’s right as to  extraordinary expenses incurred. —Thepawnee is entitled to receive 
from the pawnor extraordinary expenses incurred by him for the pre servation of the goods pledged.  
176. Pawnee ’s right where pawnor makes default .—If the pawnor makes default in payment of the 
debt, or performance, at the stipulated time of the promise, in respect of which the goods were pledged, 
the pawnee may bring a suit against the pawnor upon the debt or promise, and retain the goods pledge d as 
a collateral security; 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 42]
ainst the pawnor upon the debt or promise, and retain the goods pledge d as 
a collateral security; or he may sell the thing pledged, on giving the pawnor reasonable notice of the sale.  
If the proceeds of such sale are less than the amount due in respect of the debt or promise, the pawnor 
is still liable to pay the balance. If the proceeds of the sale are greater than the amount so due, the pawnee 
shall pay  over the surplus to the pawnor.  
177. Defaulting pawne r’s right to redeem .—If a time is stipulated for the payment of the debt, o r 
performance of the promise, for which the pledge is made,  and the pawnor makes default in payment of 
the debt or performance of the promise at the stipulated time, he may redeem the goods pledged at any 
subsequent time before the actual sale of them2; but he must, in that case, pay, in addition, any expenses 
whic h have arisen from his default.  
3[178. Pledge by mercantile agent .—Where a mercantile agent is, with the consent of the owner, in 
possession of goods or the document of title to goods, any pledge made by him, when acting in the 
ordinary course of business of a mercantile agent, shall be as valid as if he were expressly authorised by 
the owne r of the goods to make the same ; provided that the pawnee acts in good faith and has not at the 
time of the pledge notice that the pawn or has not authority to pledge.  
Explanation .—In this section, the expressions “mercantile agent ” and “documents of title” shall have 
the meanings assigned to them in the Indian Sale o f Goods Act, 1930 (3 of 1930) . 
178A. Pledge by person in posse ssion under voidable contract .—When the pawnor has obtained 
possession of the goods pledged by him under a contract voidable under section 19 or section 19A, but 
                                                           
1. As to lien of an agent, see s. 221, infra.  As to lien of a Railway Administration, see the Indian Railways Act, 1890 (9 of 1890), 
s. 55.  
2. For limitation,
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 42]
 Railway Administration, see the Indian Railways Act, 1890 (9 of 1890), 
s. 55.  
2. For limitation, see the Limitation Act, 1 963 (36 of 1963), the Second Schedule . 
3. Ss. 178 and 178A subs. by Act 4 of 1930, s. 2, for the original s. 178.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 43]
43 
 the contract has not been rescinded at the time of the pledge, the pawnee acquires a good title to the 
goods, provided he act s in good faith and without notice of the pawnor ’s defect of title.]  
179. Pledge where pawn or has only a limited interest .—Where a person pledges goods in which 
he has only a limited interest, the pledge is valid to  the extent of that interest.  
Suits by bailees  or bailors against wrong -doers  
180.Suit by bailo r or bailee against wrong -doer .—If a third person wrongfully deprives the bailee 
of the use or possession of the goods bailed, or does them any injury, the bailee is entitled to use such 
remedies as t he owner might have used in the like case if no bailment had been made; and either the 
bailor or the bailee may bring a suit against a third person for such deprivatio n or injury.  
181. Apportionment of relief or compe nsation obtained by such suits .—Whatever is obtained by 
way of relief or compensation in any such suit shall, as between the bailor and the bailee, be dealt with 
according  to their respective interests.  
CHAPTER X  
AGENCY  
Appoi ntment and authority of agents  
182.“Agent ” and “principal ” defined .—An “agent ” is a person employed to do any act for another , 
or to represent another in dealings with third persons. The person for whom such act is done, or who is so 
represented, is called the “principal ”. 
183. Who may employ agent .—Any person who is of the age of majority according to the law to 
which he is subject, and who is of s ound mind, may employ an agent.  
184. Who may be an agent .—As between the principal and third persons , any person may become 
an agent, but no person who is not of the age of majority and of sound mind can become an agent, so as to 
be responsible to his principal according to the provisions i n that behalf herein contained.  
185. Consideration not necessary .—No consideration is  necessary to create an agency.  
186. Agent ’s authori ty may be expressed or
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 43]
.—No consideration is  necessary to create an agency.  
186. Agent ’s authori ty may be expressed or implied .—The authority of an agent may be expressed 
or implied1. 
187. Definitions of  express and implied authority .—An authority is said to be express when it is 
given by words spoken or written. An authority is said to be implied when it is to be inferred from the 
circumstances of the case; and things spoken or written, or the ordinary course of dealing, may be 
accou nted circumstances of the case.  
Illustration  
A owns a shop in Serampore, living himself in Calcutta, and visi ting the shop occasionally. Th e shop is managed by B, and 
he is in the habit of ord ering goods from C in the name of A for the purposes of the shop, and of paying for them out of A ’s funds 
with A ’s knowledge. B has an implied authority from A to order good s from C in the name of A for the pu rposes of the shop.  
188. Extent of agent ’s authority .—An agent , having an authority to do an act , has authority to do 
every lawful thing which is necessary in order to do such a ct. 
An agent having an authority to carry on a business , has authority to do every lawful thing necessary 
for the purpose, or usually done in the cours e, of conducting such business.  
  
                                                           
1. See, however, the Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908), s. 33; see also the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), Sch. I, 
Order III, rule 4.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 44]
44 
 Illustrations  
(a) A is employed by B, residing in London, to recover at Bombay a debt due to B. A may adopt any legal process necessary 
for the purpose of recovering the debt, and may give a valid discharge for the same.  
(b) A constitutes B his agent to carry on his busin ess of a ship -builder. B may purchase timber and other materials, and hire 
workmen, for the purpo se of carrying on the business.  
189.Agent ’s authority in an emergency .—An agent has authority, in an emergency, to do all such 
acts for the purpose of protecting his principal from loss as would be done by a person of ordinary 
prudence, in his own cas e, under similar circumstances.  
Illustrations  
(a) An agent for sale may have goo ds repaired if it be necessary.  
(b) A consigns provisions to B at Calcutta, with directions to send them immediately to C, at Cuttack. B may sell the 
provisions at Calcutta, if they will not bear the journ ey to Cuttack without spoiling.  
Sub-Agents  
190. When agent cannot delegate .—An agent cannot lawfully employ another to perform acts 
which he has expressly or impliedly undertaken to perform personally, unless by the ordinary custom of 
trade a sub -agent may, or, from the nature of the agency,  a sub -agent must, be employed.  
191. “Sub-agent ” defined .—A “sub-agent ” is a person employed by, and acting under the control of, 
the original agent  in the business of the agency.  
192. Representation of principal by sub -agent properly appointed .—Where a sub -agent is 
properly appointed, the principal is, so far as regards third persons, represented by the sub -agent, and is 
bound by and responsible for his acts, as if he were an agent originally appointed by the principal.  
Agent ’s responsibility f or sub -agent .—The agent is responsible to the principal  for the acts of the 
sub-agent.  
Sub-agent ’s responsibility .—The sub -agent is responsible for hi s acts to the agent, but not to the 
principal, except in  cases of fraud or wilful 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 44]
ponsible for hi s acts to the agent, but not to the 
principal, except in  cases of fraud or wilful wrong.  
193. Agent ’s responsibility for sub -agent appointed without authority .—Where an agent, without 
having authority to do so, has appointed a person to act as a sub -agent, the agent stands towards such 
person in the relation of a princi pal to an agent, and is respon sible for his acts both to the principal and to 
third persons; the principal is not represented , by or responsible for the acts of the person so employed, 
nor is that person responsible to the  principal.  
194.Relation between principal and person duly appointed by agen t to act in business of 
agency .—Where an agent, holding an express or implied authority to name another person to act for the 
principal in the business of the agency, has named another person accordingly, such person is not a  
sub-agent, but an agent of the principal for such part of the  business of the agency as is entrusted to him.  
Illustrations  
(a)A directs B, his solicitor, to sell his estate by auction, and to employ an auctioneer for the purpose. B names C, an 
auctioneer, to conduct the sale. C is not a sub -agent, but is A ’s age nt for the conduct of the sale.  
(b)A authorizes B, a merchant in Calcutta, to recover the moneys due to A from C & Co. B instructs D, a solicitor, to take 
legal proceedings against C & Co. for the recovery of the money. D is not a sub -agent, but is solicitor for A.  
195. Agent ’s duty in naming such person .—In selecting such agent for his principal, an agent is 
bound to exercise the same amount of discretion as a man of ordinary prudence would exercise in his own 
case; and, if he does this, he is not responsible  to the principal for the acts or negli gence of the agent so 
selected.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 45]
45 
 Illustrations  
(a)A instructs B, a merchant, to buy a ship for him. B employs a ship -surveyor of good reputation to choose a ship for A. 
The surveyor makes the choice negligently and the  ship turns out to be unseaworthy and is lost. B is not, but the  surveyor is, 
responsible to A.  
(b)A consigns goods to B, a merchant, for sale. B, in due course, employs an auctioneer in good credit to sell the goods of A, 
and allows the auctioneer to rece ive the proceeds of the sale. The auctioneer afterwards becomes insolvent without hav ing 
accounted for the proceeds. B is not res ponsible to A for the proceeds.  
Ratification  
196. Right of person as to acts done for him without his authority . Effect of ratification .—
Where acts are done by one person on behalf of another, but without his knowledge or authority, he may 
elect to ratify or to disown such acts. If he ratify them, the same effects will follow as if they had b een 
performed by his authority.  
197.Ratificati on may be expressed or implied .—Ratification may be expressed or may be implied 
in the conduct of the person on whose be half the acts are done.  
Illustrations  
(a)A, without authority, buys goods for B. Afterwards B sells them to C on his own account; B ’s conduct implies a 
ratification of the purchase made for him by A.  
(b)A, without B ’s authority, lends B ’s money to C. Afterwards B accepts interest on the money from C. B ’s conduct impl ies 
a ratification of the loan.  
198.Knowledge re quisite for  valid ratification .—No valid ratification can be made by a person 
whose knowledge of the facts of th e case is materially defective.  
199.Effect of ratifying unauthorized act  forming part of a transaction .—A person ratifying any 
unauthorized act done on his  behalf ratifies the whole of the transaction of which such act formed a part.  
200.Ratification of unauthorized a ct cannot injure third person .—An act done by one person on 
behalf of another, without such other person ’s 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 45]
injure third person .—An act done by one person on 
behalf of another, without such other person ’s authority, which, if done with autho rity, would have the 
effect of subjecting a third person to damages, or of terminating any right or interest of a third person, 
cannot, by ratificatio n, be made to have such effect.  
 Illustrations   
(a)A, not being authorized thereto by B, demands, on behalf of B, the delivery of a chatte l, the property of B, from C, who is 
in possession of it. This demand cannot be ratified by B, so as to make C liable for dama ges for his refusal to deliver.  
(b)A holds  a lease from B, terminable on three months ’ notice. C, an unauthorized person, gives notice of termination to A. 
The notice cannot be ratified by B, so as to be binding on A.  
Revocation of Authority  
201. Termination of agency .—An agency is terminated by the principal revoking his authority; or 
by the agent renouncing the business of the agency; or by the business of the agency being completed; or 
by either the principal or agent dying or becoming of unsound mind; or by the principal being adjudicated 
an insolvent under the provisions of any Act for the time being in force for the relief of insolvent debtors.  
202.Termination of agency , where agent has an intere st in subject -matter .—Where the agent has 
himself an interest in the property which forms the subj ect-matter of the agency, the agency cannot, in the 
absence of an express contract, be terminated to the  prejudice of such interest.  
Illustrations  
(a) A gives authority to B to sell A ’s land, and to pay himself, out of the proceeds, the debts due to him from A. A cannot 
revoke this authority, nor can it be termi nated by his insanity or death.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 46]
46 
 (b) A consigns 1,000 bales of cotton to B, who has made advances to him on such cotton, and desires B to sell the cotton, 
and to repay  himself out of the price, the amount of his own advances. A cannot revoke this authority, nor is it termi nated by his 
insanity or death.  
203.When principal may revoke agent ’s authority .—The principal may, save as is otherwise 
provided by the last preceding section, revoke the authority  given to his agent at any time before the 
authority has been exercis ed so as to bind the principal.  
204.Revocation where autho rity has been partly exercised .—The principal cannot revoke the 
authority given to his agent after the authority has been partly exercised , so far as regards such acts and 
obligations as arise from a cts already done in the agency.  
Illustrations  
(a)A authorizes B to buy 1,000 bales of cotton on account of A, and to pay for it out of A ’s moneys remaining in B ’s hands. 
B buys 1,000 bales of cotton in his own name, so as to make himself personally liable for the price. A cannot revoke B ’s 
authority so far as regards payment for the cotton.  
(b) A authorizes B to buy 1,000 bales of cotton on account of A, and to pay for it out of A ’s mo neys remaining in B ’s hands. 
B buys 1,000 bales of cotton in A ’s name, and so as not to render himself personally liable for the price. A can revoke B ’s 
authority to pay for the cotton.  
205.Compensation for revocation by principal, o r renunciation by agent .—Where there is an 
express or implied contract that the agency should be continued for any period of time, the principal must 
make compensation to the agent, or the agent to the principal, as the case may be, for any previous 
revocation or renunciation of  the a gency without sufficient cause.  
206. Notice  of revocation or renunciation .—Reasonable notice must be given of s uch revocation or 
renunciation, otherwise the damage thereby resulting to the principal or the agent, as the case may be, 
must
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 46]
ion, otherwise the damage thereby resulting to the principal or the agent, as the case may be, 
must be mad e good  to the one by the other.  
207.Revocation and renunciatio n may be expressed or implied .—Revocation and renunciation 
may be expressed or may be implied in the conduct of the p rincipal or agent respectively.  
Illustration  
A empowers B to let A ’s house. Afterwards A lets it himself. This is an implied revocation of  
B’s authority.  
208.When termination of agent ’s authority takes effect as to agent, and as to third persons .—
The termination of the authority of an agent does not, so far as regards th e agent, take effect before it 
becomes known to him, or, so far as regards third persons, b efore it becomes known to them.  
Illustrations  
(a) A directs B to sell goods for him, and agrees to give B five per cent. commission on the price fetched by the goods. A 
afterwards, by letter, revoke B ’s authority. B, after the letter is sent, but before he receives it, sells the goods for 100 rupees. The 
sale is binding on A, and B is entitled to  five rupees as his commission.  
(b) A, at Madras, by letter, directs  B to sell for him some cotton lying in a warehouse in Bombay, and afterwards, by letter, 
revokes his authority to sell, and directs B to send the cotton to Madras. B, after receiving the second letter, enters into a contract 
with C, who knows of the first  letter, but not of the second, for the sale to him of the cotton. C pays B the money, with which B 
absconds. C ’s payment is good as against A.  
(c) A directs B, his agent, to pay certain money to C. A dies, and D takes out probate to his will. B, after A ’s death, but 
before hearing of it, pays the money to C. The payment is g ood as against D, the executor.  
209.Agent ’s duty on termination of agency by principal ’s death or insanity .—When an agency is 
terminated by the principal dying or becoming of unsound mi nd, the agent is bound to take, on behalf of 
the representatives 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 46]
l dying or becoming of unsound mi nd, the agent is bound to take, on behalf of 
the representatives of his late principal, all reasonable steps for the protection and preservation of the 
interests entrusted to him.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 47]
47 
 210. Termination of sub -agent ’s authority .—The termination of the authority of an agent causes 
the termination (subject to the rules herein contained regarding the termination of an agent ’s authority) of 
the authority of a ll sub -agents appointed by him.  
Agent ’s duty to principal  
211.Agent ’s duty in conducting principal ’s business .—An agent is bound to conduct the business 
of his principal according to the directions given by the principal, or, in the absence of any such 
directions, according to the custom which prevails in doing business of the same kind at the place where 
the agen t conducts such business. When the agent acts otherwise, if any loss be sustained, he must make  it 
good to his principal, and if any profit a ccrues, he must account for it.  
Illustrations  
(a) A, an agent engaged in carrying on for B a business, in which it is the custom to invest from time to time, at interest, the 
moneys which may be in hand, omits to make such investment. A must make good to B the interest usuall y obtained by such 
investments.  
(b) B, a broker, in whose business it is not the custom to sell  on credit, sells goods of A on credit to C, whose credit at the 
time was very high. C, before payment, becomes insolvent. B must mak e good the loss to A.  
212. Skill and  diligence required from agent .—An agent is bound to conduct the business of the 
agency  with as much skill as is generally possessed by perso ns engaged in similar business , unless the 
principal has notice of his want of skill. The agent is always bound to act with reasonable diligence, and 
to use such skill as he possesses; and to make compe nsation to his principal in respect of the direct 
consequences of his own neglect, want of skill , or misconduct, but not in respect of loss or damage which 
are indirectly or remotely caused by such neglec t, want of skill , or misconduct.  
Illustrations  
(a)A, a merchant in Calcutta, has an agent, B, in London, to whom a sum of mo
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 47]
uct.  
Illustrations  
(a)A, a merchant in Calcutta, has an agent, B, in London, to whom a sum of money is paid on A ’s account, with orders to 
remit. B retains the money for a considerable time. A, in consequence of not receiving the money, becomes insolvent. B is lia ble 
for the mone y and interest from the day on which it ought to have been paid, according to the usual rate, and for any further 
direct loss -as, e.g., by variation of ra te of exchange -but not further.  
(b)A, an agent for the sale of goods, having authority to sell on credit, sells to B on credit, without making the proper and 
usual enquiries as to the solvency of B. B, at the time of such sale, is insolvent. A must make compensation to his principal  in 
respect  of any loss thereby sustained.  
(c)A, an insurance -broker em ployed by B to effect an insurance on a ship , omits to see that the usual clauses are inserted in 
the policy. The ship is after wards lost. In consequence of the omission of the clauses nothing can be recovered from the 
underwriters. A is bo und to make goo d the loss to B.  
(d)A, a merchant in England, directs B, his agent at Bombay, who accepts the agency, to send him 100 bales of cotton by a 
certain ship. B, having it in his power to send the cotton, omits to do so. The ship arrives safely in England. Soon after her arrival 
the price of cotton rises. B is bound to make good to A the profit which he might have made by the 100 bales of cotton at the  time 
the ship arrived, but not any profit he might have made by the subsequent rise.  
213.Agent ’s accounts .—An agent is bound to render proper accounts to his principal on demand.  
214.Agent ’s duty  to communicate with principal .—It is the duty of an agent, in cases of difficulty, 
to use all reasonable diligence in communicating with his principal, and in seeking to obtain his 
instructio ns. 
215.Right of principal when agent deals, on his own account, in business of agency without 
principal ’s consent .—If 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 47]
ipal when agent deals, on his own account, in business of agency without 
principal ’s consent .—If an agent deals on his own account in the business of the agency, without first 
obtaining the consent of his principal and acquainting him with all material circumstances which have 
come to his own knowledge on the subject, the principal may repudiate the transaction, if the case shows , 
either that any material fact has been dishonestly concealed from him by the agent, or that the dealings of 
the agent have been disadvantageous to him.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 48]
48 
 Illustrations  
(a)A directs B to sell A ’s estate. B buys the estate for  himself in the name of C. A, on  discovering that B has bought the 
estate for himself, may repudiate the sale, if he can show that B has dishonestly concealed any material fact, or that the sa le has 
been disadvantageous to him.  
(b)A directs B to sell A ’s estate B, on looking over the est ate before selling it, finds a mine on the estate which is unknown 
to A. B informs A that he wishes to buy the estate for himself, but conceals the discovery of the mine. A allows  B to buy , in 
ignorance of the existence of the mine. A, on discovering that B knew of the mine at the time he bought the estate, may either 
repudiate or adopt the sale at his option.  
216. Principal ’s right to benefit gained by agent dealing on his own  account in business of 
agency .—If an agent, without the knowledge of his principal, deals in the business of the agency on his 
own account instead of on account of his principal, the principal is entitled to claim from the agent any 
benefit which may have result ed to him from the transaction.  
Illustration  
A directs B, his agent, to buy a certain house for him. B tells A it cannot be bought, and buys the house for himself. A may, 
on discovering that B has bought the house, compel him to sell it to  A at the price he gave for it.  
217.Agent ’s right of retainer out of sums received on principal ’s account .—An agent may retain, 
out of any sums received on account of the principal in the business of the agency, all moneys due to 
himself in respect of advances made or expenses properly incurred by him in conducting such business , 
and also such remuneration as may be paya ble to him for acting as agent.  
218. Agent ’s duty to p ay sums received for principal .—Subject to such deductions, the agent is 
bound to pay to his principal al l sums received on his account.  
219.When agent ’s remuneration becomes due .—In the absence of any special contract, paym
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 48]
account.  
219.When agent ’s remuneration becomes due .—In the absence of any special contract, payment 
for the performance of any act is not due to the agent until the completion of such act; but an agent may 
detain moneys received by him on account of goods sold, although the whole of the goods consigned to 
him fo r sale may not have been sold, o r although the sal e may not be actually complete.  
220.Agent not entitled to remunerat ion for business misconducted .—An agent who is guilty of 
misconduct in the business of the agency , is not entitled to any remuneration in respect of that part of the 
business which he has misconducted.  
Illustrations  
(a) A employs B to recover, 1,00,000 rupees from C, and to lay it out on good security. B recovers the 1,00,000 rupees; and 
lays out 90,00 0 rupees on good security, but lays out 10,000 rupees on security which he ought to have known to be bad, 
whereby A loses 2,000 rupees. B is entitled to remuneration for recovering the 1,00,000 rupees and for investing the 90,000 
rupees. He is not entitled  to any remuneration for investing the 10,000 rupees, and he must m ake good the 2,000 rupees to B.  
(b)A employs B to recover 1,000 rupees from C. Through B ’s misconduct the money is not recovered. B is entitled to no 
remuneration for his service s, and must  make good the loss.  
221. Agent ’s lien on principal ’s property .—In the absence of any contract to the contrary, an agent 
is entitled to retain goods, papers and other property , whether movable or immovable of the principal 
received by him, until  the amount due to himself for c ommission, disbursements and services in respect 
of the same has bee n paid or accounted for to him.  
  Principal ’s duty to agent   
222.Agent to be indemnified agains t consequences of lawful acts .—The employer of an agent is 
bound to indemnify him against the consequences of all lawful acts done by such agent in exercise of th e 
authority c onferred upon him.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 48]
ll lawful acts done by such agent in exercise of th e 
authority c onferred upon him.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 49]
49 
 Illustrations  
(a)B, at Singapur, under instructions from A of Calcutta, contracts with C to deliver certain goods to him. A does not send 
the goods to B, and C sues B for breach of contract. B informs A of the suit, and A authorizes him to defend the suit. B defe nds 
the suit, and is compelled to pay damages and costs, and incurs expenses. A is liable to B for su ch damage s, costs and expenses.  
(b)B, a broker at Calcutta, by the orders of A, a merchant there, contracts with C for the purchase of 10 casks of oil for A. 
Afterwards A refuses to receive the oil, and C sues B. B informs A, who repudiates the contract altogether.  B defends, but 
unsuccessfully, and has to pay damages  and costs and incurs expenses.  A is liable to B for su ch damages, costs and expenses.  
223.Agent to be indemnified against consequen ces of acts done in good faith .—Where one person 
employs another to do an act, and the agent does the act in good faith, the employer is liable to indemnify 
the agent against the consequences of that act, though it cause an injury to the rights of third persons.  
Illustrations  
(a)A, a dec ree-holder and entitled to execution of B ’s goods, requires the officer of the Court to seize certain goods, 
represe nting them to be the goods of B. The officer seizes the goods, and is sued by C, the true owner of the goods. A is liable to 
indemnify the officer for the sum w hich he is compelled to pay to C, in consequence of obeying A ’s directions.  
(b)B, at the request of A, sells goods in the possession of A, but whic h A had no right to dispose of,  B does not know this, 
and hands over the proceeds of th e sale to A. Afterwards C, the true owner of the goods, sues B and recovers the value of the 
goods and costs. A is liable to indemnify B for what he has been compelled to pay to C , and for B ’s own expenses.  
224.Non -liability of employer of agent to do a cr iminal act .—Where one person employs another 
to do an act which is criminal, th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 49]
f agent to do a cr iminal act .—Where one person employs another 
to do an act which is criminal, the employer is not liable to the agent, either upon an express or an implied 
promise, to indemnify him against the consequences of that Act1. 
Illustrations  
(a) A employs B to beat C, and agrees to indemnify him against all consequences of the act. B thereupon beats C, and has to 
pay damages to C for so doing. A is not liable to  indemnify B for those damages.  
(b)B, the proprietor of a newspaper, publishes, at A ’s request, a libe l upon C in the paper, and A agrees to indemnify B 
against the consequences of the publication, and all costs and damages of any action in respect thereof. B is sued by C and h as to 
pay damages, and also incurs expenses. A is not liable to B upon the indem nity. 
225.Compensation to agent for injury caused by principal ’s neglect .—The principal must make 
compensation to his agent in respect of injury2caused to such agent by the principal ’s neg lect or want of 
skill.  
Illustration  
A employs B as a bricklayer in building a house, and puts up the scaffolding himself. The scaffolding is unskilfully put up, 
and B is in consequence hurt.  A must make compensation to B.  
Effect of agency on contracts with third persons  
226. Enforcement and consequences of agent ’s contracts .—Contracts entered into through an 
agent, and obligations arising from acts done by an agent, may be enforced in the same manner, and will 
have the same legal consequences, as if the contracts had been entered into and the acts d one by the 
princi pal in person.  
  Illustrations  
(a)A buys goods from B, knowing that he is an agent for their sale, but not knowing who is the principal. B ’s principal is the 
person entitled to claim from A the price of the goods, and A cannot, in a suit by the principal, set-off against that clai m a debt 
due to himself from B.  
  
                                                           
1. See s. 24, supra . 
2. Cf. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 49]
m B.  
  
                                                           
1. See s. 24, supra . 
2. Cf. the Indian Fatal Accidents Act, 1855 (13 of 1855).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 50]
50 
 (b)A, being B ’s agent , with authority to receive money on his behalf, receives from C a sum of money due to B. C is 
discharged of his obligation t o pay the sum in question to B.  
227. Principal how far bound , when agent exceeds authority .—When an agent does more than he 
is authorized to do, and when the part of what he does, which is within his authority, can be separated 
from the part which is beyond his authority, so much only of what he does as is  within his authority is 
binding as  between him and his principal.  
Illustration  
A, being owner of a ship and cargo, authorizes B to procure an insurance for 4,000 rupees on the ship. B procures a policy 
for 4,000 rupees on the ship, and another for the lik e sum on the cargo. A is bound to pay the premium for the policy on the ship, 
but not the premium for the policy on the ca rgo. 
228.Principal not bound when excess of agent ’s authority is not separable .—Where an agent 
does more than he is authorized to do, and what he does beyond the scope of his authority cannot be 
separated from what is within it, the principal is not boun d to recognize the transaction.  
  Illustration  
A authorizes B to buy 500 sheep for him. B buys 500 sheep and 200 lambs for one sum of 6, 000 rupees. A may repudiate 
the whole transactio n. 
229.Consequ ences of notice given to agent .—Any notice given to or information obtained by the 
agent, provided it be given or obtained in the course of the business transacted by him for the principal, 
shall, as between the principal and third parties, have the same legal consequences as if it had been given 
to or obtained by the principal.  
  Illustrations  
(a)A is employed by B to buy from C certain goods, of which C is the apparent owner, and buys them accordingly. In the 
course of the treaty for the sale, A learns that the goods really belonged to D, but B is ignorant of that fact. B is not ent itled to  
set-off a debt owing to him from C against the price of the good
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 50]
 that fact. B is not ent itled to  
set-off a debt owing to him from C against the price of the goods.  
(b)A is employed by B to buy from C goods of which C is the apparent owner. A was, before he was so employed, a servant 
of C, and then learnt that the goods really belonged to D, but B is ignorant of that fact. In spite of the knowledge of his agent, B 
may set -off against the price of the goods a deb t owing to him from C.  
230.Agent cannot personally enforce, nor be bound by, co ntracts on behalf of principal .—In the 
absence of any contract t o that effect, an agent cannot personally enforce contracts entered into by him on 
behalf of his principal, nor is he personally bound by them.  
Presu mption of contract to contrary —Such a contract shall be presumed t o exist in the following 
cases: — 
(1) where the contract is made by an agent for the sale or purchase of goods for a merchant 
resident abroad;  
(2) where the agent does not dis close the name of his principal;  
(3) where the principal, thoug h disclosed, cannot be sued.  
231.Rights of parties to a contrac t made by agent not disclosed .—If an agent makes a contract 
with a person who neither knows, nor has reason to suspect, that he is an agent, his principal may require 
the performance of the contract ; but the other contracting party has, as against  the principal, the same 
rights as he would have had as against the agent i f the agent had been principal.  
If the principal discloses himself before the contract is completed, the other contracting party may 
refuse to fulfil the contract, if he can show th at, if he had known who was the principal in the contract, or 
if he had known that the agent was not a principal, he would not have entered into the contract.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 51]
51 
 232. Performance of contract with a gent supposed to be principal .—Where one man makes a 
contract with another, neither knowing nor having reasonable ground to suspect that the other is an agent, 
the principal, if he requires the performance of the contract, can only obtain such performance subject to 
the rights and obligations subsisting between the a gent and t he other party to the contract.  
Illustration  
A, who owes 500 rupees to B, sells 1,000 rupees  worth of rice to B. A is acting as agent for C i n the transaction, but B has 
no knowledge nor reasonable ground of suspicion that such is the case. C cannot compel B to take the rice without allowing him 
to set -off A ’s debt.  
233.Right of person dealin g with agent personally liable .—In cases where the agent is personally 
liable, a person dealing with him may hold either him or his prin cipal, or both of t hem, liable.  
Illustration  
A enters into a contract with B to sell him 100 bales of cotton, and afterwards discovers that B was acting as agent for C. A  
may sue either B or C, or bot h, for the price of the cotton.  
234. Consequence of inducing agent or principal to act on belief that principal or agent w ill be 
held exclusively liable .—When a person who has made a contract with an agent induces the agent to act 
upon the belief that the principal only will be held liable, or induces the principal to act up on the belief 
that the agent only will be held liable, he cannot afterwards hold liable the agent or principal respectively.  
235. Liability of pretended agent .—A person untruly representing himself to be the authorized 
agent of another, and thereby inducing a third person to deal with him as such agent, is liable, if his 
alleged employer does not ratify his acts, to make compensation to the other in respect of any loss or 
damage which he has incurred  by so dealing.  
236.Person falsely contracting as a gent not entitled to performance .—A person with whom a 
contract has be
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 51]
on falsely contracting as a gent not entitled to performance .—A person with whom a 
contract has been entered into in the character of agent, is not entitled to require the performance of it, if 
he was in reality acting, not as  agent, but on his own account.  
237.Liability of principal  induc ing belief that agent ’s unauthoriz ed acts were authorized .—
When an agent has, without authority, done acts or incurred obligations to third persons on behalf of his 
principal, the principal is bound by such acts or obligations, if he has by his words  or conduct induced 
such third persons to believe that such acts and obligations were within the scope of the agent ’s authority.  
Illustrations  
(a) A consig ns goods to B for sale, and gives him instructions not to sell under a fixed price. C, being ignorant  of B ’s 
instructions, enters into a contract with B to buy the goods at a price lower than the reserved pri ce. A is bound by the contract.  
(b) A entrusts B with negotiable instruments endorsed in blank. B sells them to C in violation of private orders from  A. The 
sale is good.  
238. Effect , on agreement, of misrep resentation of fraud, by agent .—Misrepresentation made, or 
frauds committed, by agents acting in the course of their business for their principals, have the same 
effect on agreements made by such agents as if such misrepresentations or frauds had been made or 
committed by the principals; but misrepresentations made, or frauds committed, by agents, in matters 
which do not fall within their authority, do not affect their prin cipals.  
Illustrations  
(a) A, being B ’s agent for the sale of goods, induces C to buy them  by a misrepresentation, which he w as not authorized by 
B to make. The contract is voidable, as betwe en B and C, at the option of C.  
(b) A, the captain of B ’s ship, signs bills of lading without having received on board the goods mentioned therein. The bills 
of lading are void as betwee n B and the pretended cosignor.  

<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 51]
 goods mentioned therein. The bills 
of lading are void as betwee n B and the pretended cosignor.  
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 52]
52 
 CHAPTER XI. —[OF PARTNERSHIP. ]Rep. by the Indian Partnership Act , 1932 (9 of 1932), s. 73 
and the Second Schedule.  
239. [‘Partnership’ defined.] Rep. by s. 73 and the Second Schedule, ibid.  
240. [Lender not a partner by advancing money for share of profits .] Rep. by s . 73 and the Second 
Schedule , ibid.  
241. [Property left in business by retiring partner, or decreased partn er’s preventative .] Rep. by s . 73 
and the Second Schedule , ibid . 
242. [Servant or agent remunerated by share of profits, not a partner .] Rep. by s . 73 and the Second 
Schedule , ibid.  
243. [Widow or child of deceased partner receiving annuity out of profits,  not a partner .] Rep. by s.  
73 and the Second Schedule , ibid.  
244. [Person receiving portion of profits for sale of good -will, no a partner .] Rep. by s . 73 and the 
Second Schedule , ibid.  
245. [Responsibility of person leading another to believe him a partn er.] Rep. by s . 73 and the Second 
Schedule , ibid.  
246. [Liability of person permitting him self to be represented as a partner .] Rep. by s . 73 and the 
Second Schedule , ibid.  
247. [Minor partner not personally liable, but his share is .] Rep. by s . 73 and the Second Schedule , 
ibid. 
248. [Liability of minor partner on attaining majority .] Rep. by s . 73 and the Second Schedule , ibid  
249. [Partner’s liability for debts of partnership .] Rep. bys . 73 and the Second Schedule , ibid.  
250. [Partner’s liability to th ird person for neglect or fraud of co -partner .] Rep. by s . 73 and the 
Second Schedule , ibid.  
251. [Partner’s power to bind co -partners .] Rep. by s . 73 and the Second Schedule , ibid.  
252. [Annulment of contract defining partner’s rights and obligations .] Rep. by s . 73 and the Second 
Schedule , ibid . 
253. [Rules determining partner’s mutual relations, where no contract to contrary .] Rep. by s . 73 and 
the Second Schedule , ibid . 
254. [When Court may dissolve partnership .] Rep. by s.  73 and the Second Sc
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 52]
ond Schedule , ibid . 
254. [When Court may dissolve partnership .] Rep. by s.  73 and the Second Schedule , ibid. 
255. [Dissolution of partnership by prohibition of business .] Rep. by s . 73 and the Second Schedule, 
ibid. 
256. [Rights and obligations of partners in partnership continued after expiry of term for which it was 
entered into. ] Rep. by s.  73 and the Se cond Schedule,  ibid. 
257. [General duties of partners .] Rep. by s . 73 and the Second Schedule , ibid  
258. [Account, to firm, of benefit derived from transaction affecting partnership. ]Rep. by s. 73 and the 
Second Schedule,  ibid. 
259. [Obligations, to firm, of partner carrying on business .] Rep. by s . 73 and the Second Schedule, 
ibid. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872.pdf - page 53]
53 
 260. [Revocation of continuing guarantee by charge by change in firm .] Rep. by the Indian  
Partnership Act , 1932 (9 of 1932), s. 73 and the Second Schedule . 
261. [Non-liability of deceased partner’s estate for subsequent obligations .] Rep. by s. 73 and the 
Second Schedule , ibid.  
262. [Payment of partnership debts, and of separate debts .] Rep. by s . 73and the Second Schedule , 
ibid. 
263. [Continuance, of partners rights and obligations after dissolution .] Rep. by s . 73and the Second 
Schedule , ibid.  
264. [Notice of dissolution .] Rep. by  s. 73 and the Second Schedule , ibid.  
265. [Right of partners to apply for winding -up after termination of partnership .] Rep. by s . 73 and 
the S econd Schedule , ibid.  
266. [Limited -liability partnerships, incorporate partnerships, and joint -stock companies .] Rep. by s . 
73and the Second Schedule,  ibid. 
SCHEDULE. —[Enactments repealed .] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act,  1914 (10 of 1914), 
s. 3 and the Second Schedule . 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882  
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
 
PREAMBLE  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
Local extent.  
Commencement.   
2. Savings.  
3. Construction of certain references to Act 15 of 1877 and Act 9 of 1871.  
CHAPTER I  
OF EASEMENTS GENERALLY  
4. “Easement ” defined.  
Dominant and servient heritages and owners.  
5. Continuous and discontinuous, apparent and non -apparent , easements.  
6. Easement for limited time or on condition.  
7. Easements restrictive of certain rights.  
(a) Exclusive right to enjoy.  
(b) Rights to advantages arising from situation.  
CHAPTER II  
THE IMPOSITION, ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF EASEMENTS  
8. Who may impose easements.  
9.  Servient owners.  
10. Lessor and mortgagor.  
11. Lessee.  
12. Who may acquire easement s. 
13. Easements of necessity and quasi easements.  
14. Direction of way of necessity.  
15. Acquisition by prescription.  
16. Exclusion in favour of reversioner of servient heritage.  
17. Rights which cannot be acquired by prescription.  
18. Customary easement s. 
19. Transfer of dominant heritage passes easement . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 2]
2 
 CHAPTER III  
THE INCIDENTS OF EASEMENTS  
SECTIONS  
20. Rules controlled by contract or title.  
     Incidents of customary easements.  
21. Bar to use unconnected with enjoyment.  
22. Exercise of ease ment. 
     Confinement of exercise of easement.  
23. Right to alter mode of enjoyment.  
24. Right to do acts to secure enjoyment.  
           Accessory rights.  
25. Liability for expenses necessary for preservation of easement.  
26. Liability for damage from want of repair.  
27. Servient owner not bound to do anything.  
28. Extent of easements.  
      Easement of necessity.  
Other easements.  
(a) Right of way.  
(b) Right to light or air acquired by grant.  
(c) Prescriptive right to light or air.  
(d) Prescriptive right to pollute air or water.  
(e) Other prescriptive rights.  
29. Increase of easement.  
30. Partition of dominant heritage.  
31. Obstruction in case of excessive user.  
CHAPTER IV  
THE DISTURBANCE OF EASEMENTS  
32. Right to enjoyment without disturbance.  
33. Suit for disturbance of easement.  
34. When cause of action arises for removal of support.  
35. Injunction to restrain disturbance.  
36. Abatement of obstruction of easement.  
CHAPTER V  
THE EXTINCTION, SUSPENSION AND REVIVAL OF EASEMENTS  
37. Extinction by dissolution of right of servient owner.  
38. Extinction by release.  
39. Extinction by revocation.  
40. Extinction on expiration of limited period or happening of dissolving condition.  
41. Extinction on termination of necessity.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 3]
3 
 SECTIONS  
42. Extinction of useless easement.  
43. Extinction by permanent chang e in dominant heritage.  
44. Extinction on permanent alteration of servi ent heritage by superior force.  
45. Extinction by destruction of either heritage.  
46. Extinction by unity of ownership.  
47. Extinction by non -enjoyment.  
48. Extinction of accessory rights.  
49. Suspension of ea sement.  
50. Servient owner not entitled to require continuance.  
     Compensation for damage caused by ex tinguishment or suspension.  
51. Revival of easements.  
CHAPTER VI  
LICENSES  
52. “ License ” defined.  
53. Who may grant license.  
54. Grant may be express or implied.  
55. Accessory licenses annexed by law.  
56. License when transferable.  
57. Grantor ’s duty to disclose defects.  
58. Grantor ’s duty not to render property unsafe.  
59. Grantor ’s transferee not bound by license.  
60. License when revocable.  
61. Revocation express or implied.  
62. License when deemed revoked.  
63. Licensee ’s rights on revocation.  
64. Licensee ’s rights on eviction.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 4]
4 
 THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882  
ACT NO. 5 OF 18821 
[17th February , 1882.]  
An Act to define and amend the law  relating to Easements and Licenses.  
Preamble. —WHEREAS  it is expedient to define and amend the law relating to Easements  and 
Licenses; It is hereby enacted as follows: —  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title. —This Act may be called the Indian Easements Act, 1882.  
Local extent. —It extends2 to the territories respectively administered by the Governor of Madras 
in Council and the Chief Commissioners of the Central Provinces and Coorg;  
Commencement. —and it shall come into force on the first day of July, 1882.  
STATE AMEND MENTS  
Karnataka  
Amendment of Central Act V of 1882 .—In section 1 of the Indian Easements Act, 1882 
(Central Act V of 1882) for the entry under the heading “Local extent”, the following entry shall be 
substituted, namely: — 
“It extends to the whole of the State of Karnataka”.  
[Vide Karnataka Act 33 of 1978, s. 6].  
2. Savings. —Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to affect any law not hereby expressly 
repealed; or to derogate from —  
(a) any right of the 3[Government] to regul ate the collection, retention and distribu tion of the 
water of rivers and streams flowing in natural channels, and of natural lakes and ponds, or of the 
water flowing, collected, retained or distributed in or by any channel or other work constructed at 
the public expense for irrigation;  
(b) any customary or other right (not being a license) in or over immovable property which the 
Government, the public or any person may possess irrespective of other immovable property; or  
(c) any right acquired, or arising  out of a relation created, before this Act comes into force.  
4[3. Construction of certain references to Act 15 of 1877 and Act 9 of 1871. —All references in 
any Act or Regulation to sections 26 and 27 of the Indian Limitation Act, 18775 or to sections 27 a nd 
28 of Act No. 9 of 18716 shall, in the territories to which this 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 4]
Act, 18775 or to sections 27 a nd 
28 of Act No. 9 of 18716 shall, in the territories to which this Act extends, be read as made to sections 
15 and 16 of this Act.]  
                                                      
1. For Report of Select Committee, see Gazette of India, 1880, Pt. V, p. 1021: and for Proceeding s in Council, see ibid.,  
1881, Supplement, pp. 687 and 766; and ibid., 1882, Supplement, p. 172.   
2. The Act was extended to — 
(1) Ajmer -Merwara by notification under s. 5 of the Scheduled Districts Act, 1874 (14 of 1874), see Gazette of India, 
1897, Pt. I I, p. 1413;  
(2) Bombay and the U.P. by Act 8 of 1891 and continued in force, with modifications, in the territory transferred to 
Delhi State, see the Delhi Laws Act, 1915 (7 of 1915), s. 3 and the Third Schedule ; 
(3) Whole of Madhya Pradesh by Madhya Prade sh Act 23 of 1958;  
(4) Punjab by Punjab Act 29 of 1961;  
(5) Kerala by Kerala Act 5 of 1962;  
(6) Pondicherry by Act 26 of 1968, s. 3 and Sch edule . 
(7) Extended  to the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir and Union territory of Ladakh by Act 34 of 2019 s. 95 and 
the Fifth Schedule (w.e.f. 31 -10- 2019).  
The Act has been repealed in its application to Bellary District by Mysore Act 14 of 1955.  
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “Crown ”. 
4. Subs. by Act 10 of 1914, s. 2 and the First Schedule , for s .  3. 
5. See now the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963).  
6. Rep. by Act 15 of 1877.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 5]
5 
 CHAPTER I  
OF EASEMENTS GENERALLY  
4. “Easement ” defined. —An easement is a right which the owner or occupier of certain 
land possesses, as such, for the beneficial enjoyment of that land, to do and continue to do  
something, or to prevent and continue to prevent something being done, in or upon, or in respect of, 
certain other land not his own.  
Dominant and servient heritages and  owners. —The land for the beneficial enjoyment of which 
the right exists is called the dominant heritage, and the owner or occupier thereof the dominant owner; 
the land on which the liability is imposed is called the servient heritage, and the owner or occ upier 
thereof the servient owner.  
Explanation. —In the first and second clauses of this section, the expression “land” includes also 
things permanently attached to the earth; the expression “beneficial enjoyment ” includes also possible 
convenience, remote a dvantage, and even a mere amenity; and the expression “to do something ” 
includes removal and appropriation by the dominant owner, for the beneficial enjoyment of the 
dominant heritage, of any part of the soil of the servient heritage or anything growing or  subsisting 
thereon.  
Illustrations  
(a) A, as the owner of a certain house, has a right of way thither o ver his neighbour B ’s land for purposes 
connected with the beneficial enjoyment of the house. This is an easement.  
(b) A, as the owner of a certain house, has the right to go on his neighbour B ’s land, and to take water for the 
purposes of his household out of a spring therein. This is an easement.  
(c) A, as the owner of a certain house, has the right to conduct water from  B’s stream to supply the fountains 
in the garden attached to the house. This is an easement.  
(d) A, as the owner of a certain house and farm, has the right to graze a certain number of his own cattle on 
B’s field, or to take, for the purpose of being used  in the house, by himself, his family, guests, lodgers and 
servan
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 5]
ke, for the purpose of being used  in the house, by himself, his family, guests, lodgers and 
servants, water or fish out of C ’s tank, or timber out of D ’s wood, or to use, for the purpose of manuring his 
land, the leaves which have fallen from the trees on E ’s land. These are easements.  
(e) A dedicates to the public the right to occupy the surface of certain land for the purpose of passing and               
re-passing. This right is not an easement.  
(f) A is bound to cleanse a water course running through his land and keep it free from obstr uction for the 
benefit of B, a lower riparian owner. This is not an easement.  
5. Continuous and discontinuous, apparent and non -apparent , easements. —Easements are 
either continuous or discontinuous, apparent or non -apparent.  
A continuous easement is one whose enjoyment is, or may be, continual without the act of man.  
A discontinuous easement is one that needs the act of man for its enjoyment.  
An apparent easement is one the existence of which is shown by some permanent sign which, upon 
careful inspection by a competent person, would be visible to him.  
A non -apparent easement is one that has no such sign.  
Illustrations  
(a) A right annexed to B ’s house to receive light by the windows without obstruction by his neighbour A. 
This is a continuous easement.  
(b) A right of way annexed to A ’s house over B ’s land. This is a discontinuous easement.  
(c) Rights annexed to A ’s land to lead water thither across B ’s land by an aqueduct and to draw off water 
thence by a drain. The drain would be discovered upon careful ins pection by a person conversant with such 
matters. These are apparent easements.  
(d) A right annexed to A ’s house to prevent  B from building on his own land. This is a non -apparent 
easement.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 6]
6 
 6. Easement for limited time or on condition. —An easement may be permanent, or for a term of 
years or other limited period, or subject to periodical interruption, or exercisable only at a certain 
place or at certain times, or between certain hours, or for a particular purpose, or on                           
condition th at it shall commence or become void or voidable on the happening of a specified event or the 
performance or non -performance of a specified act.  
7. Easements restrictive of certain rights. —Easements ar e restrictions of one or other of the 
following rights ( namely): —  
(a) Exclusive right to enjoy. —The exclusive right of every owner of immovable property (subject 
to any law for the time being in force) to enjoy and dispose of the same and all products thereof and 
accessions thereto.  
(b) Rights to advantages ar ising  from situation. —The right of every owner of immovable 
property (subject to any la w for the time being in force)  to enjoy without disturbance try another the 
natural advantages arising from its situation.  
Illustrations of the rights above referred to  
(a) The exclusive right of every owner of land in a town to build on such land, subject to any municipal law for the 
time being in force.  
(b) The right of every owner of land that the air passing thereto shall not be unreasonably polluted by other 
persons.  
(c) The right of every owner of a house that his physical comfort shall not be interfered with materially and 
unreasonably by noise or vibration caused by any other person.  
(d) The right of every owner of land to so much light and air as pass vertically t hereto.  
(e) The right of every owner of land that such land, in its natural condition, shall have the support naturally 
rendered by the subjacent and adjacent soil of another person.  
Explanation .—Land is in its natural condition when it is not excavated an d not subjected to artificial pressure; and 
the “subjacent and adjacent soil" mentioned i
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 6]
avated an d not subjected to artificial pressure; and 
the “subjacent and adjacent soil" mentioned in this illustration means such soil only as in its natural condition would 
support the dominant heritage in its natural condition.  
(f) The right of every owner of land  that, within his own limits, the water which naturally passes or percolates by, 
over or through his land shall not, before so passing or percolating, be unreasonably polluted by other persons.  
(g) The right of every owner of land to collect and dispose wi thin his own limits of all water under the land which 
does not pass in a defined channel and all water on its surface which does not pass in a defined channel.  
(h) The right of every owner of land that the water of every natural stream which passes by, thr ough or over his 
land in a defined natural channel shall be allowed by other persons to flow within such owner ’s limits without 
interruption and without material alteration in quantity, direction, force or temperature; the right of every owner of 
land abut ting on a natural lake or pond into or out of which a natural stream flows, that the water of such lake or pond 
shall be allowed by other persons to remain within such owner ’s limits without material alteration in quantity or 
temperature.  
(i) The right of every owner of upper land that water naturally rising in, or falling on, such land, and not passing in 
defined channels, shall be allowed by the owner of adjacent lower land to run naturally thereto.  
(j) The right of every owner of land abutting on a natur al stream, lake or pond to use and consume its water for 
drinking, household purposes and watering his cattle and sheep; and the right of every such owner to use and consume 
the water for irrigating such land and for the purposes of any manufactory situate  thereon, provided that he does not 
thereby cause material injury to other like owners.  
Explanation. —A natural stream is a stream, whether permanent or intermittent
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 6]
o other like owners.  
Explanation. —A natural stream is a stream, whether permanent or intermittent, tidal or tideless, on the surface of 
land or underground, which flows by the operation of nature only and in a natural and known course.  
CHAPTER II  
THE IMPOSITION , ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER  OF EASEMENTS  
8. Who may impose easements. —An easement may be imposed by any one  in the circumstances, 
and to the extent, in and to which he may transfer his interest in the heritage on which the liability is 
to be imposed.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 7]
7 
 Illustrations  
(a) A is tenant of B ’s land under a lease for an unexpired term of twenty years, and has power t o transfer his interest 
under the lease. A may impose an easement on the land to continue during the time that the lease exists or for any shorter 
period.  
(b) A is tenant for his life of certain land with remainder to B absolutely. A cannot, unless with B ’s consent, 
impose an easement thereon which will continue after the determination of his life -interest.  
(c) A, B and C are co -owners of certain land. A cannot, without the consent of B and C, impose an easement on 
the land or on any part thereof.  
(d) A and  B are lessees of the same lessor, A of a field X for a term of five years, and B of a field Y for a term of 
ten years. A ’s interest under his lease is transferable; B ’s is not. A may impose on X, in favour of B, a right of way 
terminable with A ’s lease.  
9. Servient owners. —Subject to the provisions of section 8, a servient owner may impose on the 
servient heritage any easement that does not lessen the utility of the existing easement. But he cannot, 
without the consent of the dominant owner, impose an ease ment on the servient heritage which would 
lessen such utility.  
Illustrations  
(a) A has, in respect of his mill, a right to the uninterrupted flow thereto from sunrise to noon of the water of 
B’s stream. B may grant to C the right to divert the water of the stream from noon to sunset: Provided that A ’s 
supply is not thereby diminished.  
(b) A has, in respect of his house, a right of way over B's land. B may grant to C, as the owner of a 
neighbouring  farm, the right to feed his cattle on the grass growing on the way: Provided that A ’s right of way is 
not thereby obstructed.  
10. Lessor and mortgagor. —Subject to the provisions of section 8, a lessor may impose, on the 
property leased, any easement that does not derogate from the rights of the lessee as such, and a 
mortgagor may impose, on the property mortga
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 7]
 derogate from the rights of the lessee as such, and a 
mortgagor may impose, on the property mortgaged, any easement that does not render the security 
insufficient. But a lessor or mortgagor cannot, without the consent of the lessee or mortgagee, i mpose 
any other easement on such property, unless it be to take effect on the termination of the lease or the 
redemption of the mortgage.  
Explanation. —A security is insufficient within the meaning of this section unless the value of the 
mortgaged property exceeds by one -third, or, if consisting of buildings, exceeds by one -half, the 
amount for the time being due on the mortgage.  
11. Lessee. —No lessee or other person having a derivative interest may impose on the property 
held by him as such an easement to t ake effect after the expiration of his own interest, or in derogation 
of the right of the lessor or the superior proprietor.  
12. Who may acquire easements. —An easement may be acquired by the owner of the 
immovable property for the beneficial enjoyment of w hich the right is created or on his behalf, by any 
person in possession of the same.  
One of two or more co -owners of immovable property may, as such, with or without the consent of 
the other or others, acquire an easement for the beneficial enjoyment of su ch property.  
No lessee of immovable property can acquire, for the beneficial enjoyment of other immovable 
property of his own, an easement in or over the property comprised in his lease.  
13. Easements of necessity and quasi easements. —Where one person tran sfers or bequeaths 
immovable property to another, —  
(a) if an easement in other immovable property of the transferor or testator is necessary for 
enjoying the subject of the transfer or bequest, the transferee or legatee shall be entitled to such 
easement;  or 
(b) if such an easement is apparent and continuous and necessary for enjoying the said subject 
as it was enjoyed when the transfer or bequest took effect, the transfere
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 7]
enjoying the said subject 
as it was enjoyed when the transfer or bequest took effect, the transferee or legatee shall, unless a 
different intention is expressed or necessarily implied , be entitled to such easement;  
(c) if an easement in the subject of the transfer or bequest is necessary for enjoying                            
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 8]
8 
 other immovable property of the transferor or testator, the transferor or the legal representative  of 
the testator shall be entitled to such easement; or  
(d) if such an easement is apparent and continuous and necessary for enjoying the said property 
as it was enjoyed when the transfer or bequest took effect, the transferor, or the legal representative 
of the testator, shall , unless a different intention is expressed or necessarily implied, be entitled to 
such easement.  
Where a partition is made of the joint property of several persons, —  
(e) if an easement  over the share of one of them is necessary for enjoying the share of another 
of them, the latter shall be entitled to such easement , or 
(f) if such an easement is apparent and continuous and necessary for enjoying the share of the 
latter as it was enjoyed when the partition took effect, he shall, unles s a different intention is 
expressed or necessarily implied, be entitled to such easement.  
The easements mentioned in this section, clauses ( a), (c) and ( e), are called easements of necessity.  
Where immovable property passes by operation of law, the persons from and to whom it so passes 
are, for the purpose of this section, to be deemed, respectively, the transferor and transferee.  
Illustrations  
(a) A sells B a field then used for agricultural p urposes only. It is inaccessible except by passing over A ’s 
adjoining land or by trespassing on the land of a stranger. B is entitled to a right of way, for agricultural 
purposes only, over A ’s adjoining land to the field sold.  
(b) A, the owner of two fields, sells one to B, and retains the other. The field retained was , at the date of the 
sale, used for agricultural purposes only , and is inaccessible except by passing over the field sold to B. A is 
entitled to a right of way, for agricultural purposes only, over B ’s field to the field retained.  
(c) A sells B a house with windows overlooking A ’s land, which A retains. The light 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 8]
ld retained.  
(c) A sells B a house with windows overlooking A ’s land, which A retains. The light which passes over A ’s 
land to the windows is necessary for enjoying the house as it war enjoyed when the sale took effect. B is entitled 
to the light, and A cannot afterwards obstruct it by building on his land.  
(d) A sells B a house with windows overlooking A ’s land. The light passing over A ’s land to the windows is 
necessary for enjoying the house as it was enjoyed when the sale took effect. Afterwards A sells the la nd to C. 
Here C cannot obstruct the light by building on the land, for he takes it subject to the burdens to which it was 
subject in A ’s hands.  
(e) A is the owner of a house and adjoining land. The house has windows ov erlooking the land. A 
simultaneously sells the house to B and the land to C. The light passing over the land is necessary for enjoying 
the house as it was enjoyed when the sale took effect. Here A i mpliedly grants B a right to the light, and C takes 
the la nd subject to the restriction that he may not build so as to obstruct such light.  
(f) A is the owner of a house and adjoining land. The house has windows over -looking the land. A, retaining 
the house, sells the land to B, without expressly reserving any ea sement. The light passing over the land is 
necessary for enjoying the house as it was enjoyed when the sale took effect. A is entitled to the light, and B 
cannot build on the land so as to obstruct such light.  
(g) A, the owner of a house, sells B a factory  built on adjoining land. B is entitled, as against A, to pollute 
the air, when necessary, with smoke and vapours from the factory.  
(h) A, the owner of two adjoining houses, Y and Z, sells Y to B, and retains Z. B is entitled to the benefit of 
all the gutt ers and drains common to the two houses and necessary for enjoying Y as it was enjoyed when the 
sale took effect, and A is entitled to the benefit of all the gutters and drains common to the two house
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 8]
 took effect, and A is entitled to the benefit of all the gutters and drains common to the two houses and 
necessary for enjoying Z as it was enjoyed when th e sale took effect.  
(i) A, the owner of two adjoining buildings, sells one to B retaining the other. B is entitled to a right to lateral 
support from A ’s building, and A is entitled to a right to lateral support from B ’s building.  
(j) A, the owner of two adjoining buildings, sells one to B, and the other to C. C is entitled to lateral support 
from B ’s building, and B is entitled to lateral support from C ’s building.  
(k) A grants lands to B for the purpose of building a house thereon. B is entitled to such amount of lateral  
and subjacent support from A ’s land as is necessary for the safety of the house.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 9]
9 
  
 (l) Under the Land Aquisition Act, 18701 (10 of 1870), a Railway Company compulsorily acquires a portion 
of B's land for the purpose of making  a siding. The Company is entitled to such amount of lateral support from 
B's adjoining land as is essential for the safety of the siding.  
(m) Owing to the partition of joint property, A becomes the owner of an upper room in a building, and B 
becomes  the owner of the portion of the building immediately beneath it. A is entitled to such amount of vertical 
support from B's portion as is essential for the safety of the upper room.  
(n) A lets a house and grounds to B  for a particular business. B has no access to them other than by crossing 
A’s land. B is entitled to a right of way over that land suitable to the business to be carried on by B in the house 
and grounds.  
14. Direction of way of necessity. —When 2[a right] to a way of necessity is created under    
section 13, the transferor, the legal representative of the testator, or the owner of the share over which 
the right is exercised, as the case may be, is entitled to set out the way; but it must be reasonably 
convenient for the dominant owner.  
When the perso n so entitled to set out the way refuses or neglects to do so, the dominant owner 
may set it out.  
15. Acquisition by prescription. —Where the access and use of light or air to and for any building 
have been peaceably enjoyed therewith, as an easement, without interruption, and for twenty years,  
and where support from one person ’s land or things affixed thereto has been peaceably received by 
another person ’s land subjected to artificial pressure or by things affixed thereto as an easement, 
without interr uption, and for twenty years,  
and where a right of way or any other easement has been peaceably and openly enjoyed by any 
person claiming title thereto, as an easement, and as of right, without interruption, and for  twenty 
years,  
the right to such access a nd use of light or air,
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 9]
, without interruption, and for  twenty 
years,  
the right to such access a nd use of light or air, support or other easement shall be absolute.  
Each of the said periods of twenty years shall be taken to be a period ending within two years next 
before the institution of the suit wherein the claim to which such period relates is co ntested.  
Explanation I. —Nothing is an enjoyment within the meaning of this section when it has been had 
in pursuance of an agreement with the owner or occupier of the property over which the right is 
claimed, and it is apparent from the agreement that such  right has not been granted as an easement, or, 
if granted as an easement, that it has been granted for a limited period, or subject to a condition on the 
fulfilment  of which it is to cease.  
Explanation II.—Nothing is an interruption within the meaning of this section unless where there 
is an actual cessation of the enjoyment by reason of an obstruction by the act of some person other 
than the claimant, and unless such obstruction is submitted to or acquiesc ed in for one year after the 
claimant has notice thereof and of the person making or authori sing the same to be made.  
Explanation III.—Suspension of enjoyment in pursuance of a contract between the dominant and 
servient owners is not an interruption within  the meaning of this section.  
Explanation IV. —In the case of an easement to pollute water, the said period of twenty years 
begins when the pollution first prejudices perceptibly the servient heritage.  
When the property over which a right is claimed under t his section belongs to 3[Gover nment] this 
section shall be read as if, for the words “twenty years ”, the words “4[thirty years] ” were substituted.  
                                                      
1. See now the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (1 of 1894).  
2. Subs. by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and the Second Schedule, for “right”  
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “Crown”.  
4. Subs. by Act 36 of 1963,
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 9]
Second Schedule, for “right”  
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “Crown”.  
4. Subs. by Act 36 of 1963, s. 28, for “sixty years” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1964).   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 10]
10 
 Illustrations  
(a) A suit is brought in 1883 for obstructing a right of way. The defendant admits the obstruction, 
but denies the right of way. The plaintiff proves that the right was peaceably and openly enjoyed by 
him, claiming title thereto as an easement and as of right, w ithout interruption, from 1st January, 1862 , 
to 1st January, 1882. The plaintiff is entitled to judgment.  
(b) In a like suit the plaintiff shows that the right was peaceably and openly enjoyed by him for 
twenty years. The defendant proves that for a year o f that time the plaintiff was entitled to possession 
of the servient heritage as lessee thereof and enjoyed the right as such lessee. The suit shall be 
dismissed, for the right of way has not been enjoyed “as an easement ” for twenty years.  
(c) In a like su it the plaintiff shows that the right was peaceably and openly enjoyed by him for 
twenty years. The defendant proves that the plaintiff on one occasion during the twenty years had 
admitted that the user was not of right and asked his leave to enjoyed the r ight. The suit shall be 
dismissed, for the right of way has not been enjoyed “as of right ” for twenty years.  
16. Exclusion in favour of reversioner of servient heritage .—Provided that, when any 
land upon, over or from which any easement has been enjoyed or  derived has been held under 
or by virtue of any interest for life or any term of years exceeding three years from the 
granting thereof, the time of the enjoyment of such easement during the continuance of such 
interest or term shall be excluded in the com putation of the said last -mentioned period of 
twenty years, in case the claim is, within three years next after the determination of such 
interest or term, resisted by the person entitled, on such determination, to the said land.  
Illustration  
A sues for a declaration that he is entitled to a right of way over B ’s land. A proves that he has 
enjoyed the right for twenty -five years; but B shows tha
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 10]
 way over B ’s land. A proves that he has 
enjoyed the right for twenty -five years; but B shows that during ten of these years C had a life -interest 
in the land; that on C ’s death B became entitled to the land; an d that within two years after C ’s death he 
contested A ’s claim to the right. The suit must he dismissed, as A, with reference to the provisions of 
this section, has only proved enjoyment for fifteen years.  
17. Rights which cannot be acquired by prescriptio n.—Easements acquired under 
section 15 ar e said to be acquired by prescription, and are called prescriptive rights.  
None of the following rights can be so acquired: —  
(a) a right which would tend to the total destruction  of the subject of the right, or the 
property on which, if the acquisition were made, liability would be imposed;  
(b) a right to the free passage of light or air to an open space of ground;  
(c) a right to surface -water not flowing in a stream and not perma nently collected in a 
pool, tank or otherwise;  
(d) a right to underground water not passing in a defined channel.  
18. Customary easement. —An easement may be acquired in virtue of a local custom. 
Such easements are called customary easements.  
Illustrations  
(a) By the custom of a certain village every cultivator of village land is entitled, as such, to graze 
his cattle on the common pasture. A , having become the tenant of a plot of uncultivated land in the 
village , breaks up and cultivates that plot. He there by acquires an easement to graze his cattle in 
accordance with the custom.  
(b) By the custom of a certain town no owner or occupier of a house can open a new window 
therein so as substantially to invade his neighbour ’s privacy. A builds a house in the town  near B’s 
house. A thereupon acquires an easement that B shall not open new windows in his house so as to 
command a view of the portions of A ’s house which are ordinarily excluded from observation, and B 
acquires a like easement with r
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 10]
of A ’s house which are ordinarily excluded from observation, and B 
acquires a like easement with respect to A ’s house.  
19. Transfer of dominant heritage passes easement. —Where the dominant heritage is 
transferred or devolves, by act of parties or by operation of law, the transfer or devolution 
shall, unless a contrary intention appears, be deemed to pass the easement to th e person in 
whose favour the transfer or devolution takes place.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 11]
11 
 Illustration  
A has certain land to which a right of way is annexed. A lets the land to B for twenty years. The right of way 
vests in B and his legal representative so lon g as the lease continues.  
CHAPTER III  
THE INCIDENTS OF EASEMENTS  
20. Rules controlled by contract or title. —The rules contained in this Chapter are controlled by 
any contract between the dominant and servient owners relating to the servient heritage, and b y the 
provisions of the instrument or decree, if any, by which the easement referred to was imposed.  
Incidents of customary easements. —And when any incident of any customary easement is 
inconsistent with such rules, nothing in this Chapter shall affect suc h incident.  
21. Bar to use unconnected with enjoyment. —An easement must not be used for any pu rpose 
not connected with the enjoyment of the dominant heritage.  
Illustrations  
(a) A, as owner of a farm Y, has a right of way over B ’s land to Y. Lying beyond Y,  A has another farm Z, 
the beneficial enjoyment of which is not necessary for the beneficial enjoyment of Y. He must not use the 
easement for the purpose of passing to and from Z.  
(b) A, as owner of a certain house, has a right of way to and from it. For t he purpose of passing to and from 
the house, the right may be used, not only by A, but by the members of his family, his guests, lodgers, servants, 
workmen, visitors and customers; for this is a purpose connected with the enjoyment of the dominant heritage . 
So, if A lets the house, he may use the right of way for the purpose of collecting the rent and seeing that the 
house is kept in repair . 
22. Exercise of easement Confinement of exercise of easement. —The dominant owner must 
exercise his right in the mode which is least onerous to the servient owner; and , when the exercise of 
an easement can without detriment to the dominant owner be confined to a determinate part of the 
servient heritage, such exercise shall, at the request of the servient ow
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 11]
a determinate part of the 
servient heritage, such exercise shall, at the request of the servient owner, be so con fined.  
Illustrations  
(a) A has a right of way over B ’s field. A must enter the way at either end and not at any intermediate point.  
(b) A has a right annexed to his house to cut thatching -grass in B ’s swamp. A, when exercising his easement, 
must cut the grass so that the plants may not be destroyed.  
23. Right to alter mode of enjoyment. —Subject to the provisions of section 22, the dominant 
owner may, from time to time, alter the mode and place of enjoying the easement, provided  that he 
does not thereby im pose any additional burden on the servient heritage.  
Exception. —The dominant owner of a right of way cannot vary his line of passage at pleasure, 
even though he does not thereby impose any additional burden on the servient heritage.  
Illustrations  
(a) A, th e owner of a saw -mill, has a right to a flow of water sufficient to work the mill. He may convert the 
saw mill into a corn -mill, provided that it can be worked by the same amount of water.  
(b) A has a right to discharge on B ’s land the rain -water from the  eaves of A ’s house. This does not entitle A 
to advance his eaves if, by so doing, he imposes a greater burden on B ’s land.  
(c) A, as the owner of a paper -mill, acquires a right to pollute a stream by pouring in the refuse -liquor 
produced by making in the mill paper from rags. He may pollute the stream by pouring in similar liquor 
produced by making in the mill paper by a new process from bamboos, provided that he does not substantially 
increase the amount, or injuriously change the nature, of the pollution . 
(d) A, a riparian owner, acquires, as against the lower riparian owners, a prescriptive right to pollute a stream 
by throwing sawdust into it. This does not entitle A to pollute the stream by discharging into it poisonous liquor.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 11]
 into it poisonous liquor.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 12]
12 
 24. Right to do acts to secure enjoyment .—The dominant owner is entitled1, as against servient 
owner, to do all acts necessary to secure the full enjoyment of the easement; but such acts must be 
done at such time and in such manner as, without detriment to the domin ant owner, to cause the 
servient owner as little inconvenience as possible; and the dominant owner must repair, as far as 
practicable, the damage (if any) caused by the act to the servient heritage.  
Accessory rights. —Rights to do acts necessary to secure t he full enjoyment of an easement are 
called accessory rights.  
Illustrations  
(a) A has an easement to lay pipes in B ’s land to convey water to A ’s cistern. A may enter and dig the land 
in order to mend the pipes, but he must restore the surface to its o riginal state.  
(b) A has an easement of a drain through B ’s land. The sewer with which the drain communicates is altered. 
A may enter upon B ’s land and alter the drain, to adapt it to the new sewer, provided that he does not thereby 
impose any additional bu rden on B ’s land.  
(c) A, as owner of a certain house, has a right of way over B ’s land. The way is out of repair, or a tree is 
blown down and falls across it. A may enter on B ’s land and repair the way or remove the tree from it.  
(d) A, as owner of a certa in field, has a right of way over B ’s land. B renders the way impassable. A may 
deviate from the way and pass over the adjoining land of B, provided that the deviation is reasonable.  
(e) A, as owner of a certain house, has a right of way over B ’s field. A may remove rocks to make the way.  
(f) A has an easement of support from B ’s wall. The wall gives way. A may enter upon B ’s land and repair 
the wall.  
(g) A has an easement to have his land flooded by means of a dam in B’s stream. The dam is half  swept 
away by an in undation. A may enter upon B ’s land and repair the dam.  
25. Liability for expenses necessary for preservation of easement. —The expense
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 12]
nd repair the dam.  
25. Liability for expenses necessary for preservation of easement. —The expenses incurred in 
constructing works, or making repairs, or doing any other act necessary for the use or preservation of 
an easement, must be defrayed by the dominant owner.  
26. Liability for damage from want of repair. —Where an easement is enjoyed by means of an 
artificial work, the dominant owner is liable to make compensation for any damage to the servient  
heritage arising from the want of repair of such work.2  
27. Servient owner not bound to do anything. —The servient owner is not bound to do anything 
for the benefit of the dominant heritage, and he is entitled, as against the dominant owner, to use the 
servient heritage in any way consistent with the enjoyment of the easement; but he must not do any 
act tending to restrict the easement or to render its exercise less convenient.  
Illustrations  
(a) A, as owner of a house, has a right to lead water and send se wage through B ’s land. B is not bound , as servient  
owner , to clear the watercourse or scour the sewer.  
(b) A grants a right of way through his land to B as owner of a field. A may feed his cattle on grass growing on the way, 
provided that B ’s right of way is not thereby obstructed; but he must not build a wall at the end of his land so as to prevent B 
from going beyond it, nor must he narrow the way so as to render the exercise of the right less easy than it was at the date of 
the grant.  
(c) A, in respect o f his house, is entitled to an easement of support from B ’s wall. B is not bound , as servient owner , to 
keep the wall standing and in repair. But he must not pull down or weaken the wall so as to make it incapable of rendering 
the necessary support.  
(d) A, in respect of his mill, is entitled to a watercourse through B ’s land. B must not drive stakes so as to obstruct the 
watercourse.  
(e) A, in respect of his house, is entitled to a certain quantity of light passing over B
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 12]
rcourse.  
(e) A, in respect of his house, is entitled to a certain quantity of light passing over B ’s land. B must not p lant trees so a s 
to obstruct the passage to A ’s windows of that quantity of light.  
                                                      
1. But see s. 36, infra , as to abatement of obstruction of easement.  
2. But see s. 50, infra , as to extinguishment or suspension of easement.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 13]
13 
 28. Extent of easements. —With respect to the extent of easements and the mode of their 
enjoyment, the following provisions shall take effect: —  
Easement of necessity. —An eas ement of necessity is co -extensive with the necessity as it existed 
when the easement was imposed.  
Other easements. —The extent of any other easement and the mode of its enjoyment must be 
fixed with reference to the probable intention of the parties and the  purpose for which the right was 
imposed or acquired.  
In the absence of evidence as to such intention and purpose —  
(a) Right of way. —A right of way of any one kind does not include a right of way of any other 
kind;  
(b) Right to light or air acquired by grant. —The extent of a right to the passage of light or 
air to a certain window, door or other opening, imposed by a testamentary or non -testamentary 
instrument, is the quantity of light or air that entered the opening at the time the testator died or the 
non-testamentary instrument was made;  
(c) Prescriptive right to light or air. —The extent of a prescriptive right to the passage of light 
or air to a certain window, door or other opening is that quantity of light or air which has been 
accustomed to enter t hat opening during the whole of the prescriptive period irrespectively of the 
purposes for which it has been used;  
(d) Prescriptive right to pollute air or water. —The extent of a prescriptive right to pollute air 
or water is the extent of the pollution at the commencement of the period of user on completion of 
which the right arose; and  
(e) Other prescriptive rights. —The extent of every other prescriptive right and the mode of its 
enjoyment must be determined by the accustomed user of the right.  
29. Increase of easement. —The dominant owner cannot, by merely altering or adding to the 
dominant heritage, substantially increase an easement.  
Where an easement has been granted or bequeathed so that its extent shall be proportionate to the 
extent 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 13]
an easement has been granted or bequeathed so that its extent shall be proportionate to the 
extent of the domi nant heritage, if the dominant heritage is increased by alluvion, the easement is 
proportionately increased, and , if the dominant heritage is diminished by dilluvion, the easement is 
proportionate ly diminished.  
Save as aforesaid, no easement is affected by  any change in the extent of the dominant or the 
servient heritage.  
Illustrations  
(a) A, the owner of a mill, has acquired a prescriptive right to divert to his mill part of the water of a stream. 
A alters the machinery of his mill. He cannot therbey incre ase his right to divert water.  
(b) A has acquired an easement to pollute a stream by carrying on a manufacture on its banks by which a 
certain quantity of foul matter is discharged into it. A extends his works and thereby increases the quantity 
discharged. He is responsible to the lower riparian owners for injury done by such increase.  
(c) A, as the owner of a farm, has a right to take, for the pur pose of manuring his farm, leaves which have 
fallen from the trees on B ’s land. A buys a field and unites it to his farm. A is not thereby entitled to take leaves 
to manure this field.  
30. Partition of dominant heritage. —Where a dominant heritage is divide d between two or     
more persons, the easement becomes annexed to each of the shares, but not so as to increase 
substantially the burden on the servient heritage: Provided that such annexation is                             
consistent with the terms of th e instrument, decree or revenue -proceeding (if any) under which the 
division was made, and , in the case of prescriptive rights, with the user during the prescriptive period.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 14]
14 
 Illustrations  
(a) A house to which a right of way by a particular pat h is annexed is divided into two parts, one of which is 
granted to A, the other to B. Each is entitled, in respect of his part, to a right of way by the same path.  
(b) A house to which is annexed the right of drawing water from a well to the extent of fift y buckets a day is 
divided into two distinct heritages , one of which is granted to A, the other to B. A and B are each entitled, in 
respect of his heritage, to draw from the well fifty buckets a day; but the amount drawn by both must not exceed 
fifty buckets a day.  
(c) A, having in respect of his house an easement of light, divides the house into three distinct heritages. 
Each of these continues to have the right to have its windows unobstructed.  
31. Obstruction in case of excessive user. —In the case o f excessive user of an easement the 
servient owner may, without prejudice to any other remedies to which he may be entitled, obstruct the 
user, but only on the servient heritage: Provided that such user cannot be obstructed when the 
obstruction would inter fere with the lawful enjoyment of the easement.  
Illustration  
A, having a right to the free passage over B's land of light to four windows six feet by four, increases their 
size and number. It is impossible to obstruct the passage of light to the new window s without also obstructing 
the passage of light to the ancient windows. B cannot obstruct the excessive user.  
CHAPTER IV  
THE DISTURBANCE OF EASEMENTS  
32. Right to enjoyment without disturbance. —The owner or occupier of the dominant heritage 
is entitled to enjoy the easement without disturbance by any other person.  
Illustration  
A, as owner of a house, has a right of way over B ’s land. C unlawfully enters on B ’s land , and obstructs A in 
his right of way. A may sue C for compensation, not for the entry, but for the obstruction.  
33. Suit for disturbance of easement. —The owner of any interest in the d
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 14]
but for the obstruction.  
33. Suit for disturbance of easement. —The owner of any interest in the dominant heritage, or the 
occupier of such heritage, may institute a suit for compensation for the disturbance of the easement or 
of any right accessory thereto; provided that the disturbance has actually caused substantia l damage to 
the plaintiff.  
Explanation  I.—The doing of any act likely to injure the plaintiff by affecting the evidence of the 
easement, or by materially diminishing the value of the dominant heritage, is substantial damage 
within the meaning of this secti on and section 34.  
Explanation II.—Where the easement disturbed is a right to the free passage of light passing to the 
openings in a house, no damage is substantial within the meaning of this section unless it falls within 
the first Explanation , or interfe res materially with the physical comfort of the plaintiff, or prevents 
him from carrying on his accustomed business in the dominant heritage as beneficially as he had done 
previous to instituting the suit.  
Explanation III .—Where the easement disturbed is a  right to the free passage of air to the openings 
in a house, damage is substantial within the meaning of this section if it interferes materially with the 
physical comfort of the plaintiff, though it is not injurious to his health.  
Illustrations  
(a) A pla ces a permanent obstruction in a path over which B, as tenant of C ’s house, has a right of way. This 
is substantial damage to C, for it may affect the evidence of his reversionary right to the easement.  
(b) A, as owner of a house, has a right to walk along  one side of B ’s house. B builds a verandah overhanging 
the way about ten feet from the ground, and so as not to occasion any inconvenience to foot -passengers using 
the way. This is not substantial damage to A.  
34. When cause of action arises for removal o f support. —The removal of the means of  support to 
which a dominant owner is entitled does not give 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 14]
support. —The removal of the means of  support to 
which a dominant owner is entitled does not give rise to a right to recover compensation unless and until 
substantial damage is actually sustained.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 15]
15 
 35. Injunction to restrain disturbance. —Subject to the provisions of the Specific Relief Act, 
18771 (1 of 1877), sections 52 to 57 (both inclusive), an injunction may be granted to restrain the 
disturbance of an easement —  
(a) if the easement is actually disturbed —when compensation for such disturb ance might b e 
recovered under this Chapter;  
(b) if the disturbance is only threatened or intended —when the act threatened or intended must 
necessarily, if performed, disturb the easement.  
36. Abatement of obstruction of easement. —Notwithstanding the provisions of sect ion 24, the 
dominant owner cannot himself abate a wrongful obstruction of an easement.  
CHAPTER V  
THE EXTINCTION, SUSPENSION AND REVIVAL OF EASEMENTS  
37. Extinction by dissolution of right of servient owner. —When, from a cause which preceded 
the imposition of an easement, the person by whom it was imposed ceases to have any right in the 
servient heritage, the easement is extinguished.  
Exception. —Nothing in this section applies to an easement lawfully imposed by a mortgagor in 
accordance with section 10.  
Illustrations 
(a) A transfers Sultanpur to B on condition that he does not marry C. B imposes an easement on Sultanpur. 
Then B marries C. B ’s interest in Sultanpur ends, and with it the easement is extinguished.  
(b) A, in 1860, let Sultanpur to B for thirty  years from the date of the lease. B, in 1861, imposes an easement 
on the land in favour of C, who enjoys the easement peaceably and openly as an easement without interruption 
for twenty -nine years. B ’s interest in Sultanpur then ends, and with it C ’s ease ment.  
(c) A and B, tenants of C, have permanent transferable interests in their respective holdings. A imposes on 
his holding an easement to draw water from a tank for the purpose of irrigating B ’s land. B enjoys the easement 
for twenty years. Then A ’s ren t falls into arrear and his interest is sold. B ’s easement is extinguished.  
(d) A mortgages Sult
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 15]
 t falls into arrear and his interest is sold. B ’s easement is extinguished.  
(d) A mortgages Sultanpur to B , and lawfully imposes an easement on the land in favour of C in accordance 
with the provisions of section 10. The land is sold to D in satisfaction o f the mortgage -debt. The easement is not 
thereby extinguished.  
38. Extinction by release. —An easement is extinguished when the dominant owner releases it, 
expressly or impliedly, to the servient owner.  
Such release can be made only in the circumstances and  to the extent in and to which the dominant 
owner can alienate the dominant heritage.  
An easement may be released as to part only of the servient heritage.  
Explanation I.—An easement is impliedly released —  
(a) where the dominant owner expressly authorises an act of a permanent nature to be done on 
the servient heritage, the necessary consequence of which is to prevent his future enjoyment of the 
easement, and such act is done is pursuance of such authority;  
(b) where any permanent alteration is m ade in the dominant heritage of such a nature as to 
show that the dominant owner intended to cease to enjoy the easement in future.  
Explanation II.—Mere non -user of an easement is not an implied release within the meaning of 
this section.  
                                                      
1. Ref. by Act 47 of 1963, s. 44 (w.e.f. 1 -3-1964).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 16]
16 
 Illustrations  
(a) A, B and C are co -owners of a house to which an easement is annexed. A, without the consent of B and 
C, releases the easement. This release is effectual only as against A and his legal representative.  
(b) A grants B an easement over A ’s lan d for the beneficial enjoyment of his house. B assigns the house to 
C. B then purports to release the easement. The release is ineffectual.  
(c) A, having the right to discharge his eavesdroppings into B's yard, expressly authori ses B to build over 
this yar d to a height which will interfere with the discharge. B builds accordingly. A ’s easement is extinguished 
to the extent of the interference.  
(d) A, having an easement of light to a window, builds up that window with bricks and mortar so as to 
manifest an i ntention to abandon the easement permanently. The easement is impliedly released.  
(e) A, having a projecting roof by means of which he enjoys an easement to discharge eavesdroppings on 
B’s land, permanently alters the roof  so as to  direct the rain -water into a different channel and discharge it on 
C’s land. The easement is impliedly released . 
39. Extinction by revocation. —An easement is extinguished when the servient owner, in exercise 
of a power reserved in this behalf, revokes the  easement.  
40. Extinction on expiration of limited period or happening of dissolving condition. —An 
easement is extinguished where it has been imposed for a limited period, or acquired on condition that 
it shall become void on the performance or non -perform ance of a specified act, and the period expires 
or the condition is fulfilled.  
41. Extinction on termination of necessity. —An easement of necessity is extinguished when the 
necessity comes to an end.  
Illustration  
A grants B a field inaccessible except by passing over A ’s adjoining land. B afterwards purchases a part of 
that land over which he can pass to his field. The right of way over A ’s land which B had acquired is 
extingu
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 16]
ver which he can pass to his field. The right of way over A ’s land which B had acquired is 
extinguished.  
42. Extinction of useless easement. —An easement is extinguished when it be comes  incapable of 
being at any time  under any circumstances beneficial to the dominant owner.  
43. Extinction by permanent change in dominant heritage. —Where, by any permanent change 
in the dominant heritage, the burden on the servi ent heritage is material ly increased and cannot be 
reduced by the servient owner without interfering with the lawful enjoyment of the easement, the 
easement is extinguished, unless —  
(a) it was intended for the beneficial enjoyment of the dominant heritage, to whatever extent the  
easement should be used; or  
(b) the injury caused to the servient owner by the change is so slight that no reasonable person 
would complain of it; or  
(c) the easement is an easement of necessity.  
Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to an easement entitling the dominant owner to 
support of the dominant heritage.  
44. Extinction on permanent alteration of servient heritage by superior force. —An ease ment 
is extinguished where the servient heritage is by superior force so permanently altered th at the 
dominent owner can no longer enjoy such easement:  
Provided that, where a way of necessity is destroyed by superior force, the dominant owner has a 
right to another way over the servient heritage; and the provisions of section 14 apply to such way.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 17]
17 
 Illustration  
(a) A grants to B, as the owner of a certain house, a right to fish in a river running through A ’s 
land. The river changes its course permanently and runs through C ’s land. B ’s easement is                
extinguished.  
(b) Access to a path over which A has a right of way is permanently cut off by an earthquake. A ’s 
right is extinguished.  
45. Extinction by destruction of either heritage. —An easement is extinguished when either the 
dominant or the servient heritage is completely dest royed.  
Illustration  
A has a right of way over a road running along the foot of a sea -cliff. The road is washed away by a 
permanent encroachment of the sea. A ’s easement is extinguished.  
46. Extinction by unity of ownership. —An easement is extinguished when  the same person 
becomes entitled to the absolute ownership of the whole of the dominant and servient heritages.  
Illustrations  
(a) A, as the owner of a house has a right of way over B ’s field. A mortgages his house, and B mortgages his 
field to C. Then C forecloses both mortgages and becomes thereby absolute owner of both house and field. The 
right of way is extinguished.  
(b) The dominant owner acquires only part of the servient heritage: the easement is not extinguished, except 
in the case illustrated in section 41.  
(c) The servient owner acquires the dominant heritage in connection with a third person: the easement is not 
extinguished.  
(d) The separate owners of two separate dominant heritages jointly acquire the heritage which is servient to 
the two sepa rate heritages: the easements are not extinguished.  
(e) The joint owners of the dominant heritage jointly acquire the servient heritage: the easement is 
extinguished.  
(f) A single right of way exists over two servient heritages for the beneficial enjoyment  of a single dominant 
heritage. The dominant owner acquires one only of the servient heritages. The easement is not extinguished.  
(g) A has a right of way over B ’s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 17]
ly of the servient heritages. The easement is not extinguished.  
(g) A has a right of way over B ’s road. B dedicates the road to the public. A ’s right of way is not 
extinguished.  
47. Extincti on by non -enjoyment. —A continuous easement is extinguished when it totally ceases 
to be enjoyed as such for an unbroken period of twenty years.  
A discontinuous easement is extinguished when, for a like period, it has not been enjoyed as such.  
Such period s hall be reckoned, in the case of a continuous easement, from the day on which its 
enjoyment was obstructed by the servient owner, or rendered impossible by the dominant owner; and, 
in the case of a discontinuous easement, from the day on which it was last enjoyed by any person as 
dominant owner:  
Provided that if, in the case of a discontinuous easement, the dominant owner, within such period, 
registers, under the Indian Registration Act, 18771 (3 of 1877), a declaration of his intention to retain 
such easem ent, it shall not be extinguished until a period of twenty years has elapsed from the date of 
the registration.  
Where an easement can be legally enjoyed only at a certain place, or at certain times, or between 
certain hours, or for a particular purpose, it s enjoyment during the said period at another place, or at 
other times, or between other hours, or for another purpose, does not prevent its extinction under this 
section.  
The circumstance that, during the said period, no one was in possession of the servi ent heritage,              
or that the easement could not be enjoyed, or that a right accessory thereto was                                                  
enjoyed, or that the dominant owner was not aware of its existence, or that he enjoyed it in ignoran ce 
of his right to do so, does not prevent its extinction under this section.  
  
                                                      
1. See now the Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 17]
  
1. See now the Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 18]
18 
 An easement is not extinguished under this section —  
(a) where the cessation is in pursuance of a contract between the dominant and servient owners;  
(b) where the dominant heritage is held in co -ownership, and one of the co -owners enjoys the 
easement within the said period , or 
(c) where the easement is a necessary easement.  
Where several heritages are respectively subject to rights of way for the benefit of a single 
heritage , and the ways are continuous, such rights shall, for the purposes of this section, be deemed to 
be a single easement.  
Illustration  
A has, as annexed to his house, rights of way from the high road thither over the heritages X and Z and the intervening 
heritage Y. Before the twenty years expire, A exercises his right of way over X. His rights of way over Y and Z are not 
extinguished.  
48. Extinction of accessory rights. —When an easement is extinguished, the rights (if any) 
accessory thereto are also extinguis hed. 
Illustration  
A has an easement to draw water from B ’s well. As accessory thereto, he has a right of way over B ’s land to 
and from the well. The easement to draw water is extinguished under section 47. The right of way is also 
extinguished.  
49. Suspension of easement. —An easement is suspended when the dominant owner become 
entitled to possession of the servient heritage for a limited interest therein, or when the servient owner 
becomes entitled to possession of the dominant heritage for a limited  interest therein.  
50. Servient owner not entitled to require continuance. —The servient owner has no right to 
require that an easement be continued; and, notwithstanding the provisions of section 26, he is not 
entitled to compensation for damage caused to the servient heritage in consequence of the 
extinguishment or suspension of the easement, if the dominant owner has given to the servient owner 
such notice as will enable him, without unreasonable expense, to protect the servient heritage from 
such
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 18]
notice as will enable him, without unreasonable expense, to protect the servient heritage from 
such damage.  
Compensation for damage caused by extinguishment or suspension. —Where such notice has 
not been given, the servient owner is entitled to compensation for damage caused to the servient 
heritage in consequence of such extinguishment or suspension.  
Illustrati on 
A, in exercise of an easement, diverts to his canal the water of B ’s stream. The diversion continues for many years, and 
during that time the bed of the stream partly fills up. A then abandons his easement, and restores the stream to its ancient 
course.  B’s land is consequently flooded. B sues A for compensation for the damage caused by the flooding. It is proved that 
A gave B a month ’s notice of his intention to abandon the easement, and that such notice was sufficient to enable B, without 
unreasonable expense, to have prevented the damage. The suit must he dismissed.  
51. Revival of easements. —An easement extinguished under section 45 revives ( a) when the 
destroyed heritage is, before twenty years have expired, restored by the deposit of alluvion; ( b) when 
the destroyed heritage is a servient building and before twenty years have expired such building is 
rebuilt upon the same site; and ( c) when the destroyed heritage is a dominant building and before 
twenty years have expired such building is rebuilt upon  the same site and in such a manner as not to 
impose a greater burden on the servient heritage.  
An easement extinguished under section 46 revives when the grant or bequest by which
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 19]
19 
 the unity of ownership was produced is set aside by the decre e of a competent Court. A necessary 
easement extinguished under the same section revives when the unity of ownership ceases from any 
other cause.  
A suspended easement revives if the cause of suspension is removed before the right is 
extinguished under sect ion 47.  
Illustration  
A, as the absolute owner of field Y, has a right of way thither over B ’s field Z. A obtains from B a lease of Z 
for twenty years. The easement is suspended so long as A remains lessee of Z. But when A assigns the lease to 
C, or surrend ers it to B, the right of way revives.  
CHAPTERVI  
LICENSES  
52. “License” defined. —Where one person grants to another, or to a definite number of other 
persons, a right to do, or continue to do, in or upon the immovable property of the grantor, something 
which would, in the absence of such right, be unlawful, and such right does not amount to an 
easement or an interest in the property, the right is called a license.  
53. Who may grant license. —A license may be granted by any one in the circumstances and to 
the extent in and to which he may transfer his interests in the property affected by the license.  
54. Grant may be express or implied. —The grant of a license may be express or implied from 
the conduct of the grantor, and an agreement which purports to crea te an easement, but is ineffectual 
for that purpose, may operate to create a license.  
55. Accessory licenses annexed by law. —All licenses necessary for the enjoyment of any 
interest, or the exercise of any right, are implied in the constitution of such int erest or right. Such 
licenses are called accessory licenses.  
Illustration  
A sells the trees growing on his land to B. B is entitled to go on the land and take away the trees.  
56. License when transferable. —Unless a different intention is expressed or necessarily implied, 
a license to attend a place of public entertainment may be transferred by the li
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 19]
cessarily implied, 
a license to attend a place of public entertainment may be transferred by the licensee; but, save as 
aforesaid, a license cannot he transferred by the licensee or exercised by his servants or agents.  
Illustrations  
(a) A grants B a righ t to walk over A ’s field whenever he pleases. The right is not annexed to any 
immovable property of B. The right cannot be transferred.  
(b) The Government grant B a license to erect and use temporary grain -sheds on Government land. In the 
absence of expres s provision to the contrary, B ’s servants may enter on the land for the purpose of erecting 
sheds, erect the same, deposit grain therein and remove grain therefrom.  
57. Grantor ’s duty to disclose defects. —The grantor of a license is bound to disclose to the 
licensee any defect in the property affected by the license, likely to be dangerous to the person or 
property of the licensee, of which the grantor is, and the licensee is not, aware.  
58. Grantor ’s duty  not to render property unsafe. —The grantor of a license is bound not to do 
anything likely to render the property affected by the license dangerous to the person or property of 
the licensee.  
59. Grantor ’s transferee not bound by license. —When the grantor of the license transfers the 
property affected thereby, the transferee is not as such bound  by the license.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 20]
20 
 60. License when revocable. —A license may be revoked by the grantor, unless — 
(a)  it is coupled with a transfer of property and such tr ansfer is in force;  
(b) the licensee, acting upon the license, has executed a work of a permanent character and 
incurred expenses in the execution.  
61. Revocation express or implied. —The revocation of a license may be express or implied.  
Illustrations  
(a) A, the owner of a field, grants a license to B to use a path across it. A, with intent to revoke the 
license, locks a gate across the path. The license is revoked.  
(b) A, the owner of a field, grants a license to B to stack hay on the field. A lets or sells the field to C. 
The license is revoked.  
62. License when deemed revoked. —A license is deemed to be revoked —  
(a) when, from a cause preceding the grant of it, the grantor ceases to have any interest in the 
property affected by the license;  
(b) when t he licensee releases it, expressly or impliedly, to the grantor or his representative;  
(c) where it has been granted for a limited period, or acquired on condition that it shall become 
void on the performance or non -performance of a specified act, and the period expires, or the 
condition is fulfilled;  
(d) where the property affected by the license is destroyed or by superior force so permanently 
altered that the licensee can no t longer exercise his right;  
(e) where the licensee becomes entitled to the absol ute ownership of the property affected by 
the license;  
(f) where the license is granted for a specified purpose and the purpose is attained, or 
abandoned, or becomes impracticable;  
(g) where the license is granted to the licensee as holding a particular of fice, employment or 
character, and such office, employment or character ceases to exist;  
(h) where the license totally ceases to be used as such for an unbroken period of twenty years, 
and such cessation is not in pursuance of a contract between the granto r and the licensee;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 20]
ears, 
and such cessation is not in pursuance of a contract between the granto r and the licensee;  
(i) in the case of an accessory license, when the interest or right to which it is accessory ceases 
to exist.  
63. Licensee ’s rights on revocation. —Where a license is revoked, the licensee is entitled to a 
reasonable time to leave the pr operty affected thereby and to remove any goods which he has been 
allowed to place on such property.  
64. Licensee ’s rights on eviction. —Where a license has been granted for a consideration, and the 
licensee, without any fault of his own, is evicted by the grantor before he has fully enjoyed, under the 
license, the right for which he contracted, he is entitled to recover compensation from the grantor.  
______  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 1]
     
 
 
      
 
 
   
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
                                    
 
                                  
 
               
  
 
     
  
 
 
 
        
  
                  
                 
        
 
 
 
 
 
      
  
               
               
             
      
  
 
  
            
  
 
 THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860 
ACT NO. 45 OF 1860 1* 
[6th October, 1860.] 
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTION 
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTION 
Preamble.-WHEREAS it is expedient to provide a general Penal Code 
for 2*[India]; 
It is enacted as follows:- -
1. 
Title and extent of operation of the Code. 
1. Title and extent of operation of the Code.--This Act shall be 
called the Indian Penal Code, and shall 3*[extend to the whole of 
India 4*[except the State of Jammu and Kashmir]]. 
2. 
Punishment of offences committed within India. 
2. Punishment of offences committed within India.--Every person 
shall be liable to punishment under this Code and not otherwise for 
every act or omission contrary to the provisions thereof, of which he 
shall be guilty within 5*[India] 6****. 
3. 
Punishment of offences committed beyond, but which by law may be tried 
within, India. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 2]
                 
              
                   
                   
                  
    
 
 
 
 
 
      
  
                  
           
 
                            
            
 
                       
              
 
                       
                                         
                 
                 
                             
                   
                    
                   
                          
                       
            
 
                          
           
                       
                  
                         
             
 
                         
       
             
 
                    
             
                
         ----------------------------------------------------------------------3. Punishment of offences committed beyond, but which by law may 
be tried within, India.--Any person liable, by any 7*[Indian law], to be tried for an offence committed beyond 5*[India] shall be 
dealt with according to the provisions of this Code for any act 
committed beyond 5*[India] in the same manner as if such act had 
been committed within 5*[India]. 
4. 
Extension of Code to extra-territorial offences. 
8*[4. Extension of Code to extra-territorial offences.--The 
provisions of this Code apply also to any offence committed by- -
9*[(1) any citizen of India in any place without and 
beyond India; 
(2) any person on any ship or aircraft registered in India 
wherever it may be.] 
1. The Act has been amended in its application to Madras by 
Madras Act 25 of 1960, U. P. by U. P. Acts 31 of 1961, 29 of 1970 
and 47 of 1975, Andhra Pradesh by Andhra Pradesh Act 16 of 1968, 
Maharashtra by Maharashtra Act 19 of 1971, Mysore by Mysore Act 8 
of 1972, West Bengal by West Bengal Act 42 of 1973. 
The Act has been extended to Goa, Daman and Diu with 
modifications by Reg. 12 of 1962, s. 3 and Sch., extended to and 
brought into force in Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, 
s. 2 and
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 2]
and Sch., extended to and 
brought into force in Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, 
s. 2 and Sch. I (w.e.f. 1-7-1965) and to Laccadive, Minicoy and 
Amindivi Islands by Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-10 -
1967). 
The Act comes into force in Pondicherry vide Reg. 7 of 1963, 
s. 3 and Sch. I (w.e.f. 1-10-1963). 
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the whole of 
India except Part B States". 
3. Subs. by the A. O. 1948, for "take effect * * * throughout 
British India". The words and figures "on and from the first day 
of May, 1861" occurring between the words "effect" and 
"throughout" were rep. by Act 12 of 1891. 
4. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "except Part B States". 
5. Subs. by s. 3 and Sch., ibid., for "the States". 
6. The words and figures "on or after the said first day of May, 
1861" omitted by Act 12 of 1891. 
7. Subs. by the A. O. 1937, for "law passed by the Governor-General 
of India in Council". 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 3]
 
                
 
                
 
 
 
 
 
 
               
          
     
 
                          
 
                    
                    
       
 
                                                            
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
                   
              
            
                
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
                                    
 
                              
 
 
 
 
 
          
  
                          
             
           
               102 8. Subs. by Act 4 of 1898, s. 2, for the original s. 4. 
9. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for the original cls. (1) to (4). 
Explanation. 
Explanation.--In this section the word "offence" includes every 
act committed outside 1*[India] which, if committed in 1*[India] would 
be punishable under this Code. 
2*[Illustration] 
3***A, 4*[who is 5*[a citizen of India]], commits a murder in 
Uganda. He can be tried and convicted of murder in any place in 
1*[India] in which he may be found. 
6* * * * * 
5. 
Certain laws not to be affected by this Act. 
7*[5. Certain laws not to be affected by this Act.--Nothing in 
this Act shall affect the provisions of any Act for punishing mutiny 
and desertion of officers, soldiers, sailors or airmen in the service 
of the Government of India or the provision of any special or local 
law.] 
CHAPTER II 
GENERAL EXPLANATIONS 
CHAPTER II 
GENERAL EXPLANATIONS 
6. 
Definitions in the Code to be understood subject to exceptions. 
6. Definitions in the Code to be understood subject to 
exceptions.--Throughout this Code every definition of an offence, 
every penal provision and every illustration of every such definition or penal provision, shall be understood subject to the exceptions 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 4]
           
             
 
 
                             
 
                    
              
           
                 
          
 
                  
                 
             
            
                 
 
 
 
  
     
 
 
              
               
     
 
 
 
  
 
 
                  
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                 
                      
  
 
 
 
  
 
 contained in the Chapter entitled "General Exceptions", though those 
exceptions are not repeated in such definition, penal provision, or 
illustration. 
Illustrations 
(a) The sections, in this Code, which contain definitions of 
offences, do not express that a child under seven years of age cannot 
commit such offences; but the definitions are to be understood subject 
to the general exception which provides that nothing shall be an 
offence which done by child under seven years of age. 
(b) A, a police-officer, without warrant, apprehends Z who has 
committed murder. Here A is not guilty of the offence of wrongful 
confinement; for he was bound by law to apprehend Z, and therefore the 
case falls within the general exception which provides that "nothing is an offence which is done by a person who is bound by law to do it". 
7. 
Sense of expression once explained. 
7. Sense of expression once explained.--Every expression which is 
explained in any part of this Code, is used in every part of this Code 
in conformity with the explanation. 
8. 
Gender. 
8. Gender.--The pronoun "he" and its derivatives are used of any 
person, whether male or female. 
9. 
Number. 
9. Number.--Unless the contrary appears from the context, words 
importing the singular number include the plural number, and words 
importing the plural number include the singular number. 
10. 
"Man". "Woman". 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 5]
                
             
 
                
 
               
 
                
 
                    
      
 
                       
      
 
               
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
                      
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               
   
  
 
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
                       
              
          ----------------------------------------------------------------------
103 10. "Man". "Woman".--The word "man" denotes a male human being of 
any age; the word "woman" denotes a female human being of any age. 
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the States". 
2. Subs. by Act 36 of 1957, s.3 and Sch. II, for "Illustrations". 
3. The brackets and letter `6(a)' omitted by s. 3 and Sch. II, ibid. 
4. Subs. by the A. O. 1948, for "a coolie, who is a Native Indian 
subject". 
5. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for "a British subject of Indian domicile". 
6. Illustrations (b), (c) and (d) were rep. by the A. O. 1950. 
7. Subs., ibid., for the former s. 5. 
11. 
"Person". 
11. "Person".--The word "person" includes any Company or 
Association or body of persons, whether incorporated or not. 12. 
"Public". 
12. "Public".--The word "public" includes any class of the public 
or any community. 
13. 
[Definition of "Queen".] Rep. by the A. O. 1950. 
14. 
"Servant of Government". 
1*[14. "Servant of Government".--The words "servant of 
Government" denote any officer or servant continued, appointed or 
employed in India by or under the authority of Government.] 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 6]
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
       
  
 
  
 
 
 
               
       
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
               
      
  
 
  
 
 
 
                
          
                    
                  
                  
         
                           
        
                              
 
                 
    
 
                 15. 
[Definition of "British India".] Rep. by the A. O. 1937. 
16. 
Definition of "Government of India".] Rep., ibid. 
17. 
"Government". 
2*[17 "Government".--The word "Government" denotes the Central 
Government or the Government of a 3****State.] 
18. 
"India". 
4*[18. "India".--"India" means the territory of India excluding 
the State of Jammu and Kashmir.] 
19. 
"Judge". 
19. "Judge".--The word "Judge" denotes not only every person who 
is officially designated as a Judge, but also every person. 
who is empowered by law to give, in any legal proceeding, civil 
or criminal, a definitive judgment, or a judgment which, if not 
appealed against, would be definitive, or a judgment which, if confirmed by some other authority, would be definitive, or 
who is one of a body of persons, which body of persons is 
empowered by law to give such a judgment. 
Illustrations 
(a) A collector exercising jurisdiction in a suit under Act 10 of 
1859, is a Judge. 
(b) A Magistrate exercising jurisdiction in respect of a charge 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 7]
                  
     
 
                  
              
                  
                 
   
  
 
  
   
  
                  
                 
                 
         
                               
                  
             
 
            
 
        
 
                   
      
 
             
 
              
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
              
         
 
                                                             
                        
             
                     
                    ---------------------------------------------------------------------
104 on which he has power to sentence to fine or imprisonment with or 
without appeal, is a Judge. 
(c) A member of a panchayat which has power, under 5*Regulation 
VII, 1816, of the Madras Code, to try and determine suit, is a Judge. 
(d) A Magistrate exercising jurisdiction in respect of a charge 
on which he has power only to commit for trial to another Court, is not a Judge. 
20. 
"Court of Justice". 
20. "Court of Justice".--The words "Court of Jutsice" denote a 
Judge who is empowered by law to act judicially alone, or a body of 
Judges which is empowered by law to act judicially as a body, when 
such Judge or body of Judges is acting judicially. 
Illustration 
A Panchayat acting under 5*Regulation VII, 1816, of the Madras 
Code, having power to try and determine suits, is a Court of Justice. 
1. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for s. 14. 
2. Subs., ibid., for s. 17. 
3. The words and letter "Part A" omitted by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and 
Sch. 
4. Subs. by s. 3 and Sch., ibid., for s. 18. 
5. Rep. by the Madras Civil Courts Act, 1873 (3 of 1873). 
21. 
"Public servant". 
21. "Public servant".--The words "public servant" denote a person 
falling under any of the descriptions hereinafter following, namely:- -
1* * * * * 
Second.--Every Commissioned Officer in the Military, 
2*[Naval or Air] Forces 3*[4**** of India]; 
5*[Third.--Every Judge including any person empowered by 
law to discharg
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 7]
orces 3*[4**** of India]; 
5*[Third.--Every Judge including any person empowered by 
law to discharge, whether by himself or as a member of any body 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 8]
          
 
                                 
             
                  
                   
                      
                 
                      
                 
 
                     
             
 
                     
                   
              
                        
                 
                     
                 
                
         
                       
                                      
                       
                
                     
                    
                  
                      
        
 
                     
                 
                      
                           
                   
               
 
           
 
                 
 
                   
              
 
              
 
              
 
        
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------of persons. any adjudicatory functions;] 
Fourth.--Every officer of a Court of Justice 
6*[(including a liquidator, receiver or commissioner)] whose duty 
it is, as such officer, to investigate or report on any matter of 
law or fact, or to make, authenticate, or keep any document, or to take charge or dispose of any property, or to execute any 
judicial process, or to administer any oath, or to interpret, or 
to preserve order in the Court, and every person specially 
authorized by a Court of Justice to perform any of such duties; 
Fifth.--Every juryman, assessor, or member of a panchayat 
assisting a Court of Justice or public servant; 
Sixth.--Every arbitrator or other person to whom any cause 
or matter has been referred for decision or report by any Court 
of Justice, or by any other competent public authority; 
Seventh.--Every person who holds any office by virtue of 
which he is empowered to place or keep any person in confinement; 
Eighth.--Every officer of 7*[the Government] whose duty it 
is, as such officer, to prevent offences, to give information of offences, to bring
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 8]
] whose duty it 
is, as such officer, to prevent offences, to give information of offences, to bring offenders to justice, or to protect the public 
health, safety or convenience; 
Ninth.--Every officer whose duty it is as such officer, to 
take, receive, keep or expend any property on behalf of 7*[the 
Government], or to make any survey, assessment or contract on 
behalf of 7*[the Government], or to execute any revenue-
process, or to investigate, or to report, on any matter affecting 
the pecuniary interests of 7*[the Government], or to make. 
authenticate or keep any document relating to the pecuniary 
interests of 7*[the Government], or to prevent the infraction 
of any law for the protection of the pecuniary interests of 
7*[the Government] 8****; 
Tenth.--Every officer whose duty it is, as such officer, to 
take, receive, keep or expend any property, to make any survey or 
assessment or to levy any rate or tax for any secular common 
purpose of any village, town or district, or to make, authenticate or keep any document for the ascertaining of the 
rights of the people of any village, town or district; 
1. Cl. First omitted by the A. O. 1950. 
2. Subs. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and Sch. I, for "or Naval". 
3. Subs. by the A. O. 1948, for "of the Queen while serving under 
any Government in British India or the Crown Representative". 
4. The words "of the Dominion" omitted by the A. O. 1950. 
5. Subs. by Act 40 of 1964, s. 2, for cl. Third. 
6. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 9]
            
 
             
 
 
 
 
                     
                 
                         
      
             
 
                                  
                    
               
 
                                
                   
                      
                  
                               
 
            
 
                        
          
  
 
               
             
              
      
 
                
               
          
            
                                                             
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
                    
            
                 
       
  
 105 7. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for "the Crown". 
8. Certain words omitted by Act 40 of 1964, s. 2. 
1*[Eleventh.--Every person who holds any office in virtue 
of which he is empowered to prepare, publish, maintain or revise 
an electoral roll or to conduct an election or part of an 
election;] 
2*[Twelfth.--Every person- -
(a) in the service or pay of the Government or 
remunerated by fees or commission for the performance of any public duty by the Government; 
(b) in the service or pay of a local authority, a 
corporation established by or under a Central, Provincial or 
State Act or a Government company as defined in section 617 
of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956).] 
Illustration 
A Municipal Commissioner is a public servant. 
Explanation 1.--Persons falling under any of the above 
descriptions are public servants, whether appointed by the Government 
or not. 
Explanation 2.--Wherever the words "public servant" occur, they 
shall be understood of every person who is in actual possession of the 
situation of a public servant, whatever legal defect there may be in 
his right to hold that situation. 
3*[Explanation 3.--The word "election" denotes an election for 
the purpose of selecting members of any legislative, municipal or 
other public authority, of whatever character, the method of selection 
to which is by, or under, any law pre
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 9]
lic authority, of whatever character, the method of selection 
to which is by, or under, any law prescribed as by election.] 
4* * * * * 
22. 
"Movable property". 
22. "Movable property".--The words "movable property" are 
intended to include corporeal property of every description, except 
land and things attached to the earth or permanently fastened to 
anything which is attached to the earth. 
23. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 10]
 
 
  
 
 
                
           
  
  
  
                
           
 
 
    
  
               
             
             
                
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               
                          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                
            
 
           
 
                    
         
           
 
                    
         
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------"Wrongful gain". 
23. "Wrongful gain".--"Wrongful gain" is gain by unlawful means 
of property to which the person gaining is not legally entitled. 
"Wrongful loss". 
"Wrongful loss".--"Wrongful loss" is the loss by unlawful means 
of property to which the person losing it is legally entitled. 
Gaining wrongfully. Losing wrongfully. 
Gaining wrongfully. Losing wrongfully.--A person is said to gain 
wrongfully when such person retains wrongfully, as well as when such 
person acquires wrongfully. A person is said to lose wrongfully when 
such person is wrongfully kept out of any property, as well as when 
such person is wrongfully deprived of property. 
24. 
"Dishonestly". 
24. "Dishonestly".--Whoever does anything with the intention of 
causing wrongful gain to one person or wrongful loss to another 
person, is said to do that thing "dishonestly". 
25. 
"Fraudulently". 
25. "Fraudulently".--A person is said to do a thing fraudulently 
if he does that thing with intent to defraud but not otherwise. 
1. Ins. by Act 39 of 1920, s. 2. 
2. Subs. by Act 40 of 1964, s. 2, for cl. Twelfth, ins. by Act 2 of 
1958, s. 2. 
3. Ins. by Act 39 of 1920, s. 2. 
4. Explanation 4 ins. by Act 2 of 1958, s. 2, omitted by Act 40 of 1964, s. 2. 
106 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 11]
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
                    
             
  
 
 
 
 
 
        
  
                    
             
              
    
                 
              
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               
                  
               
     
              
     
                      
                 
            
               
            
         
  
 
 
 
 
 
 26. 
"Reason to believe". 
26. "Reason to believe".--A person is said to have "reason to 
believe" a thing, if he has sufficient cause to believe that thing but 
not otherwise. 
27. 
Property in possession of wife, clerk or servant. 
27. Property in possession of wife, clerk or servant.--When 
property is in the possession of a person's wife, clerk or servant, on 
account of that person, it is in that person's possession within the 
meaning of this Code. 
Explanation.--A person employed temporarily or on a particular 
occasion in the capacity of a clerk, or servant, is a clerk or servant 
within the meaning of this section. 
28. 
"Counterfeit". 
28. "Counterfeit".--A person is said to "counterfeit" who causes 
one thing to resemble another thing, intending by means of that 
resemblance to practise deception, or knowing it to be likely that 
deception will thereby be practised. 
1*[Explanation 1.--It is not essential to counterfeiting that 
the imitation should be exact. 
Explanation 2.--When a person causes one thing to resemble 
another thing, and the resemblance is such that a person might be deceived thereby, it shall be presumed, until the contrary is proved, that the person so causing the one thing to resemble the other thing 
intended by means of that resemblance to practise deception or knew it 
to be likely that deception would thereby be practised.] 
29. 
"Document". 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 12]
             
            
                
       
                      
               
                 
 
                              
 
                   
        
 
             
 
          
                       
     
               
                     
              
               
                   
 
 
                              
 
                      
             
                
                   
                 
   
  
 
 
 
  
 
               
                
          
               
         
 
               
 
 
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------29. "Document".--The word "document" denotes any matter expressed 
or described upon any substance by means of letters, figures or marks, 
or by more than one of those means, intended to be used, or which may 
be used, as evidence of that matter. 
Explanation 1.--It is immaterial by what means or upon what 
substance the letters, figures or marks are formed, or whether the 
evidence is intended for, or may be used in, a Court of Justice, or 
not. 
Illustrations 
A writing expressing the terms of a contract, which may be used 
as evidence of the contract, is a document. 
A cheque upon a banker is a document. 
A power-of-attorney is a document. A map or plan which is intended to be used or which may be used 
as evidence, is a document. 
A writing containing directions or instructions is a document. Explanation 2.--Whatever is expressed by means of letters, 
figures or marks as explained by mercantile or other usage, shall be 
deemed to be expressed by such letters, figures or marks within the 
meaning of this section, although the same may not be actually 
expressed. 
Illustration 
A writes his name on the back of a bill of exchange payable to 
his order. The meaning of the endorsement as explained by mercantile 
usage, is that the bill is to be paid to the holder. The endorsement 
is a document, and must be construed in the same manner as if the w
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 12]
 to the holder. The endorsement 
is a document, and must be construed in the same manner as if the words "pay to the holder" or words to that effect had been written 
over the signature. 
30. 
"Valuable security". 
30. "Valuable security".--The words "valuable security" denote a 
document which is, or purports to be, a document whereby any legal 
right is created, extended, transferred, restricted, extinguished or 
released, or who hereby any person acknowledges that he lies under 
legal liability, or has not a certain legal right. 
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 1889, s. 9, for the original Explanation. 
107 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 13]
                              
 
                         
              
                
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
                      
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
               
             
                   
 
  
 
  
  
 
                 
               
      
  
 
  
          
  
                     
                   
               
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 Illustration 
A writes his name on the back of a bill of exchange. As the 
effect of this endorsement is to transfer the right to the bill to any 
person who may become the lawful holder of it, the endorsement is a 
"valuable security". 
31. 
"A will". 
31. "A will".--The words "a will" denote any testamentary 
document. 
32. 
Words referring to acts include illegal omissions. 
32. Words referring to acts include illegal omissions.--In every 
part of this Code, except where a contrary intention appears from the 
context, words which refer to acts done extend also to illegal 
omissions. 
33. 
"Act". "Omission". 
33. "Act". "Omission".--The word "act" denotes as well as series 
of acts as a single act: the word "omission" denotes as well a series 
of omissions as a single omission. 
34. 
Acts done by several persons in futherance of common intention. 
1*[34. Acts done by several persons in futherance of common 
intention.--When a criminal act is done by several persons in 
furtherance of the common intention of all, each of such persons is 
liable for that act in the same manner as if it were done by him alone.] 
35. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 14]
                     
    
 
 
                   
          
                     
             
                
                      
   
 
 
 
 
 
         
  
               
               
                   
                   
     
 
                              
 
               
            
 
 
 
  
          
  
                   
                
          
               
    
 
                             
                    
                   
                
             
              
               
       
 
                     
              
               
           When such an act is criminal by reason of its being done with a 
criminal knowledge or intention. 
35. When such an act is criminal by reason of its being done with 
a criminal knowledge or intention.--Whenever an act, which is criminal only by reason of its being done with a criminal knowledge or 
intention, is done by several persons, each of such persons who joins 
in the act with such knowledge or intention is liable for the act in 
the same manner as if the act were done by him alone with that 
knowledge or intention. 
36. 
Effect caused partly by act and partly by omission. 
36. Effect caused partly by act and partly by omission.--Wherever 
the causing of a certain effect, or an attempt to cause that effect, 
by an act or by an omission, is an offence, it is to be understood 
that the causing of that effect partly by an act and partly by an 
omission is the same offence. 
Illustration 
A intentionally causes Z's death, partly by illegally omitting to 
give Z food, and party by beating Z. A has committed murder. 
37. 
Co-operation by doing one of several acts constituting an offence. 
37. Co-operation by doing one of several acts constituting an 
offence.--When an offence is committed by means of several acts, 
whoever intentionally co-operates in the commission of that offence by 
doing any one of those acts, either singly or jointly with any other person, commits
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 14]
hat offence by 
doing any one of those acts, either singly or jointly with any other person, commits that offence. 
Illustrations 
(a) A and B agree to murder Z by severally and at different times 
giving him small doses of poison. A and B administer the poison 
according to the agreement with intent to murder Z. Z dies from the 
effects the several doses of poison so administered to him. Here A and 
B intentionally co operate in the commission of murder and as each of 
them does an act by which the death is caused, they are both guilty of the offence though their acts are separate. 
(b) A and B are joint jailors, and as such have the charge of Z, 
a prisoner, alternatively for six hours at a time. A and B, intending to cause Z's death, knowingly co-operate in causing that effect by illegally omitting, each during the time of his attendance, to furnish 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 15]
               
          
 
               
 
 
 
 
                   
            
                  
               
            
                  
                  
                 
 
 
 
 
  
                    
 
 
 
                 
               
            
     
 
                              
 
                  
                 
               
               
                    
           
  
 
  
 
  
                        
             
                
           
 
                              
                    
               
               ----------------------------------------------------------------------
108 Z with food supplied to them for that purpose. Z dues of hunger. Both 
A and B are guilty of the murder of Z. 
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 1870, s. 1, for the original section. 
(c) A, a jailor, has the charge of Z, a prisoner. A, intending to 
cause Z's death, illegally omits to supply Z with food; in consequence 
of which Z is much reduced in strength, but the starvation is not sufficient to cause his death. A is dismissed from his office, and B 
succeeds him. B, without collusion or co-operation with A, illegally 
omits to supply Z with food, knowing that he is likely thereby to 
cause Z's death. Z dies of hunger. B is guilty of murder, but, as A 
did not co-operate with B. A is guilty only of an attempt to commit murder. 
38. 
Persons concerned in criminal Act may be guilty of different 
offences. 
38. Persons concerned in criminal Act may be guilty of different 
offences.--Where several persons are engaged or concerned in the commission of a criminal act, they may be guilty of different offences 
by means of that act. 
Illustration 
A attacks Z under such circumstances of grave provocation that 
his killing of Z would be only culpable homicide not amounting to 
murder. B, having ill-will towards Z and intending to kill him, and not having been subject to the provocation, assists A in killing Z. 
Here, though A and B are 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 15]
, and not having been subject to the provocation, assists A in killing Z. 
Here, though A and B are both engaged in causing Z's death, B is 
guilty of murder, and A is guilty only of culpable homicide. 
39. 
"Voluntarily". 
39. "Voluntarily".--A person is said to cause an effect 
"voluntarily" when he causes it by means whereby he intended to cause 
it, or by means which, at the time of employing those means, he knew 
or had reason to believe to be likely to cause it. 
Illustration 
A sets fire, by night, to an inhabited house in a large town, for 
the purpose of facilitating a robbery and thus causes the death of a person. Here, A may not have intended to cause death; and may even be 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 16]
                 
          
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
                   
                  
        
 
                    
             
               
                      
               
       
 
                     
              
                       
                 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
                    
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
                     
       
 
                
 
                
 
           
 
           
 
            
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------sorry that death has been caused by his act; yet, if he knew that he 
was likely to cause death, he has caused death voluntarily. 
40. 
"Offence". 
1*[40. "Offence".--Except in the 2*[Chapters] and sections 
mentioned in clauses 2 and 3 of this section, the word "offence" 
denotes a thing made punishable by this Code. 
In Chapter IV, 3*[Chapter VA] and in the following sections, 
namely, sections 4*[64, 65, 66, 5*[67], 71], 109, 110, 112, 114, 115, 
116, 117, 187, 194, 195, 203, 211, 213, 214, 221, 222, 223, 224,225, 
327, 328, 329, 330, 331, 347, 348, 388, 389 and 445, the word 
"offence" denotes a thing punishable under this Code, or under any 
special or local law as hereinafter defined. 
And in sections 141, 176, 177, 201, 202, 212, 216 and 441, the 
word "offence" has the same meaning when the thing punishable under 
the special or local law is punishable under such law with 
imprisonment for a term of six months or upwards, whether with or 
without fine.] 
41. 
"Special law". 
41. "Special law".--A "special law" is a law applicable to a 
particular subject. 42. 
"Local law". 
42. "Local law".--A "local law" is a law applicable only to a 
particular part of 6* [7**** 8*[India]]. 
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 1870, s. 2, for the original s. 40. 
2. Subs. by Act 8 of 1930, s. 2 and Sch. I, for "chapter". 
3. Ins. by Act 8 of 1913, s. 2. 
4. Ins. by Act 8 of 1882, s. 1. 
5. Ins. by Act 10 of 1886, s. 21 (1). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 16]
. 
5. Ins. by Act 10 of 1886, s. 21 (1). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 17]
           
 
                 
           
 
                
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
    
  
                   
            
                 
                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                    
           
 
 
 
  
 
  
                  
       
 
 
 
  
 
  
                
       
 
 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
109 6. Subs. by the A.O. 1948, for "British India". 
7. The words "the territories comprised in" were rep. by Act 48 of 
1952, s. 3 and Sch. II. 
8. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the States". 
43. 
"Illegal". 
"Legally bound to do". 
43. "Illegal". "Legally bound to do".--The word "illegal" is 
applicable to everything which is an offence or which is prohibited by 
law, or which furnishes ground for a civil action; and a person is 
said to be "legally bound to do" whatever it is illegal in him to 
omit. 
44. 
"Injury". 
44. "Injury".--The word "injury" denotes any harm whatever 
illegally caused to any person, in body, mind, reputation or property. 
45. 
"Life". 
45. "Life".--The word "life" denotes the life of a human being, 
unless the contrary appears from the context. 
46. 
"Death". 
46. "Death".--The word "death" denotes the death of a human being 
unless the contrary appears from the context. 
47. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 18]
 
 
 
 
 
                 
     
  
 
  
 
 
 
                 
         
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
                     
                
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               
             
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
                    
                  
               
            
  
 
 "Animal". 
47. "Animal".--The word "animal" denotes any living creature, 
other than a human being. 
48. 
"Vessel". 
48. "Vessel".--The word "vessel" denotes anything made for the 
conveyance by water of human beings or of property. 
49. 
"Year". 
"Month". 
49. "Year". "Month".--Wherever the word "year" or the word 
"month" is used, it is to be understood that the year or the month is 
to be reckoned according to the British calendar. 
50. 
"Section". 
50. "Section".--The word "section" denotes one of those portions 
of a Chapter of this Code which are distinguished by prefixed numeral 
figures. 
51. 
"Oath". 
51. "Oath".--The word "oath" includes a solemn affirmation 
substituted by law for an oath, and any declaration required or 
authorized by law to be made before a public servant or to be used for 
the purpose of proof, whether in a Court of Justice or not. 
52. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 19]
 
  
 
 
                     
            
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
                  
                  
               
           
              
               
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
                                    
 
                                   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
               
       
            
              
 
                                                                 
 
                      
      
 
                      
                  
              "Good faith". 
52. "Good faith".--Nothing is said to be done or believed in 
"good faith" which is done or believed without due care and attention. 
52A. 
"Harbour". 
1*[52A. "Harbour".--Except in section 157, and in section 130 
in the case in which the harbour is given by the wife or husband of 
the person harboured, the word "harbour" includes the supplying a 
person with shelter, food, drink, money, clothes, arms, ammunition or 
means of conveyance, or the assisting a person by any means, whether 
of the same kind as those enumerated in this section or not, to evade 
apprehension.] 
CHAPTER III 
OF PUNISHMENTS 
CHAPTER III 
OF PUNISHMENTS 
53. Punishments. 
53. Punishments.--The punishments to which offenders are liable 
under the provisions of this Code are- -
First.--Death; 
2*[Secondly.--Imprisonment for life;] 
3* * * * * 
Fourthly.--Imprisonment, which is of two descriptions, 
namely:-
(1) Rigorous, that is with hard labour; 
(2) Simple; 
Fifthly.--Forfeiture of property; 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 20]
 
           
 
           
 
                      
       
 
                    
       
 
 
  
 
  
     
 
 
                   
            
              
               
                
     
 
                     
              
                
                 
     
 
                            
             
                  
 
                    
     
                         
             
 
                     
            
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
                   
                   
               ----------------------------------------------------------------------
110 Sixthly.--Fine. 
1. Ins. by Act 8 of 1942. s. 2. 
2. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "Secondly.- -
Transportation;"(w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
3. "Thirdly,-Penal seritude;" was rep. by Act 17 of 1949, s. 2 
(w.e.f. 6-4-1949). 
53A. 
Construction of reference to transportation. 
1*[53A. Construction of reference to transportation.--(1) 
Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) and sub-section (3), any 
reference to "transportation for life" in any other law for the time 
being in force or in any instrument or order having effect by virtue 
of any such law or of any enactment repealed shall be construed as a 
reference to "imprisonment for life". 
(2) In every case in which a sentence of transportation for a 
term has been passed before the commencement of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2*[1955], (26 of 1955), the offender 
shall be dealt with in the same manner as if sentenced to rigorous 
imprisonment for the same term. 
(3) Any reference to transportation for a term or to 
transportation for any shorter term (by whatever name called) in any 
other law for the time being in force shall be deemed to have been omitted. 
(4) Any reference to "transportation" in any other law for the 
time being in force shall, -
(a) if the expression means transportation for life, be 
construed as a reference to imprisonment for life; 
(b) if the expression means trans
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 20]
 for life, be 
construed as a reference to imprisonment for life; 
(b) if the expression means transportation for any shorter 
term, be deemed to have been omitted.] 
54. 
Commutation of sentence of death. 
54. Commutation of sentence of death.--In every case in which 
sentence of death shall have been passed, 3*[the appropriate 
Government] may, without the consent of the offender, commute the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 21]
         
 
 
 
 
 
       
  
                
              
           
                   
        
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
                
       
 
 
                       
                   
               
                       
                   
                
           
 
 
 
 
 
                   
             
           
       
  
 
  
     
 
 
               
           
      
 
 
 
 punishment for any other punishment provided by this Code. 
55. 
Commutation of sentence of imprisonment for life. 
55. Commutation of sentence of imprisonment for life.--In every 
case in which sentence of 4*[imprisonment] for life shall have been 
passed, 5[the appropriate Government] may, without the consent of the 
offender, commute the punishment for imprisonment of either 
description for a term not exceeding fourteen years. 
55A. 
Definition of "appropriate Government". 
6*[55A. Definition of "appropriate Government".--In sections 
fifty-four and fifty-five the expression "appropriate Government" 
means,-
(a) in cases where the sentence is a sentence of death or is 
for an offence against any law relating to a matter to which the 
executive power of the Union extends, the Central Government; and 
(b) in cases where the sentence (whether of death or not) is 
for an offence against any law relating to a matter to which the 
executive power of the State extends, the Government of the State 
within which the offender is sentenced.] 
56. 
56. [Sentence of Europeans and Americans to penal servitude. 
Proviso as to sentence for term exceeding ten years but not for life.] 
Rep. by the Criminal Law (Removal of Racial Discriminations) Act, 1949 (17 of 1949) (w. e. f. 6-4-1949). 
57. 
Fractions of terms of punishment. 
57. Fractions of terms of punishment.--In calculating fractions 
of terms of punishment, 4[imprinsonment] for life shall be reckoned as 
equivalent to 4[imprisonment] for twenty years. 
58. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 21]
risonment] for twenty years. 
58. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 22]
 
                
           
        
 
               
 
                
 
                     
                
          
 
                  
       
 
                  
                 
 
                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
               
            
  
 
 
 
 
 
              
   
 
 
                 
                
             
                 
                   
              
            
  
 
  
                    
          
 
 
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------
111 58. [Offenders sentenced to transportation how dealt with until 
transported.] Rep. by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 
1955 (26 of 1955), s. 117 and Sch. 
1. Ins. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
2. Subs. by Act 36 of 1957, s. 3 and Sch. II, for "1954". 
3. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for "the Central Government or the 
Provincial Government of the Province within which the offender shall have been sentenced". 
4. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation" 
(w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
5. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for "the provincial Government of the 
Province within which the offender shall have been sentenced". 
6. Subs., ibid, for s. 55A which had been ins. by the A. O. 1937. 
59. 
59. [Transportation instead of imprisonment.] Rep. by the Code of 
Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1955 (26 of 1955) s.117 and Sch., 
(w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
60. 
Sentence may be (in certain cases of imprisonment) wholly or partly 
rigorous or simple. 
60. Sentence may be (in certain cases of imprisonment) wholly or 
partly rigorous or simple.--In every case in which an offender is punishable with imprisonment which may be of either description, it 
shall be competent to the Court which sentences such offender to 
direct in the sentence that such imprisonment shall be wholly 
rigorous, or that such imprisonment shall be wholly simple or] that any pa
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 22]
isonment shall be wholly 
rigorous, or that such imprisonment shall be wholly simple or] that any part of such imprisonment shall be rigorous and the rest simple. 
61. 
61. [Sentence of forfeiture of property.] Rep. by the Indian 
Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 1921 (16 of 1921), s. 4. 
62. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 23]
 
 
                
          
 
 
 
  
   
  
                    
                  
      
 
 
 
 
 
       
  
                  
            
              
 
                              
                
    
 
                 
              
                   
             
                       
    
  
 
 
 
            
  
 
 
                        
          
                
            
            
    
 
 
 
 62. [Forfeiture of property, in respect of offenders punishable 
with death, transportation or imprisonment.] Rep., by s. 4 ibid. 
63. 
Amount of fine. 
63. Amount of fine.--Where no sum is expressed to which a fine 
may extend, the amount of fine to which the offender is liable is 
unlimited, but shall not be excessive. 
64. 
Sentence of imprisonment for non-payment of fine. 
64. Sentence of imprisonment for non-payment of fine.--1*[In 
every case of an offence punishable with imprisonment as well as fine, 
in which the offender is sentenced to a fine, whether with or without 
imprisonment, 
and in every case of an offence punishable 2*[with 
imprisonment or fine, or] with fine only, in which the offender is sentenced to a fine.] 
it shall be competent to the Court which sentences such offender 
to direct by the sentence that, in default of payment of the fine, the 
offender shall suffer imprisonment for a certain term, which 
imprisonment shall be in excess of any other imprisonment to which he may have been sentenced or to which he may be liable under a 
commutation of a sentence. 
65. 
Limit to imprisonment for non-payment of fine, when imprisonment and 
fine awardable. 
65. Limit to imprisonment for non-payment of fine, when 
imprisonment and fine awardable.--The term for which the Court directs the offender to be imprisoned in default of payment of a fine shall 
not exceed one-fourth of the term of imprisonment which is the maximum fixed for the offence, if the offence be punishable with imprisonment 
as well as fine. 
66. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 23]
xed for the offence, if the offence be punishable with imprisonment 
as well as fine. 
66. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 24]
 
       
 
 
                 
              
                   
    
  
 
 
 
             
  
 
 
              
                   
             
                
               
                   
                 
                 
                  
       
  
 
 
 
       
 
 
                        
               
               
 
 
                       
           
 
           
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
  
          
 
                 ----------------------------------------------------------------------Description of imprisonment for non-payment of fine. 
66. Description of imprisonment for non-payment of fine.--The 
imprisonment which the Court imposes in default of payment of a fine 
may be of any description to which the offender might have been 
sentenced for the offence. 
67. 
Imprisonment for non-payment of fine, when offence punishable with 
fine only. 
67. Imprisonment for non-payment of fine, when offence punishable 
with fine only.--If the offence be punishable with fine only, 
3*[the imprisonment which the Court imposes in default of payment of 
the fine shall be simple, and] the term for which the Court directs 
the offender to be imprisoned, in default of payment of fine, shall 
not exceed the following scale, that is to say, for any term not 
exceeding two months when the amount of the fine shall not exceed 
fifty rupees, and for any term not exceeding four months when the 
amount shall not exceed one hundred rupees, and for any term not 
exceeding six months in any other case. 
68. 
Imprisonment to terminate on payment of fine. 
68. Imprisonment to terminate on payment of fine.--The 
imprisonment which is imposed in default of payment of a fine shall 
terminate whenever that fine is either paid or levied by process of 
law. 
1. Subs. by Act 8 of 1882, s. 2, for "in every case in which an 
offender is sentenced to a fine". 
2. Ins, by Act 10 of 1886, s. 21(2). 
3. Ins by Act 8 of 1882, s. 3. 
69. 
Termination of imprisonment on paymen
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 24]
ct 10 of 1886, s. 21(2). 
3. Ins by Act 8 of 1882, s. 3. 
69. 
Termination of imprisonment on payment of proportional part of fine. 
69. Termination of imprisonment on payment of proportional part 112 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 25]
            
              
               
                  
   
 
                              
                          
              
                  
               
                
               
               
                
                
                 
              
         
  
 
 
 
             
    
 
 
               
                
                
              
               
             
               
                 
 
  
 
 
 
          
 
                 
                               
               
  
 
                      
               
      
 
                  of fine.--If, before the expiration of the term of imprisonment fixed 
in default of payment, such a proportion of the fine be paid or levied 
that the term of imprisonment suffered in default of payment is not 
less than proportional to the part of the fine still unpaid, the 
imprisonment shall terminate. 
Illustration 
A is sentenced to a fine of one hundred rupees and to four 
months' imprisonment in default of payment. Here, if seventy-five 
rupees of the fine be paid or levied before the expiration of one month of the imprisonment. A will be discharged as soon as the first 
month has expired. If seventy-five rupees be paid or levied at the 
time of the expiration of the first month, or at any later time while 
A continues in imprisonment. A will be immediately discharged. If 
fifty rupees of the fine be paid or levied before the expiration of two months of the imprisonment. A will be discharged as soon as the 
two months are completed. If fifty rupees be paid or levied at the 
time of the expiration of those two months, or at any later time while 
A continues in imprisonment, A will be immediately discharged. 
70. Fine leviable within six years, or during imprisonment. Death not to 
discharge property from liability. 
70. Fine leviable within six years, or during imprisonment. Death 
not to discharge property from liability.--The fine, or any part 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 25]
rs, or during imprisonment. Death 
not to discharge property from liability.--The fine, or any part 
thereof which remains unpaid, may be levied at any time within six 
years after the passing of the sentence, and if, under the sentence, 
the offender be liable to imprisonment for a longer period than six 
years, then at any time previous to the expiration of that period; and 
the death of the offender does not discharge from the liability any property which would, after his death, be legally liable for his 
debts. 
71. 
Limit of punishment of offence made up of several offences. 
71. Limit of punishment of offence made up of several offences.- -
Where anything which is an offence is made up of parts, any of which 
parts is itself an offence, the offender shall not be punished with 
the punishment of more than one of such his offences, unless it be so 
expressly provided. 
1*[Where anything is an offence falling within two or more 
separate definitions of any law in force for the time being by which 
offences are defined or punished, or 
where several acts, of which one or more than one would by itself 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 26]
              
  
 
                 
                     
 
 
                             
 
                          
               
                     
                
               
       
 
                            
                 
                  
              
    
 
 
 
 
 
             
       
 
 
                  
             
               
               
             
             
    
 
           
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
              
              
             
             
             
              
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------
113 or themselves constitute an offence, constitute, when combined, a 
different offence, 
the offender shall not be punished with a more severe punishment 
than the Court which tries him could award for any one of such offences]. 
Illustrations 
(a) A gives Z fifty strokes with a stick. Here A may have 
committed the offence of voluntarily causing hurt to Z by the whole beating, and also by each of the blows which make up the whole 
beating. If A were liable to punishment for every blow, he might be 
imprisoned for fifty years, one for each blow. But he is liable only 
to one punishment for the whole beating. 
(b) But, if, while A is beating Z, Y interferes, and A 
intentionally strikes Y, here, as the blow given to Y is no part of 
the act whereby A voluntarily causes hurt to Z, A is liable to one 
punishment for voluntarily causing hurt to Z, and to another for the 
blow given to Y. 
72. 
Punishment of person guilty of one of several offences, the judgment 
stating that it is doubtful of which. 
72. Punishment of person guilty of one of several offences, the 
judgment stating that it is doubtful of which.--In all cases in which judgment is given that a person is guilty of one of several offences 
specified in the judgment, but that it is doubtful of which of these 
offences he is guilty
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 26]
ffences 
specified in the judgment, but that it is doubtful of which of these 
offences he is guilty, the offender shall be punished for the offence 
for which the lowest punishment is provided if the same punishment is not provided for all. 
1. Ins by Act 8 of 1882, s, 4. 
73. 
Solitary confinement. 
73. Solitary confinement.--Whenever any person is convicted of an 
offence for which under this Code the Court has power to sentence him 
to rigorous imprisonment, the Court may, by its sentence, order that 
the offender shall be kept in solitary confinement for any portion or 
portions of the imprisonment to which he is sentenced, not exceeding 
three months in the whole, according to the following scale, that is to say--
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 27]
 
                  
    
 
                 
         
 
                    
    
 
 
 
  
    
  
                 
                 
                   
            
               
              
           
        
 
 
 
 
 
            
    
 
 
                 
           
 
 
                           
                 
                 
 
                                                            
 
                  
              
               
              
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
 a time not exceeding one month if the term of imprisonment shall 
not exceed six months: 
a time not exceeding two months if the term of imprisonment shall 
exceed six months and 1*[shall not exceed one] year: 
a time not exceeding three months if the term of imprisonment 
shall exceed one year. 
74. 
Limit of solitary confinement. 
74. Limit of solitary confinement.--In executing a sentence of 
solitary confinement, such confinement shall in no case exceed 
fourteen days at a time, with intervals between the periods of 
solitary confinement of not less duration than such periods; and when 
the imprisonment awarded shall exceed three months, the solitary 
confinement shall not exceed seven days in any one month of the whole 
imprisonment awarded, with intervals between the periods of solitary 
confinement of not less duration than such periods. 
75. 
Enhanced punishment for certain offence under Chapter XII or Chapter 
XVII after previous conviction. 
2*[75. Enhanced punishment for certain offences under Chapter 
XII or Chapter XVII after previous conviction.--Whoever, having been 
convicted, -
(a) by a Court in 3*[India], of an offence punishable 
under Chapter XII or Chapter XVII of this Code with imprisonment 
of either description for a term of three years or upwards, 4**** 
4* * * * * 
shall be guilty of any offence punishable under either of those 
Chapters with like imprisonment for the like term, shall be subject for every such subsequent offence to 5*[imprisonment f
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 27]
risonment for the like term, shall be subject for every such subsequent offence to 5*[imprisonment for life] or 
to imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
ten years.] 
CHAPTER IV 
GENERAL EXCEPTIONS 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 28]
                                    
 
                                
 
 
 
 
 
                
   
 
 
                    
                  
                
               
   
                              
 
                       
              
  
 
                     
              
      
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
                 
              
               
  
 
                
 
               
 
                
 
                    
           
                
        
 
 
 
  
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------CHAPTER IV 
GENERAL EXCEPTIONS 
76. 
Act done by a person bound, or by mistake of fact believing himself 
bound, by law.- -
76. Act done by a person bound, or by mistake of fact believing 
himself bound, by law.--Nothing is an offence which is done by a person who is, or who by reason of a mistake of fact and not by reason 
of a mistake of law in good faith believes himself to be, bound by law to do it. 
Illustrations 
(a) A, a soldier, fires on a mob by the order of his superior 
officer, in conformity with the commands of the law. A has committed 
no offence. 
(b) A, an officer of a Court of Justice, being ordered by that 
Court to arrest Y, and after due enquiry, believing Z to be Y, arrests 
Z. A has committed no offence. 
77. 
Act of Judge when acting judicially. 
77. Act of Judge when acting judicially.--Nothing is an offence 
which is done by a Judge when acting judicially in the exercise of any 
power which is, or which in good faith he believes to be, given to him 
by law. 
1. Subs. by Act 8 of 1882, s. 5, for "be less than a". 
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1910, s. 2, for the original section. 
3. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the States". 
4. The word "or" at the end of cl. (a) and cl. (b) were omitted by 
s. 3 and Sch., ibid. 
5. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for 
life" (w.e.f. 1-1-1
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 28]
h., ibid. 
5. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for 
life" (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
78. 114 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 29]
 
 
          
 
 
                
               
              
              
                 
                
 
  
 
  
                   
    
 
 
                         
           
                    
                 
          
 
                              
                           
                
             
             
                
  
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
                 
            
               
       
                               
                       
                 
            
  
 
 Act done pursuant to the judgment or order of Court. 
78. Act done pursuant to the judgment or order of Court.--Nothing 
which is done in pursuance of, or which is warranted by the judgment 
or order of, a Court of Justice, if done whilst such judgment or order 
remains in force, is an offence, notwithstanding the Court may have 
had no jurisdiction to pass such judgment or order, provided the 
person doing the act in good faith believes that the Court had such jurisdiction. 
79. 
Act done by a person justified, or by mistake of fact believing 
himself, justified, by law. 
79. Act done by a person justified, or by mistake of fact 
believing himself, justified, by law.--Nothing is an offence which is done by any person who is justified by law, or who by reason of a 
mistake of fact and not by reason of a mistake of law in good faith, 
believes himself to be justified by law, in doing it. 
Illustration 
A sees Z commit what appears to A to be a murder. A, in the 
exercise, to the best of his judgment exerted in good faith, of the power which the law gives to all persons of apprehending murderers in 
the fact, seizes Z, in order to bring Z before the proper authorities. 
A has committed no offence, though it may turn out that Z was acting 
in self-defence. 
80. 
Accident in doing a lawful act. 
80. Accident in doing a lawful act.--Nothing is an offence which 
is done by accident or misfortune, and without any criminal intention 
or knowledg
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 29]
an offence which 
is done by accident or misfortune, and without any criminal intention 
or knowledge in the doing of a lawful act in a lawful manner by lawful means and with proper care and caution. 
Illustration 
A is at work with a hatchet; the head flies off and kills a man 
who is standing by. Here, if there was no want of proper caution on 
the part of A, his act is excusable and not an offence. 
81. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 30]
 
                
   
 
 
                  
             
               
               
              
  
 
                  
                
                
       
                              
                     
                 
                 
              
                
              
              
                
               
                 
                  
               
         
                    
            
               
               
         
 
 
  
 
 
 
         
 
 
                       
            
  
 
 
 
                          
 115 Act likely to cause harm, but done without criminal intent, and to 
prevent other harm. 
81. Act likely to cause harm, but done without criminal intent, 
and to prevent other harm.--Nothing is an offence merely by reason of its being done with the knowledge that it is likely to cause harm, if 
it be done without any criminal intention to cause harm, and in good 
faith for the purpose of preventing or avoiding other harm to person 
or property. 
Explanation.-It is a question of fact in such a case whether the 
harm to be prevented or avoided was of such a nature and so imminent 
as to justify or excuse the risk of doing the act with the knowledge 
that it was likely to cause harm. 
Illustrations 
(a) A, the captain of a steam vessel, suddenly and without any 
fault or negligence on his part, finds himself in such a position that, before he can stop his vessel, he must inevitably run down a 
boat B, with twenty or thirty passengers on board, unless he changes 
the course of his vessel, and that, by changing his course, he must 
incur risk of running down a boat C with only two passengers on board, 
which he may possibly clear. Here, if A alters his course without any 
intention to run down the boat C and in good faith for the purpose of 
avoiding the danger to the passengers in the boat B, he is not guilty 
of an offence, though he may run down the boat C by doing an which he 
k
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 30]
e boat B, he is not guilty 
of an offence, though he may run down the boat C by doing an which he 
knew was likely to cause that effect, if it be found as a matter of 
fact that the danger which he intended to avoid was such as to excuse 
him in incurring the risk of running down C. 
(b) A, in a great fire, pulls down houses in order to prevent the 
conflagration from spreading. He does this with the intention in good 
faith of saving human life or property. Here, if it be found that the harm to be prevented was of such a nature and so imminent as to excuse 
A's act, A is not guilty of the offence. 
82. 
Act of a child under seven years of age. 
82. Act of a child under seven years of age.--Nothing is an 
offence which is done by a child under seven years of age. 83. 
Act of a child above seven and under twelve of immature 
understanding. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 31]
 
 
                       
             
              
             
     
 
 
 
  
       
 
 
                 
                       
             
            
 
 
 
 
 
            
   
 
 
                           
           
                      
              
               
                 
     
  
 
 
 
             
   
 
 
               
                   
              
                   
                 
             
          
  
 
 
 
              83. Act of a child above seven and under twelve of immature 
understanding.--Nothing is an offence which is done by a child above 
seven years of age and under twelve, who has not attained sufficient 
maturity of understanding to judge of the nature and consequences of his conduct on that occasion. 
84. 
Act of a person of unsound mind. 
84. Act of a person of unsound mind.--Nothing is an offence which 
is done by a person who, at the time of doing it, by reason of 
unsoundness of mind, is incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or 
that he is doing what is either wrong or contrary to law. 
85. 
Act of a person incapable of judgment by reason of intoxication caused 
against his will. 
85. Act of a person incapable of judgment by reason of 
intoxication caused against his will.--Nothing is an offence which is 
done by a person who, at the time of doing it, is, by reason of 
intoxication, incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that he 
is doing what is either wrong, or contrary to law: provided that the 
thing which intoxicated him was administered to him without his 
knowledge or against his will. 
86. 
Offence requiring a particular intent or knowledge committed by one 
who is intoxicated. 
86. Offence requiring a particular intent or knowledge committed 
by one who is intoxicated.--In cases where an act done is not an offence unless done with a particular knowledge or intent, a person 
who does the act in a state of intoxication shall be liable to be 
dealt with as if he had the
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 31]
rson 
who does the act in a state of intoxication shall be liable to be 
dealt with as if he had the same knowledge as he would have had if he 
had not been intoxicated, unless the thing which intoxicated him was 
administered to him without his knowledge or against his will. 
87. 
Act not intended and not known to be likely to cause death or grievous 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 32]
    
 
 
                   
               
                
               
                                   
               
                               
                               
                         
             
                 
         
 
 
 
 
 
                 
  
 
 
                      
            
                 
                
                
                
         
                               
                    
             
                  
                   
   
 
 
 
 
 
               
   
 
 
                  
             
              
              
             hurt, done by consent. 
87. Act not intended and not known to be likely to cause death or 
grievous hurt, done by consent.--Nothing which is not intended to 
cause death, or grievous hurt, and which is not known by the doer to be likely to cause death or grievous hurt, is an offence by reason of 
any harm which it may cause, or be intended by the doer to cause, to 
any person, above eighteen years of age, who has given consent, 
whether express or implied, to suffer that harm; or by reason of any 
harm which it may be known by the doer to be likely to cause to any such person who has consented to take the risk of that harm. 
Illustration 
A and Z agree to fence with each other for amusement. This 
agreement implies the consent of each to suffer any harm which, in the 
course of such fencing, may be caused without foul play; and if A, 
while playing fairly, hurts Z, A commits no offence. 
88. 
Act not intended to cause death, done by consent in good faith for 
person's benefit. 
88. Act not intended to cause death, done by consent in good 
faith for person's benefit.--Nothing, which is not intented to cause 
death, is an offence by reason of any harm which it may cause, or be 
intended by the doer to cause, or be known by the doer to be likely to 
cause, to any person for whose benefit it is done in good faith, and 
who has given a consent, whethe
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 32]
ause, to any person for whose benefit it is done in good faith, and 
who has given a consent, whether express or implied to suffer that 
harm, or to take the risk of that harm. 
Illustration 
A, a surgeon, knowing that a particular operation is likely to 
cause the death of Z, who suffers under the painful complaint, but not 
intending to cause Z's death, and intending, in good faith, Z's 
benefit, performs that operation on Z, with Z's consent. A has 
committed no offence. 
89. 
Act done in good faith for benefit of child or insane person, by or by 
consent of guardian. 
89. Act done in good faith for benefit of child or insane person, 
by or by consent of guardian.--Nothing which is done in good faith for the benefit of a person under twelve years of age, or of unsound mind, 
by or by consent, either express or implied, of the guardian or other person having lawful charge of that person, is an offence by reason of 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 33]
                
              
 
 
 
 
 
                   
                     
       
                    
                  
                     
                         
      
                           
                
                  
                       
      
                          
                   
         
                              
                     
               
                  
             
          
  
 
 
 
         
 
 
                   
                 
                                
             
     
  
    
 
 
                    
                    
               116 any harm which it may cause, or be intended by the doer to cause or be 
known by the doer to be likely to cause to that person: Provided-
Provisos. 
Provisos.-First.-That this exception shall not extend to the 
intentional causing of death, or to the attempting to cause 
death; 
Secondly.-That this exception shall not extend to the doing 
of anything which the person doing it knows to be likely to cause 
death, for any purpose other than the preventing of death or 
grievous hurt, or the curing of any grievous disease or infirmity; 
Thirdly.-That this exception shall not extend to the 
voluntary causing of grievous hurt, or to the attempting to cause 
grievous hurt, unless it be for the purpose of preventing death 
or grievous hurt, or the curing of any grievous disease or 
infirmity; 
Fourthly.-That this exception shall not extend to the 
abetment of any offence, to the committing of which offence it 
would not extend. 
Illustration 
A, in good faith, for his child's benefit without his child's 
consent, has his child cut for the stone by a surgeon knowing it to be 
likely that the operation will cause the child's death, but not 
intending to cause the child's death. A is within the exception, in as 
much as his object was the cure of the child. 
90. 
Consent known to be given under fear or misconception. 
90. Consent known to be given und
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 33]
ild. 
90. 
Consent known to be given under fear or misconception. 
90. Consent known to be given under fear or misconception.--A 
consent is not such a consent as is intended by any section of this 
Code, if the consent is given by a person under fear of injury, or under a misconception of fact, and if the person doing the act knows, 
or has reason to believe, that the consent was given in consequence of 
such fear or misconception; or 
Consent of insane person. 
Consent of insane person.-if the consent is given by a person 
who, from unsoundness of mind, or intoxication, is unable to 
understand the nature and consequence of that to which he gives his 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 34]
  
 
 
   
 
  
              
              
 
 
 
  
          
  
                  
             
             
               
           
 
                              
 
                
              
              
                  
               
   
 
 
 
 
 
            
  
                        
                 
                 
             
             
               
                 
           
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
                  
               consent; or 
Consent of child. 
Consent of child.-unless the contrary appears from the context, if 
the consent is given by a person who is under twelve years of age. 
91. 
Exclusion of acts which are offences independently of harm cause. 
91. Exclusion of acts which are offences independently of harm 
cause.--The exceptions in sections 87, 88 and 89 do not extend to acts 
which are offences independently of any harm which they may cause, or 
be intended to cause, or be known to be likely to cause, to the person 
giving the consent, or on whose behalf the consent is given. 
Illustration 
Causing miscarriage (unless caused in good faith for the purpose 
of saving the life of the woman) is offence inexpediently of any harm 
which it may cause or be intended to cause to the woman. Therefore, it 
is not an offence "by reason of such harm"; and the consent of the 
woman or of her guardian to the causing of such miscarriage does not 
justify the act. 
92. 
Act done in good faith for benefit of a person without consent. 
92. Act done in good faith for benefit of a person without 
consent.-Nothing is an offence by reason of any harm which it may 
causes to a person for whose benefit it is done in good faith, even 
without that person's consent, if the circumstances are such that it 
is impossible for that person to signify consent, or if that person is 
incapable of giving consent, and has no guardian or other person in 
lawful charge of him from whom it is possible to obtain consent in 
time for the thing t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 34]
 person in 
lawful charge of him from whom it is possible to obtain consent in 
time for the thing to be done with benefit: Provided-
Provisos. 
Provisos.-First.-That this exception shall not extend to the 
intentional causing of death or the attempting to cause death; 117 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 35]
 
                    
                                       
                               
 
                          
                   
                
 
                         
                   
        
 
                             
 
                   
             
             
           
                      
                  
                 
      
                   
            
             
               
       
 
                        
                  
                   
            
                      
   
                  
       
  
 
  
     
 
 
                
                 
             
 
                              
 
                       Secondly.-That this exception shall not extend to the doing 
of anything which the person doing it knows to be likely to cause death, for any purpose other than the preventing of death or 
grievous hurt, or the curing of any grievous disease or 
infirmity; 
Thirdly.-That this exception shall not extend to the 
voluntary causing of hurt, or to the attempting to cause hurt, 
for any purpose other than the preventing of death or hurt; 
Fourthly.-That this exception shall not extend to the 
abetment of any offence, to the committing of which offence it 
would not extend. 
Illustrations 
(a) Z is thrown from his horse, and is insensible. A, a surgeon, 
finds that Z requires to be trepanned. A, not intending Z's death, but 
in good faith, for Z's benefit, performs the trepan before Z recovers 
his power of judging for himself. A has committed no offence. 
(b) Z is carried off by a tiger. A fires at the tiger knowing it 
to be likely that the shot may kill Z, but not intending to kill Z, 
and in good faith intending Z's benefit. A's ball gives Z a mortal 
wound. A has committed no offence. 
(c) A, a surgeon, sees a child suffer an accident which is likely 
to prove fatal unless an operation be immediately performed. There is 
not time to apply to the child's guardian. A performs
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 35]
 operation be immediately performed. There is 
not time to apply to the child's guardian. A performs the operation in 
spite of the entreaties of the child, intending, in good faith, the 
child's benefit. A has committed no offence. 
(d) A is in a house which is on fire, with Z, a child. People 
below hold out a blanket. A drops the child, from the house-top, 
knowing it to be likely that the fall may kill the child, but not intending to kill the child, and intending, in good faith, the child's 
benefit. Here, even if the child is killed by the fall, A has 
committed no offence. 
Explanation.-Mere pecuniary benefit is not benefit within the 
meaning of sections 88 89 and 92. 
93. 
Communication made in good faith. 
93. Communication made in good faith.--No communication made in 
good faith is an offence by reason of any harm to the person to whom 
it is made, if it is made for the benefit of that person. 
Illustration 
A, a surgeon, in good faith, communicates to a patient his 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 36]
               
              
       
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
                       
           
                  
                   
             
                 
             
                 
    
                   
                   
               
              
      
 
 
 
 
                  
                
              
               
    
  
 
 
 
    
 
 
                   
                 
                   
           
                          
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 118 opinion that he cannot live. The patient dies in consequence of the 
shock. A has committed no offence, though he knew it to be likely that 
the communication might cause the patient's death. 
94. 
Act to which a person is compelled by threats. 
94. Act to which a person is compelled by threats.--Except 
murder, and offences against the State punishable with death, nothing 
is an offence which is done by a person who is compelled to do it by 
threats, which, at the time of doing it, reasonnably cause the 
apprehension that instant death to that person will otherwise be the consequence: Provided the person doing the act did not of his own 
accord, or from a reasonable apprehension of harm to himself short of 
instant death, place himself in the situation by which he became 
subject to such constraint. 
Explanation 1.-A person who, of his own accord, or by reason of a 
threat of being beaten, joins a gang of dacoits, knowing their 
character, is not entitled to the benefit of this exception, on the 
ground of his having been compelled by his associates to do anything 
that is an offence by law. 
Explantion 2.-A person seized by a gang of dacoits, and forced, 
by threat of instant death, to do a thing which is an offence by law; 
for example, a smith compelled to take his tools and to force the door 
of a house for the dacoits to enter and plunder it, is entitled to the 
benefit of this exception. 
95. 
Act causing slight harm. 
95. Act causing slight harm.--Nothing is an offen
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 36]
of this exception. 
95. 
Act causing slight harm. 
95. Act causing slight harm.--Nothing is an offence by reason 
that it causes, or that it is intended to cause, or that it is known 
to be likely to cause, any harm, if that harm is so slight that no person of ordinary sense and temper would complain of such harm. 
Of the Right of Private Defence 
96. 
Things done in private defence. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 37]
                
           
 
 
 
  
          
 
 
                 
             
   
 
                         
            
 
                    
                                       
                    
          
 
 
 
  
              
 
  
                       
               
                  
          
              
                   
                  
 
 
                             
 
                    
                  
        
 
                      
             
             
               
        
 
 
 
 
 
          96. Things done in private defence.--Nothing is an offence which 
is done in the exercise of the right of private defence. 
97. 
Right of private defence of the body and of property. 
97. Right of private defence of the body and of property.--Every 
person has a right, subject to the restrictions contained in section 
99, to defend -
First.--His own body, and the body of any other person, 
against any offence affecting the human body; 
Secondly.--The property, whether movable or immovable, of 
himself or of any other person, against any act which is an offence falling under the defintion of theft, robbery, mischief 
or criminal trespass, or which is an attempt to commit theft, 
robbery, mischief or criminal trespass. 
98. 
Right of private defence against the act of a person of unsound mind, 
etc. 
98. Right of private defence against the act of a person of 
unsound mind, etc.--When an act which would otherwise be a certain offence, is not that offence, by reason of the youth, the want of 
maturity of understanding, the unsoundness of mind or the intoxication 
of the person doing that act, or by reason of any misconception on the part of that person, every person has the same right of private 
defence against that act which he would have if the act were that 
offence. 
Illustrations 
(a) Z, under the influence of madness, attempts to kill A; Z is 
guilty of no offence. But A has the same right of private defence 
wh
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 37]
ess, attempts to kill A; Z is 
guilty of no offence. But A has the same right of private defence 
which he would have if Z were sane. 
(b) A enters by night a house which he is legally entitled to 
enter. Z, in good faith, taking A for a house-breaker, attacks A. Here 
Z, by attacking A under this misconception, commits no offence. But A 
has the same right of private defence against Z, which he would have 
if Z were not acting under that misconception. 
99. 
Acts against which there is no right of private defence. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 38]
 
 
                   
                 
               
                  
              
   
 
                    
            
                
             
       
 
                    
          
  
        
  
                
                
        
 
 
 
 
                  
                  
               
        
                   
             
               
               
                     
          
 
 
 
 
 
                  
 
 
 
                     
               
           
               
              
    
 
                            119 99. Acts against which there is no right of private defence.- -
There is no right of private defence against an act which does not 
reasonably cause the apprehension of death or of grievous hurt, if 
done, or attempted to be done, by a public servant acting in good faith under colour of his office, though that act may not be strictly 
justifiable by law. 
There is no right of private defence against an act which does 
not reasonably cause the apprehension of death or of grievous hurt, if 
done, or attempted to be done, by the direction of a public servant 
acting in good faith under colour of his office though that direction 
may not be strictly justifiable by law. 
There is no right of private defence in cases in which there is 
time to have recourse to protection of the public authorities. 
Extent to which the right may be exercised. 
Extent to which the right may be exercised.--The right of private 
defence in no case extends to the inflicting of more harm than it is 
necessary to inflict for the purpose of defence. 
Explanation 1.-A person is not deprived of the right of private 
defence against an act done, or attempted to be done, by a public 
servant, as such, unless he knows or has reason to believe, that the 
person doing the act is such public servant. 
Explanation 2.-A person is not deprived of the right of private 
defence against an act done, or attempted to be done, by the di
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 38]
ot deprived of the right of private 
defence against an act done, or attempted to be done, by the direction 
of a public servant, unless he knows, or has reason to believe, that 
the person doing the act is acting by such direction, or unless such 
person states the authority under which he acts, or if he has 
authority in writing, unless he produces such authority, if demanded. 
100. 
When the right of private defence of the body extends to causing 
death. 
100. When the right of private defence of the body extends to 
causing death.--The right of private defence of the body extends, under the restrictions mentioned in the last preceding section, to the 
voluntary causing of death or of any other harm to the assailant, if 
the offence which occasions the exercise of the right be of any of the 
descriptions hereinafter enumerated, namely: -
First.-Such an assault as may reasonably cause the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 39]
               
      
 
                         
              
         
                  
 
                        
       
 
                       
      
 
                         
                  
                  
           
 
 
 
 
 
           
  
                      
            
              
               
              
            
  
 
 
 
              
 
 
 
               
               
             
                
             
     
 
 
 
  
                
 
 
 apprehension that death will otherwise be the consequence of such assault; 
Secondly.-Such an assault as may reasonably cause the 
apprehension that grievous hurt will otherwise be the consequence of such assault; 
Thirdly.-An assault with the intention of committing rape; 
Fourthly.-An assault with the intention of gratifying 
unnatural lust; 
Fifthly.-An assault with the intention of kidnapping or 
abducting; 
Sixthly.-An assault with the intention of wrongfully 
confining a person, under circumstances which may reasonably 
cause him to apprehend that he will be unable to have recourse to 
the public authorities for his release. 
101. 
When such right extends to causing any harm other than death. 
101. When such right extends to causing any harm other than 
death.--If the offence be not of any of the descriptions enumerated in 
the last preceding section, the right of private defence of the body 
does not extend to the voluntary causing of death to the assailant, 
but does extend, under the restrictions mentioned in section 99, to 
the voluntary causing to the assailant of any harm other than death. 
102. 
Commencement and continuance of the right of private defence of the 
body. 
102. Commencement and continuance of the right of private defence 
of the body.--The right of private defence of the body commences as soon as a reasonable apprehension of danger to the body arises from an 
attempt or threat to commit the offence though the offence may not have been committed
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 39]
ises from an 
attempt or threat to commit the offence though the offence may not have been committed; and it continues as long as such apprehension of 
danger to the body continues. 
103. 
When the right of private defence of property extends to causing 
death. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 40]
                    
              
                
                    
             
                   
    
 
           
              
 
                   
                        
               
 
                    
               
                  
         
 
 
  
 
  
          
 
 
                   
                
                 
            
             
                
            
       
 
 
 
 
 
                 
 
 
 
               
           
         
 
                
            
            
   
                        120 103. When the right of private defence of property extends to 
causing death.--The right of private defence of property extends, 
under the restrictions mentioned in section 99, to the voluntary 
causing of death or of any other harm to the wrong-doer, if the 
offence, the committing of which, or the attempting to commit which, 
occasions the exercise of the right, be an offence of any of the descriptions hereinafter enumerated, namely: -
First.-Robbery; 
Secondly.-House-breaking by night; 
Thirdly.-Mischief by fire committed on any building, tent or 
vessel, which building, tent or vessel is used as a human 
dwelling, or as a place for the custody of property; 
Fourthly.-Theft, mischief, or house-trespass, under such 
circumstances as may reasonably cause apprehension that death or 
grievous hurt will be the consequence, if such right of private 
defence is not exercised. 
104. 
When such right to causing any harm other than death. 
104. When such right to causing any harm other than death.--If 
the offence, the committing of which, or the attempting to commit 
which occasions the exercise of the right of private defence, be 
theft, mischief, or criminal trespass, not of any of the descriptions 
enumerated in the last preceding section, that right does not extend 
to the voluntary causing of death, but does extend, subject to the restrictions mentioned in section 99, to the voluntary causing to the 
wrong-d
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 40]
xtend, subject to the restrictions mentioned in section 99, to the voluntary causing to the 
wrong-doer of any harm other than death. 
105. 
Commencement and continuance of the right of private defence of 
property. 
105. Commencement and continuance of the right of private defence 
of property.--The right of private defence of property commences when a reasonable apprehension of danger to the property commences. 
The right of private defence of property against theft continues 
till the offender has effected his retreat with the property or either 
the assistance of the public authorities is obtained, or the property 
has been recovered. 
The right of private defence of property against robbery 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 41]
               
                
                
 
 
                      
              
       
 
                
             
    
 
 
 
  
             
    
 
 
                 
               
               
                
              
               
 
 
                              
 
                        
             
             
                   
     
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
                                    
                                    
 
 
 
  
    
 
 
                   
 continues as long as the offender causes or attempts to cause to any person death or hurt or wrongful restraint or as long as the fear of 
instant death or of instant hurt or of instant personal restraint 
continues. 
The right of private defence of property against criminal 
trespass or mischief continues as long as the offender continues in 
the commission of criminal trespass or mischief. 
The right of private defence of property against house-breaking 
by night continues as long as the house-trespass which has been begun 
by such house-breaking continues. 
106. 
Right of private defence against deadly assault when there is risk of 
harm to innocent person. 
106. Right of private defence against deadly assault when there 
is risk of harm to innocent person.--If in the exercise of the right of private defence against an assault which reasonably causes the 
apprehension of death, the defender be so situated that he cannot 
effectually exercise that right without risk of harm to an innocent 
person, his right of private defence extends to the running of that 
risk. 
Illustration 
A is attacked by a mob who attempt to murder him. He cannot 
effectually exercise his right of private defence without firing on 
the mob, and he cannot fire without risk of harming young children who 
are mingled with the mob. A commits no offence if by so firing he 
harms any of the children. 
CHAPTER V 
OF ABETMENT 
CHAPTER V 
OF ABETMENT 
107. Abetment of a thing. 
107. Abetment of 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 41]
ldren. 
CHAPTER V 
OF ABETMENT 
CHAPTER V 
OF ABETMENT 
107. Abetment of a thing. 
107. Abetment of a thing.--A person abets the doing of a thing, 
who-
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 42]
 
                  
                      
                        
               
              
 
                  
                           
              
               
             
                               
                     
               
            
             
 
 
 
 
                    
                   
                 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                  
               
               
            
                 
              
   
 
                  
            
        
 
                             
 
                      
      
 
                  121 First.-Instigates any person to do that thing; or 
Secondly.-Engages with one or more other person or persons 
in any conspiracy for the doing of that thing, if an act or 
illegal omission takes place in pursuance of that conspiracy, and in order to the doing of that thing; or 
Thirdly.-Intentionally aids, by any act or illegal omission, 
the doing of that thing. 
Explanation 1.-A person who, by wilful misrepresentation, or by 
wilful concealment of a material fact which he is bound to disclose, 
voluntarily causes or procures, or attempts to cause or procure, a 
thing to be done, is said to instigate the doing of that thing. 
Illustration 
A, a public officer, is authorized by a warrant from a Court of 
Justice to apprehend Z, B, knowing that fact and also that C is not Z, 
wilfully represents to A that C is Z, and thereby intentionally causes 
A to apprehend C. Here B abets by instigation the apprehension of C. 
Explanation 2.-Whoever, either prior to or at the time of the 
commission of an act, does anything in order to facilitate the 
commission of that act, and thereby facilitates the commission 
thereof, is said to aid the doing of that act. 
108. 
Abettor. 
108. Abettor.--A person abets an offence, who abets either the 
commission of an offence, or the commission of an act which would be 
an offence, if committed by a person capable by law of committing 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 42]
mission of an act which would be 
an offence, if committed by a person capable by law of committing an offence with the same intention or knowledge as that of the abettor. 
Explanation 1.-The abetment of the illegal omission of an act may 
amount to an offence although the abettor may not himself be bound to do that act. 
Explanation 2.-To constitute the offence of abetment it is not 
necessary that the act abetted should be committed, or that the effect 
requisite to constitute the offence should be caused. 
Illustrations 
(a) A instigates B to murder C. B refuses to do so. A is guilty 
of abetting B to commit murder. 
(b) A instigates B to murder D. B in pursuance of the instigation 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 43]
                 
  
 
               
              
                 
    
                              
                       
                  
            
                     
   
                    
                 
                  
                 
               
                   
               
 
 
                         
           
                 
                
               
                
    
 
                   
               
                
                
                
               
             
                  
         
 
                              
 
                         
             
               
             
       
 
 
 
 
                     
            stabs D. D recovers from the wound. A is guilty of instigating B to commit murder. 
Explanation 3.-It is not necessary that the person abetted should 
be capable by law of committing an offence, or that he should have the same guilty intention or knowledge as that of the abettor, or any guilty intention or knowledge. 
Illustrations 
(a) A, with a guilty intention, abets a child or a lunatic to 
commit an act which would be an offence, if committed by a person 
capable by law of committing an offence, and having the same intention 
as A. Here A, whether the act be committed or not, is guilty of 
abetting an offence. 
(b) A, with the intention of murdering Z, instigates B, a child 
under seven years of age, to do an act which causes Z's death. B, in 
consequence of the abetment, does the act in the absence of A and 
thereby causes Z's death. Here, though B was not capable by law of 
committing an offence, A is liable to be punished in the same manner 
as if B had been capable by law of committing an offence, and had 
committed murder, and he is therefore subject to the punishment of 
death. 
(c) A instigates B to set fire to a dwelling-house. B, in 
consequence of the unsoundness of his mind, being incapable of knowing 
the nature of the act, or 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 43]
 
consequence of the unsoundness of his mind, being incapable of knowing 
the nature of the act, or that he is doing what is wrong or contrary 
to law, sets fire to the house in consequence of A's instigation. B 
has committed no offence, but A is guilty of abetting the offence of 
setting fire to a dwelling-house, and is liable to the punishment 
provided for that offence. 
(d) A, intending to cause a theft to be committed, instigates B 
to take property belonging to Z out of Z's possession. A induces B to 
believe that the property belongs to A. B takes the property out of Z's possession, in good faith, believing it to be A's property. B, 
acting under this misconception, does not take dishonestly, and 
therefore does not commit theft. But A is guilty of abetting theft, 
and is liable to the same punishment as if B had committed theft. 
Explanation 4.-The abetment of an offence being an offence, the 
abetment of such an abetment is also an offence. 
Illustration 
A instigates B to instigate C to murder Z. B accordingly 
instigates C to murder Z, and C commits that offence in consequence of 
B's instigation. B is liable to be punished for his offence with the 
punishment for murder; and, as A instigated B to commit the offence, A 
is also liable to the same punishment. 
Explanation 5.-It is not necessary to the commission of the 
offence of abetment by conspiracy that the abettor should concert the 122 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 44]
             
           
 
                              
                        
             
                     
             
                    
               
               
                   
            
     
  
 
 
 
       
  
               
              
              
        
                               
                    
         
  
 
  
            
          
                     
                      
             
            
                
       
                        
              
             
   
 
                             
 
                        
                offence with the person who commits it. It is sufficient if he engages in the conspiracy in pursuance of which the offence is committed. 
Illustration 
A concerts with B a plan for poisoning Z. It is agreed that A 
shall administer the poison. B then explains the plan to C mentioning 
that a third person is to administer the poison, but without 
mentioning A's name. C agrees to procure the poison, and procures and 
delivers it to B for the purpose of its being used in the manner 
explained. A administers the poison; Z dies in consequence. Here, though A and C have not conspired together, yet C has been engaged in 
the conspiracy in pursuance of which Z has been murdered. C has 
therefore committed the offence defined in this section and is liable 
to the punishment for murder. 
108A. 
Abetment in India of offences outside India. 
1*[108A. Abetment in India of offences outside India.--A person 
abets an offence within the meaning of this Code who, in 2*[India], 
abets the commission of any act without and beyond 2*[India] which 
would constitute an offence if committed in 2*[India]. 
Illustration 
A, in 2*[India], instigates B, a foreigner in Goa, to commit a 
murder in Goa, A is guilty of abetting murder.] 
109. 
Punishment of abetment if the act abetted is committed in consequence 
and where no express provision is made for its punishment. 
109. Punis
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 44]
 is committed in consequence 
and where no express provision is made for its punishment. 
109. Punishment of abetment if the act abetted is committed in 
consequence and where no express provision is made for its punishment.--Whoever abets any offence shall, if the act abetted is 
committed in consequence of the abetment, and no express provision is 
made by this Code for the punishment of such abetment, be punished with the punishment provided for the offence. 
Explanation.-An act or offence is said to be committed in 
consequence of abetment, when it is committed in consequence of the instigation, or in pursuance of the conspiracy, or with the aid which constitutes the abetment. 
Illustrations 
(a) A offers a bribe to B, a public servant, as a reward for 
showing A some favour in the exercise of B's official functions. B 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 45]
            
 
                   
              
          
 
                           
              
            
               
             
        
  
 
  
                
     
 
 
                     
                  
                
              
           
                     
        
 
           
 
                
 
 
  
 
  
           
  
                 
             
                
       
 
 
 
 
                
           
              
 
                              ----------------------------------------------------------------------
123 accepts the bribe. A has abetted the offence defined in section 161. 
(b) A instigates B to give false evidence. B, in consequence of 
the instigation, commits that offence. A is guilty of abetting that 
offence, and is liable to the same punishment as B. 
(c) A and B conspire to poison Z. A, in pursuance of the 
conspiracy, procures the poison and delivers it to B in order that he 
may administer it to Z. B, in pursuance of the conspiracy, administers 
the poison to Z in A's absence and thereby causes Z's death. Here B is 
guilty of murder. A is guilty of abetting that offence by conspiracy, and is liable to the punishment for murder. 
110. 
Punishment of abetment if person abetted does act with different 
intention from that of abettor. 
110. Punishment of abetment if person abetted does act with 
different intention from that of abettor.--Whoever abets the commission of an offence shall, if the person abetted does the act 
with a different intention or knowledge from that of the abettor, be 
punished with the punishment provided for the offence which would have 
been committed if the act had been done with the intention or 
knowledge of the abettor and with no other. 
1. Added by Act 4 of 1898, s. 3. 
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s, 3 and Sch., for "the States". 
111. 
Liability of abettor when one act abetted and different act done. 
111. Liability of abettor when one act abetted and differ
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 45]
n one act abetted and different act done. 
111. Liability of abettor when one act abetted and different act 
done.--When an Act is abetted and a different act is done, the abettor 
is liable for the act done, in the same manner and to the same extent 
as if he had directly abetted it: 
Proviso. 
Proviso.--Provided the act done was a probable consequence of the 
abetment, and was committed under the influence of the instigation, or 
with the aid or in pursuance of the conspiracy which constituted the 
abetment. 
Illustrations 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 46]
 
                      
               
               
                     
                     
             
                  
          
                       
             
                
                       
    
                        
              
                
                
              
  
  
 
  
             
  
  
               
                
                   
             
      
 
                              
 
                      
               
                  
                   
                 
            
                  
             
  
  
 
  
            
      
 
 (a) A instigates a child to put poison into the food of Z, and 
gives him poison for that purpose. The child, in consequence of the instigation, by mistake puts the poison into the food of Y, which is 
by the side of that of Z. Here if the child was acting under the 
influence of A's instigation, and the act done was under the circumstances a probable consequence of the abetment, A is liable in 
the same manner and to the same extent as if he had instigated the 
child to put the poison into the food of Y. 
(b) A instigates B to burn Z's house. B sets fire to the house 
and at the same time commits theft of property there. A, though guilty 
of abetting the burning of the house, is not guilty of abetting the 
theft; for the theft was a distinct act, and not a probable 
consequence of the burning. 
(c) A instigates B and C to break into an inhabited house at 
midnight for the purpose of robbery, and provides them with arms for 
that purpose. B and C break into the house, and being resisted by Z, 
one of the inmates, murder Z. Here, if that murder was the probable 
consequence of the abetment, A is liable to the punishment provided 
for murder. 
112. 
Abettor when liable to cumulative punishment for act abetted and for 
act done. 
112. Abettor when liable to cumulative punishment for act abetted 
and for act done.--If the act for which the abettor 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 46]
iable to cumulative punishment for act abetted 
and for act done.--If the act for which the abettor is liable under the last preceding section is committed in addition to the act 
abetted, and constitute a distinct offence, the abettor is liable to 
punishment for each of the offences. 
Illustration 
A instigates B to resist by force a distress made by a public 
servant. B, in consequence resists that distress. In offering the resistance, B voluntarily causes grievous hurt to the officer 
executing the distress. As B has committed both the offence of 
resisting the distress, and the offence of voluntarily causing 
grievous hurt, B is liable to punishment for both these offences; and, 
if A knew that B was likely voluntarily to cause grievous hurt in resisting the distress A will also be liable to punishment for each of 
the offences. 
113. 
Liability of abettor for an effect caused by the act abetted different 
from that intended by the abettor. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 47]
                 
             
              
               
                
                 
                  
                  
       
 
                              
 
                   
               
                 
                
 
 
 
 
  
      
 
 
                 
               
                
              
     
 
 
 
 
 
  
           
    
                   
          
             
              
               
             
                  
 
  
        
 
 
                   
             
                 124 113. Liability of abettor for an effect caused by the act abetted 
different from that intended by the abettor.--When an act is abetted with the intention on the part of the abettor of causing a particular 
effect, and an act for which the abettor is liable in consequence of 
the abetment, causes a different effect from that intended by the 
abettor, the abettor is liable for the effect caused, in the same manner and to the same extent as if he had abetted the act with the 
intention of causing that effect, provided he knew that the act 
abetted was likely to cause that effect. 
Illustration 
A instigates B to cause grievous hurt to Z. B, in consequence of 
the instigation, causes grievous hurt to Z. Z dies in consequence. 
Here, if A knew that the grievous hurt abetted was likely to cause 
death, A is liable to be punished with the punishment provided for murder. 
114. 
Abettor present when offence is committed. 
114. Abettor present when offence is committed.--Whenever any 
person who if absent would be liable to be punished as an abettor, is 
present when the act or offence for which he would be punishable in 
consequence of the abetment is committed, he shall be deemed to have 
committed such act or offence. 
115. 
Abetment of offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life-if 
offence is not committed. 
115. Abetment of offence punishable with death or imprisonment 
for life--if offence not committed.-Whoever
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 47]
etment of offence punishable with death or imprisonment 
for life--if offence not committed.-Whoever abets the commission of an offence punishable with death or 1*[imprisonment for life], shall, 
if that offence be not committed in consequence of the abetment, and 
no express provision is made by this Code for the punishment of such abetment, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to 
fine: 
if act causing harm be done in consequence. 
if act causing harm be done in consequence.--and if any act for 
which the abettor is liable in consequence of the abetment, and which 
causes hurt to any person, is done, the abettor shall be liable to 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 48]
                
         
 
                              
                      
              
             
                
                    
             
   
 
 
 
  
            
 
 
 
                    
            
           
                
               
              
            
           
  
                
  
 
 
                  
                
                
                 
             
              
          
                              
                         
               
           
 
                     
           
       
 
                    
                 
            
        imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
fourteen years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
Illustration 
A instigates B to murder Z. The offence is not committed. If B 
had murdered Z, he would have been subject to the punishment of death 
or 1*[imprisonment for life]. Therefore A is liable to imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to seven years and also to a fine; and, if 
any hurt be done to Z in consequence of the abetment, he will be 
liable to imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen years, and to fine. 
116. 
Abetment of offence punishable with imprisonment--if offence be not 
committed. 
116. Abetment of offence punishable with imprisonment--if 
offence be not committed.--Whoever abets an offence punishable with imprisonment shall, if that offence be not committed in consequence of 
the abetment, and no express provision is made by this Code for the 
punishment of such abetment, be punished with imprisonment of any 
description provided for that offence for a term which may extend to 
one-fourth part of the longest term provided for that offence; or with 
such fine as is provided for that offence, or with both; 
if abettor or person abetted be a public servant whose duty it is to 
prevent offence. 
if abettor or person abetted be a public servant whose duty it is 
to prevent offence.--
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 48]
t offence. 
if abettor or person abetted be a public servant whose duty it is 
to prevent offence.--and if the abettor or the person abetted is a 
public servant, whose duty it is to prevent the commission of such 
offence, the abettor shall be punished with imprisonment of any 
description provided for that offence, for a term which may extend to 
one-half of the longest term provided for that offence, or with such fine as is provided for the offence, or with both. 
Illustrations 
(a) A offers a bribe to B, a public servant, as a reward for 
showing. A some favour in the exercise of B's official functions. B 
refuses to accept the bribe. A is punishable under this section. 
(b) A instigates B to give false evidence. Here, if B does not 
give false evidence, A has nevertheless committed the offence defined 
in this section, and is punishable accordingly. 
(c) A, a police-officer, whose duty it is to prevent robbery, 
abets the commission of robbery. Here, though the robbery be not committed, A is liable to one-half of the longest term of imprisonment provided for that offence, and also to fine. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 49]
 
                   
               
                     
           
  
 
 
 
                  
 
 
 
                 
           
             
            
          
 
                
      
 
 
 
 
 
                              
                          
                  
               
             
  
 
 
 
  
                   
   
 
 
               
          
                 
        
                       
                        
          
 
 
        
 
                 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------
125 (d) B abets the commission of a robbery by A, a police-officer, 
whose duty it is to prevent that offence. Here though the robbery be 
not committed, B is liable to one-half of the longest term of 
imprisonment provided for the offence of robbery, and also to fine. 
117. 
Abetting commission of offence by the public or by more than ten 
persons. 
117. Abetting commission of offence by the public or by more than 
ten persons.--Whoever abets the commission of an offence by the public generally or by any number or class of persons exceeding ten, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for 
life". 
Illustration 
A affixes in a public place a placard instigating a sect 
consisting of more than ten members to meet at a certain time and 
place, for the purpose of attacking the members of an adverse sect, 
while engaged in a procession. A has committed the offence defined in 
this section. 
118. 
Concealing design to commit offence punishable with death or 
imprisonment for life. 
118. Concealing design to commit offence punishable with death or 
imprisonment for life.--Whoever intending to facilitate or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby facilitate the commission of an of
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 49]
ing to facilitate or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby facilitate the commission of an offence punishable with death or 1*[imprisonment for life], 
voluntarily conceals, by any act or illegal omission, the 
existence of a design to commit such offence or makes any representation which he knows to be false respecting such design, 
if offence be committed-if offence be not committed. 
if offence be committed-if offence be not committed.--shall, if 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 50]
              
                 
          
               
    
 
                              
                     
              
             
             
                
  
  
 
  
               
   
 
 
                
            
             
                   
   
 
                      
                       
          
 
 
    
  
                
                 
               
                   
    
 
 
       
  
                 
                      
             
 
 
 
     
 
                          that offence be committed, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, or, if the 
offence of not committed, with imprisonment of either description, for 
a term which may extend to three years; and in either case shall also 
be liable to fine. 
Illustration 
A, knowing that dacoity is about to be committed at B, falsely 
informs the Magistrate that a dacoity is about to be committed at C, a 
place in an opposite direction, and thereby misleads the Magistrate with intent to facilitate the commission of the offence. The dacoity 
is committed at B in pursuance of the design. A is punishable under 
this section. 
119. 
Public servant concealing design to commit offence which it is his 
duty to prevent. 
119. Public servant concealing design to commit offence which it 
is his duty to prevent.--Whoever, being a public servant intending to facilitate or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby facilitate 
the commission of an offence which it is his duty as such public 
servant to prevent, 
voluntarily conceals, by any act or illegal omission, the 
existence of a design to commit such offence, or makes any 
representation which he knows to be false respecting such design. 
if offence be committed. 
if offence be committed.--shall, if the offence be committed, be 
punished with imprisonment of any description provided for the 
offence, for a term which may extend to one-half of the longe
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 50]
t of any description provided for the 
offence, for a term which may extend to one-half of the longest term 
of such imprisonment, or with such fine as is provided for that offence, or with both; 
if offence be punishable with death, etc. 
if offence be punishable with death, etc.--or, if the offence be 
punishable with death or 1*[imprisonment for life], with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten 
years; 
if offence be not committed. 
if offence be not committed.--or, if the offence be not 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 51]
              
                
               
       
 
                              
 
                 
              
                     
          
                  
             
 
 
 
 
  
        
  
                      
            
              
   
                       
                       
          
 
                
      
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
                  
                  
              
            
               
      
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
                                    
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------
126 committed, shall be punished with imprisonment of any description 
provided for the offence for a term which may extend to one-fourth 
part of the longest term of such imprisonment or with such fine as is 
provided for the offence, or with both. 
Illustration 
A, an officer of police, being legally bound to give information 
of all designs to commit robbery which may come to his knowledge, and 
knowing that B designs to commit robbery, omits to give such 
information, with intent to facilitate the commission of that offence. here A has by an illegal omission concealed the existence of B's 
design and is liable to punishment according to the provision of this 
section. 
120. 
Concealing design to commit offence punishable with imprisonment. 
120. Concealing design to commit offence punishable with 
imprisonment.--Whoever, intending to facilitate or knowing it to be 
likely that he will thereby facilitate the commission of an offence 
punishable with imprisonment, 
voluntarily conceals, by any act or illegal omission, the 
existence of a design to commit such offence, or makes any 
representation which he knows to be false respecting such design, 
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for 
life". 
if offence be committed-if offence be not committed. 
if offence be committed-if offence be no
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 51]
fe". 
if offence be committed-if offence be not committed. 
if offence be committed-if offence be not committed--shall, if 
the offence be committed, be punished with imprisonment of the 
description provided for the offence, for a term which may extend to 
one-fourth, and, if the offence be not committed, to one-eight, of the 
longest term of such imprisonment, or with such fine as is provided for the offence, or with both. 
CHAPTER VA 
CRIMINAL CONSPIRACY 
1*[CHAPTER VA 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 52]
                                 
 
 
 
 
 
    
  
                    
         
 
               
 
                         
           
 
                     
            
                  
  
                    
               
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
  
               
             
             
               
              
        
                       
          
               
         
  
  
  
     
  
                                    
 
                             
  CRIMINAL CONSPIRACY 
120A. 
Definition of criminal conspiracy. 
120A. Definition of criminal conspiracy.--When two or more 
persons agree to do, or cause to be done, -
(1) an illegal act, or 
(2) an act which is not illegal by illegal means, such an 
agreement is designated a criminal conspiracy: 
Provided that no agreement except an agreement to commit an 
offence shall amount to a criminal conspiracy unless some act besides 
the agreement is done by one or more parties to such agreement in 
pursuance thereof. 
Explanation.-It is immaterial whether the illegal act is the 
ultimate object of such agreement, or is merely incidental to that 
object. 
120B. 
Punishment of criminal conspiracy. 
120B. Punishment of criminal conspiracy.--(1) Whoever is a party 
to a criminal conspiracy to commit an offence punishable with death, 
2*[imprisonment for life] or rigorous imprisonment for a term of two years or upwards, shall, where no express provision is made in this 
Code for the punishment of such a conspiracy, be punished in the same 
manner as if he had abetted such offence. 
(2) Whoever is a party to a criminal conspiracy other than a 
criminal conspiracy to commit an offence punishable as aforesaid shall 
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term not 
exceeding six months, or with fine or with both.] 
CHAPTER VI 
OF OFFENCES AGAINST THE STATE 
CHAPTER VI 
OF OFFENCES AGAINST THE STATE 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 52]
GAINST THE STATE 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 53]
 
 
 
             
    
 
 
                    
            
               
                            
          
 
                          
                
         
                                                             
 
           
 
               
 
           
 
                   
       
                     
      
 
                
 
                
 
            
 
 
  
 
  
        
  
                  
              
                 
                
               
               
              
    
 
              ----------------------------------------------------------------------
127 121. 
Waging, or attempting to wage war, or abetting waging of war, against 
the Government of India. 
121. Waging, or attempting to wage war, or abetting waging of 
war, against the Government of India.--Whoever wages war against the 3*[Government of India], or attempts to wage such war, or abets the 
waging of such war, shall be punished with death, or 4*[imprisonment for life] 5*[and shall also be liable to fine]. 
6*[Illustration.] 
7***A joins an insurrection against the 3*[Government of India]. 
A has committed the offence defined in this section. 
8* * * * * 
1. Ins. by Act 8 of 1913, s. 3. 
2. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation". 
3. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for "Queen". 
4. Subs. by Act of 1955 s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for 
life". 
5. Subs. by Act 16 of 1921, s. 2, for "and shall forfeit all his 
property". 
6. Subs. by Act 36 of 1957, s. 3 and Sch. II, for "Illustrations". 
7. The brackets and letter "(a)" omitted by s. 3 and Sch. II, ibid. 
8. Illus tration (b) rep. by the A. O. 1950. 
121A. 
Conspiracy to commit offences punishable by section 121. 
1*[121A. Conspiracy to commit offences punishable by section 
121.--Whoever within or without 2*[India] conspires to commit any 
of the offences punishable by section 121, 3*** or conspires to 
overawe, by means of criminal force or the show of criminal
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 53]
le by section 121, 3*** or conspires to 
overawe, by means of criminal force or the show of criminal force, 4*[the Central Government or any State Government 5***], shall be 
punished with 6*[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of 
either description which may extend to ten years, 7*[and shall also 
be liable to fine]. 
Explanation.-To constitute a conspiracy under this section, it is 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 54]
                
  
 
 
 
  
                 
   
                  
           
             
                 
             
             
     
 
 
 
  
         
 
 
                 
                    
                   
            
              
             
              
 
 
 
 
 
                 
       
 
 
               
                
             
               
             
    
 
                   
                  
           
  
 
             
 
                ----------------------------------------------------------------------not necessary that any act or illegal omission shall take place in 
pursuance thereof.] 
122. 
Collecting arms, etc., with intention of waging war against the 
Government of India. 
122. Collecting arms, etc., with intention of waging war against 
the Government of India.--Whoever collects men, arms or ammunition or otherwise prepares to wage war with the intention of either waging or 
being prepared to wage war against the 8*[Government of India], 
shall be punished with 9*[imprisonment for life] or imprisonment of either description for a term not exceeding ten years, 10*[and shall 
also be liable to fine]. 
123. 
Concealing with intent to facilitate design to wage war. 
123. Concealing with intent to facilitate design to wage war.- -
Whoever, by any act, or by any illegal omission, conceals the 
existence of a design to wage war against the 8*[Government of 
India], intending by such concealment to facilitate, or knowing it to 
be likely that such concealment will facilitate, the waging of such 
war, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
124. 
Assaulting President, Governor, etc., with intent to compel or 
restrain the exercise of any lawful power. 
124. Assaulting President, Governor, etc., with intent to compel 
or restrain the exercise of any lawful power.--Whoever, with the intention of inducing or compel
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 54]
el 
or restrain the exercise of any lawful power.--Whoever, with the intention of inducing or compelling the 11*[President] of India, or 
12*[Governor 13***] of any State, 14*** 15*** 16*** to exercise or refrain from exercising in any manner any of the lawful powers of such 
17*[President or 12*[Governor 13*], 
assaults or wrongfully restrains, or attempts wrongfully to 
restrain, or overawes, by means of criminal force or the show of 
criminal force, or attempts so to overawe, such 17*[President or 12*** 
[Governor 13***], 
1. S. 121A ins. by Act 27 of 1870, s. 4. 
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the States". 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 55]
 
                    
                 
 
                  
 
                
 
                   
           
 
           
 
           
 
                   
       
 
                    
      
 
           
 
              
 
              
         
             
 
                
             
                
      
 
               
                
                   
 
 
 
                  
                  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               
               
              ----------------------------------------------------------------------
128 3. The words "or to deprive the Queen of the sovereignty of the 
Provinces or of any part thereof" omitted by the A. O. 1950. 
4. Subs. by the A. O. 1937, for "the G. of I. or any L. G.". 
5. The words "or the Govt. of Burma" rep. by the A. O. 1948. 
6. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation 
for life or any shorter term". 
7. Ins. by Act 16 of 1921, s. 3. 
8. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for "Queen". 
9. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation 
for life". 
10. Subs. by Act 16 of 1921, s. 2, for "and shall forfeit all his 
property". 
11. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for "Governor General". 
12. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "Governor". 
13. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 
2) Order, 1956. 
14. The words "or a Leutenant-Governor" rep. by the A. O. 1937. 
15. The words "or a Member of the Council of the Governor General of 
India" rep. by the A. O. 1948. 
16. The words "or of the Council of any Presidency" rep. by the A. O. 
1937. 
17. The original words "Governor General, Governor, Lieutenant-
Governor or Member of Council" have successively been amended by 
the A.O. 1937, A. O. 1948 and A. O. 1950 to read as above. 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
124A. 
Sedition. 
1*[124A. Sedition.--Whoever by words, either spoken or 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 55]
 also be liable to 
fine. 
124A. 
Sedition. 
1*[124A. Sedition.--Whoever by words, either spoken or written, 
or by signs, or by visible representation, or otherwise, brings or 
attempts to bring into hatred or contempt, or excites or attempts to 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 56]
          
           
                 
           
 
           
     
             
                
             
         
                     
            
                  
      
  
 
  
             
  
 
 
                  
          
                 
              
             
            
              
 
 
 
 
 
               
   
 
 
               
               
           
                  
            
                     
              
       
 
 
 
 
 
            
   excite disaffection towards, 2***the Government established by law in 
3*[India], a 4***shall be punished with 5*[imprisonment for life], to 
which fine may be added, or with imprisonment which may extend to 
three years, to which fine may be added, or with fine. 
Explanation 1.-The expression "disaffection" includes disloyalty 
and all feelings of enmity. 
Explanation 2.-Comments expressing disapprobation of the measures 
of the Government with a view to obtain their alteration by lawful means, without exciting or attempting to excite hatred, contempt or disaffection, do not constitute an offence under this section. 
Explanation 3.-Comments expressing disapprobation of the 
administrative or other action of the Government without exciting or attempting to excite hatred, contempt or disaffection, do not constitute an offence under this section.] 
125. 
Waging war against any Asiatic Power in alliance with the Government 
of India. 
125. Waging war against any Asiatic Power in alliance with the 
Government of India.--Whoever wages war against the Government of any Asiatic Power in alliance or at peace with the 6*[Government of 
India] or attempts to wage such war, or abets the waging of such war, 
shall be punished with 7*[imprisonment for life], to which fine may 
be added, or with imprisonment of either description for a term which 
may extend to seven years, to which fine may be added, or with fine. 
126. 
Committing depredation on territories of Power at peace with the
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 56]
 may be added, or with fine. 
126. 
Committing depredation on territories of Power at peace with the 
Government of India. 
126. Committing depredation on territories of Power at peace with 
the Government of India.--Whoever commits depredation, or makes preparations to commit depredation, on the territories of any Power in 
alliance or at peace with the 6*[Government of India], shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine and to 
forfeiture of any property used or intended to be used in committing 
such depredation, or acquired by such depredation. 
127. 
Receiving property taken by war or depredation mentioned in sections 
125 and 126. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 57]
 
 
                
            
              
            
             
            
 
 
 
 
 
                
 
 
 
               
            
                  
             
            
             
     
 
                  
              
                  
                  
             
                
                
       
                
          
          
                   
         
 
  
 
 
 
        
 
 
                    
           
            
                 
            
            
  
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
129 127. Receiving property taken by war or depredation mentioned in 
sections 125 and 126.-Whoever receives any property knowing the same 
to have been taken in the commission of any of the offences mentioned 
in sections 125 and 126, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also 
be liable to fine and to forfeiture of the property so received. 
128. 
Public servant voluntarily allowing prisoner of state or war to 
escape. 
128. Public servant voluntarily allowing prisoner of state or war 
to escape.--Whoever, being a public servant and having the custody of 
any State prisoner or prisoner of war, voluntarily allows such 
prisoner to escape from any place in which such prisoner is confined, 
shall be punished with 7*[imprisonment for life], or imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall 
also be liable to fine. 
1. Subs. by Act 4 of 1898, s. 4, for the original s. 124A which had 
been ins. by Act 27 of 1870, s. 5. 
2. The words "Her Majesty or" rep. by the A.O. 1950. The words "or the Crown Representative" ins. after the word "Majesty" by the 
A.O. 1937 were rep. by the A.O. 1948. 
3. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the States". 
4. The words "or British Burma" ins. by the A.O. 1937 rep. by the A.O. 1948. 
5. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sc
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 57]
itish Burma" ins. by the A.O. 1937 rep. by the A.O. 1948. 
5. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for life or any shorter term". 
6. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for "Queen". 
7. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation 
for life". 
129. 
Public servant negligently suffering such prisoner to escape. 
129. Public servant negligently suffering such prisoner to 
escape.--Whoever, being a public servant and having the custody of any 
State prisoner or prisoner of war, negligently suffers such prisoner to escape from any place of confinement in which such prisoner is 
confined, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
130. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 58]
 
 
        
 
 
                 
              
                           
                  
              
          
                
 
                        
                   
             
          
 
 
  
 
 
          
  
                               
 
                 
 
 
 
 
 
             
   
 
 
                 
            
              
              
               
                 
             
        
 
                      
           
              
              
                 
      
 
 
                ----------------------------------------------------------------------Aiding escape of, rescuing or harbouring such prisoner. 
130. Aiding escape of, rescuing or harbouring such prisoner.- -
Whoever knowingly aids or assists any State prisoner or prisoner of 
war in escaping from lawful custody, or rescues or attempts to rescue 
any such prisoner, or harbours or conceals any such prisoner who has 
escaped from lawful custody, or offers or attempts to offer any 
resistance to the recapture of such prisoner shall be punished with 1*[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of either description 
for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
Explanation.-A State prisoner or prisoner of war, who is 
permitted to be at large on his parole within certain limits in 
2*[India], is said to escape from lawful custody if he goes beyond the 
limits within which he is allowed to be at large. 
CHAPTER VII 
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO THE ARMY, [NAVY AND AIR FORCE] 
CHAPTER VII 
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO THE ARMY, 3*[NAVY AND AIR FORCE] 
131. 
Abetting mutiny, or attempting to seduce a soldier, sailor or airman 
from his duty. 
131. Abetting mutiny, or attempting to seduce a soldier, sailor 
or airman from his duty.--Whoever abets the committing of mutiny by an officer, soldier, 4*[sailor or airman], in the Army, 5*[Navy or Air 
Force] of the 6*[Government of India] or attempts to seduce any such 
officer, sold
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 58]
 5*[Navy or Air 
Force] of the 6*[Government of India] or attempts to seduce any such 
officer, soldier, 4*[sailor or airman] from his allegiance or his 
duty, shall be punished with 1*[imprisonment for life], or with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
7*[Explanation.-In this section the words "officer", 8* 
["soldier", 9*["sailor"] and "airman"] include any person subject to the 10*[Army Act, 11*[the Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950)], 9*[the Naval Discipline Act, 12***the Indian Navy (Discipline) Act,1934 (34 of 
1934)] 13*[the Air Force Act or 14*[the Air Force Act, 1950 (45 of 
1950)]], as the case may be].] 
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 59]
      
                
                 
              
               
                     
                 
             
                    
                       
               
                  
      
                    
      
                   
      
                  
       
 
 
 
  
 
  
            
 
 
                  
                
            
                   
                    
          
              
 
 
 
 
 
                 
       
 
 
                     
            
               
             
              
                
         
 
 
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
130 life". 
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the States". 
3. Subs. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and Sch. I, for "and Navy". 
4. Subs. by s. 2 and Sch. I, ibid., for "or sailor". 
5. Subs. by s. 2 and sch. I, ibid., for "or Navy". 
6. Subs. by the A.O. 1950 for "Queen". 
7. Ins. by Act 27 of 1870, s. 6. 
8. Subs. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and Sch. I, for "and soldier". 
9. Ins. by Act 25 of 1934, s. 2 and Sch. 
10. Subs. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and Sch. I, for "Articles of War 
for the better government of Her Majesty's Army, or to the Articles of War contained in Act No. 5 of 1869". 
11. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the Indian Army Act, 1911". 
12. The words "or that Act as modified by" were rep. by the A.O. 1950. 
13. Subs. by Act 14 of 1932, s. 130 and Sch., for "or the Air Force 
Act". 
14. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s.3 and Sch., for "the Indian Air Force Act, 1932". 
132. 
Abetment of mutiny, if mutiny is committed in consequence thereof. 
132. Abetment of mutiny, if mutiny is committed in consequence 
thereof.--Whoever abets the committing of mutiny by an officer, 
soldier, 1*[sailor or airman], in the Army, 2*[Navy or Air Force] of 
the 3*[Government of India], shall, if mutiny be committed in 
consequence of that abetment, be punished with death or with 4*[imprisonment for life], or im
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 59]
ed in 
consequence of that abetment, be punished with death or with 4*[imprisonment for life], or imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
133. 
Abetment of assault by soldier, sailor or airman on his superior 
officer, when in execution of his office. 
133. Abetment of assault by soldier, sailor or airman on his 
superior officer, when in execution of his office.--Whoever abets an assault by an officer, soldier, 1*[sailor or airman], in the Army, 
2*[Navy or Air Force] of the 3*[Government of India], on any superior officer being in the execution of his office, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
three years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
134. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 60]
 
 
        
 
 
              
             
                
             
            
                
         
  
 
  
        
 
 
                     
              
                 
            
                
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
                   
                  
              
              
           
               
    
                   
          
 
 
 
 
 
              
 
 
 
                      
              
               
               
               Abetment of such assault, if the assault committed. 
134. Abetment of such assault, if the assault committed.--Whoever 
abets an assault by an officer, soldier, 1*[sailor or airman], in the Army, 2*[Navy or Air Force] of the 3*[Government of India], on any 
superior officer being in the execution of his office, shall, if such 
assault be committed in consequence of that abetment be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
135. 
Abetment of desertion of soldier, sailor or airman. 
135. Abetment of desertion of soldier, sailor or airman.- -
Whoever, abets the desertion of any officer, soldier, 1*[sailor or 
airman], in the Army, 2*[Navy or Air Force] of the 3*[Government 
of India], shall be punished with imprisonment of either description 
for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
136. 
Harbouring deserter. 
136. Harbouring deserter.--Whoever, except as hereinafter 
excepted, knowing or having reason to believe that an officer, 
soldier, 1*[sailor or airman], in the Army, 2*[Navy or Air Force] of the 3*[Government of India], has deserted, harbours such officer, 
soldier, 1*[sailor or airman], shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with 
fine or with both. 
Exception.-This provision does not extend to the case in which 
the harbour is given by a wife to her husband. 
137. 
Deserter concealed on board merchant v
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 60]
 which 
the harbour is given by a wife to her husband. 
137. 
Deserter concealed on board merchant vessel through negligence of 
master. 
137. Deserter concealed on board merchant vessel through 
negligence of master.--The master or person in charge of a merchant vessel, on board of which any deserter from the Army, 2*[Navy or Air 
Force] of the 3*[Government of India] is concealed, shall, though ignorant of such concealment, be liable to a penalty not exceeding 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 61]
               
                 
           
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
                    
            
            
                    
               
            
          
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
                  
              
 
                 
 
              
 
          
 
                
      
 
 
 
 
 
  
     
  
                  
                     
              
                     
               
      
 
 
 
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
131 five hundred rupees, if he might have known of such concealment but 
for some neglect of his duty as such master or person in charge, or 
but for some want of discipline on board of the vessel. 
138. 
Abetment of act of insubordination by soldier, sailor or airman. 
138. Abetment of act of insubordination by soldier, sailor or 
airman.-Whoever abets what he knows to be an act of insubordination by 
an officer, soldier, 1*[sailor or airman], in the Army, 2*[Navy or air 
Force], of the 3*[Government of India], shall, if such act of 
insubordination be committed in consequence of that abetment, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to six months, or with fine, or with both. 
138A. 
[Repealed.] 
138A. [Application of foregoing sections to the Indian Marine 
Service.] Rep. by the Amending Act, 1934 (35 of 1934), s. 2 and Sch. 
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and Sch. I, for "or sailor". 
2. Subs. by s. 2 and Sch. I, ibid., for "or Navy". 
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for "Queen". 
4. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for 
life". 
139. 
Persons subject to certain Acts. 
139. Persons subject to certain Acts.--No person subject to 1* 
[the Army Act, 2*[the Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950)], the Naval 
Discipline Act, 3*[4***the Indian Navy (Discipline) Act, 1934 (34 
of 1934)], 5*[the Air Force Act or 6*[the Air Force Act, 1950 (45 of 1950)]]], is subject to punishment under this Code for any of 
the offences def
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 61]
rce Act, 1950 (45 of 1950)]]], is subject to punishment under this Code for any of 
the offences defined in this Chapter. 
140. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 62]
 
           
 
 
                   
              
              
              
             
              
            
              
    
  
  
 
 
      
 
 
                                    
 
                         
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
                 
           
    
 
                       
                   
                    
                                      
        
                   
       
 
                        
                         
                  
                    
                      
        
 
                         
                   
                  Wearing garb or carrying token used by soldier, sailor or airman. 
140. Wearing garb or carrying token used by soldier, sailor or 
airman.--Whoever, not being a soldier, 7*[sailor or airman] in the 
Military, 8*[Naval or Air] service of the 9*[Government of India], 
wears any garb or carries any token resembling any garb or token used 
by such a soldier, 7*[sailor or airman] with the intention that it may 
be believed that he is such a soldier, 7*[sailor or airman], shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred 
rupees, or with both. 
CHAPTER VIII 
OF OFFENCES AGAINST THE PUBLIC TRANQUILLITY 
CHAPTER VIII 
OF OFFENCES AGAINST THE PUBLIC TRANQUILLITY 
141. 
Unlawful assembly. 
141. Unlawful assembly.--An assembly of five or more persons is 
designated an "unlawful assembly", if the common object of the persons 
composing that assembly is-
First.-To overawe by criminal force, or show of criminal 
force, 10*[the Central or any State Government or Parliament 
or the Legislature of any State], or any public servant in the 
exercise of the lawful power of such public servant; or 
Second.-To resist the execution of any law, or of any legal 
process; or 
Third.-To commit any mischief or criminal trespass, or other 
offence; or 
Fourth.-By means of criminal force, or 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 62]
it any mischief or criminal trespass, or other 
offence; or 
Fourth.-By means of criminal force, or show of criminal 
force, to any person to take or obtain possession of any property, or to deprive any person of the enjoyment of a right of 
way, or of the use of water or other incorporeal right of which he is in possession or enjoyment, or to enforce any right or 
supposed right; or 
Fifth.-By means of criminal force, or show of criminal 
force, to compel any person to do what he is not legally bound to 
do, or to omit to do what he is legally entitled to do. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 63]
 
                       
       
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
                
            
                
  
 
                     
                               
 
                   
       
             
 
                
 
                    
       
                   
        
              
 
              
 
          
 
               
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
                 
             
            
 
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------
132 Explanation.-An assembly which was not unlawful when it 
assembled, may subsequently become an unlawful assembly. 
142. 
Being member of unlawful assembly. 
142. Being member of unlawful assembly.--Whoever, being aware of 
facts which render any assembly an unlawful assembly, intentionally 
joins that assembly, or continues in it, is said to be a member of an 
unlawful assembly. 
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and Sch. I, for "any Articles of 
War for the Army or Navy of the Queen, or for any part of such 
Army or Navy". 
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the Indian Army Act, 1911". 
3. Ins. by Act 35 of 1934, s. 2 and Sch. 
4. The words "or that Act as modifed by" rep. by the A.O. 1950. 
5, Subs. by Act 14 of 1932, s. 130 and Sch., for "or the Air Force 
Act". 
6. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the Indian Air Force 
Act, 1932". 
7. Ins. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and Sch. I. 
8. Subs. by s. 2 and Sch. I, ibid., for "or Naval". 
9. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for "Queen". 
10. Subs., ibid., for "the Central or any Provincial Government or 
Legislature". 
143. 
Punishment. 
143. Punishment.--Whoever is a member of an unlawful assembly, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 64]
 
 
 
       
 
                     
             
                
             
              
  
  
 
  
                 
   
 
 
                 
          
             
                 
             
       
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                
                 
               
    
  
 
  
   
  
              
             
           
 
 
 
 
 
     
 144. 
Joining unlawful assembly armed with deadly weapon. 
144. Joining unlawful assembly armed with deadly weapon.- -
Whoever, being armed with any deadly weapon, or with anything which, 
used as a weapon of offence, is likely to cause death, is a member of 
an unlawful assembly, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
145. 
Joining or continuing in unlawful assembly, knowing it has been 
commanded to disperse. 
145. Joining or continuing in unlawful assembly, knowing it has 
been commanded to disperse.--Whoever joins or continues in an unlawful assembly, knowing that such unlawful assembly has been commanded in 
the manner prescribed by law to disperse, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extent to two 
years, or with fine, or with both. 
146. 
Rioting. 
146. Rioting.--Whenever force or violence is used by an unlawful 
assembly, or by any member thereof, in prosecution of the common 
object of such assembly, every member of such assembly is guilty of 
the offence of rioting. 
147. 
Punishment for rioting. 
147. Punishment for rioting.--Whoever is guilty of rioting, shall 
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which 
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
148. 
Rioting, armed with deadly weapon. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 65]
 
                  
            
                
            
        
 
 
 
 
 
                
    
 
 
                       
          
                
              
                 
              
         
  
 
  
           
 
 
                 
              
            
              
                
                         
                
   
  
 
  
              
       
 
 
                 
            
               
             
          
              
    
                 148. Rioting, armed with deadly weapon.--Whoever is guilty of 
rioting, being armed with a deadly weapon or with anything which, used as a weapon of offence, is likely to cause death, shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
three years, or with fine, or with both. 
149. 
Every member of unlawful assembly guilty of offence committed in 
prosecution of common object. 
149. Every member of unlawful assembly guilty of offence 
committed in prosecution of common object.--If an offence is committed by any member of an unlawful assembly in prosecution of the common 
object of that assembly, or such as the members of that assembly knew 
to be likely to be committed in prosecution of that object, every 
person who, at the time of the committing of that offence, is a member 
of the same assembly, is guilty of that offence. 
150. 
Hiring, or conniving at hiring, of persons to join unlawful assembly. 
150. Hiring, or conniving at hiring, of persons to join unlawful 
assembly.--Whoever hires or engages, or employes, or promotes, or 
connives at the hiring, engagement or employment of any person to join 
or become a member of any unlawful assembly, shall be punishable as a 
member of such unlawful assembly, and for any offence which may be 
committed by any such person as a member of such unlawful assembly in pursuance of such hiring, engagement or employment, in the same manner 
as if he had been a member of such unlawful asse
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 65]
ring, engagement or employment, in the same manner 
as if he had been a member of such unlawful assembly, or himself had 
committed such offence. 
151. 
Knowingly joining or continuing in assembly of five or more persons 
after it has been commanded to disperse. 
151. Knowingly joining or continuing in assembly of five or more 
persons after it has been commanded to disperse.--Whoever knowingly joins or continues in any assembly of five or more persons likely to cause a disturbance of the public peace, after such assembly has been 
lawfully commanded to disperse, shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with 
fine, or with both. 
Explanation.-If the assembly is an unlawful assembly within the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 66]
            
 
 
 
 
  
         
 
 
                
           
             
                 
               
                              
          
 
 
  
 
 
 
             
   
 
 
                 
               
            
            
             
            
            
               
               
            
 
 
 
  
          
           
    
  
                
            
       
 
                         
                 
               
                   133 meaning of section 141, the offender will be punishable under section 
145. 
152. 
Assaulting or obstructing public servant when suppressing riot, etc. 
152. Assaulting or obstructing public servant when suppressing 
riot, etc.--Whoever assaults or threatens to assault, or obstructs or 
attempts to obstruct, any public servant in the discharge of his duty 
as such public servant, in endeavouring to disperse an unlawful 
assembly, or to suppress a riot or affray, or uses, or threatens, or 
attempts to use criminal force to such public servant, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
153. 
Want only giving provocation with intent to cause riot-if rioting be 
committed:if not committed. 
153. Want only giving provocation with intent to cause riot--if 
rioting be committed: if not committed.-Whoever malignantly, or 
wantonly by doing anything which is illegal, gives provocation to any 
person intending or knowing it to be likely that such provocation will 
cause the offence of rioting to be committed, shall, if the offence of 
rioting be committed in consequence of such provocation, be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both, and if the offence of rioting be 
not committed, with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both. 
153A. 
Promoting enmity betw
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 66]
or a term 
which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both. 
153A. 
Promoting enmity between different groups on ground of religion, race, 
place of birth, residence, language, etc., and doing acts prejudicial to maintenance of harmony. 
1*[153A. Promoting enmity between different groups on ground of 
religion, race, place of birth, residence, language, etc., and doing acts prejudicial to maintenance of harmony.--(1) Whoever -
(a) by words, either spoken or written, or by signs or by 
visible representations or otherwise, promotes or attempts to promote, on grounds of religion, race, place of birth, residence, language, caste or community or any other ground whatsoever, 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 67]
                   
                  
         
 
                     
                   
                 
             
                        
              
                      
                   
                      
                  
                    
                   
                    
                       
                  
                  
                      
      
 
             
      
 
               
              
                 
            
           
 
 
 
  
      
 
 
                    
              
       
 
                         
                         
                      
                
                       
         
                   
                      
                      
                  
       
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------disharmony or feelings of enmity, hatred or ill-will between 
different religious, racials, language or regional groups or 
castes or communities, or 
(b) commits any act which is prejudicial to the maintenance 
of harmony between different religious, racial, language or 
regional groups or castes or communities, and which disturbs or 
is likely to disturb the public tranquillity, 2*[or] 
2*[(c) organizes any exercise, movement, drill or other 
similar activity intending that the participants in such activity 
shall use or be trained to use criminal force or violence or 
knowing it to be likely that the participants in such activity 
will use or be trained to use criminal force or violence, or 
participates in such activity intending to use or be trained to 
use criminal force or violence or knowing it to be likely that the participants in such activity will use or be trained to use 
criminal force or violence, against any religious, racial, 
language or regional group or caste or community and such 
activity for any reason whatsoever causes or is likely to cause 
fear or alarm or a feeling of insecurity amongst members of 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 67]
hatsoever causes or is likely to cause 
fear or alarm or a feeling of insecurity amongst members of such 
religious, racial, language or regional group or caste or 
community,] 
shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to three years, 
or with fine, or with both. 
(2) Offence committed in place of worship, etc.--Whoever commits 
an offence specified in sub-section (1) in any place of worship or in 
any assembly engaged in the performance of religious worship or 
religious ceremonies, shall be punished with imprisonment which may 
extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine.] 
153B. 
Imputations, assertions prejudicial to national integration. 
2*[153B. Imputations, assertions prejudicial to national 
integration.--(1) Whoever, by words either spoken or written or by 
signs or by visible representations or otherwise, -
(a) makes or publishes any imputation that any class of 
persons cannot, by reason of their being members of any 
religious, racial, language or regional group or caste or 
community, bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of 
India as by law established or uphold the sovereignty and 
integrity of India, or 
(b) asserts, counsels, advises, propagates or publishes that 
any class of persons by reason of their being members of any 
religious, racial, language or regional group or caste or 
community be denied, or deprived of their rights as citizens of 
India, or 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 68]
              
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
                         
                    
                
                    
                  
                 
        
 
             
      
 
                 
              
              
              
  
 
 
 
 
 
            
 
 
                   
            
              
             
            
                
              
                 
             
                
                  
                
                 
    
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
                 
                   
              ----------------------------------------------------------------------
134 1. Subs. by Act 35 of 1969, s. 2, for s. 153A. 
2. Ins. by Act 31 of 1972, s. 2. 
(c) makes or publishes and assertion, counsel, plea or 
appeal concerning the obligation of any class of persons, by 
reason of their being members of any religious, racial, language or regional group or caste or community, and such assertion, 
counsel, plea or appeal causes or is likely to cause disharmony 
or feelings of enmity or hatred or ill-will between such members 
and other persons, 
shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to three years, 
or with fine, or with both. 
(2) Whoever commits an offence specified in sub-section (1), in 
any place of worship or in any assembly engaged in the performance of 
religious worship or religious ceremonies, shall be punished with 
imprisonment which may extend to five years and shall also be liable 
to fine]. 
154. 
Owner or occupier of land on which an unlawful assembly is held. 
154. Owner or occupier of land on which an unlawful assembly is 
held.--Whenever any unlawful assembly or riot takes place, the owner 
or occupier of the land upon which such unlawful assembly is held, or 
such riot is committed, and any person having or claiming an interest in such land, shall be punishable with fine not exceeding one thousand 
rupees, if he or his agent or manager, knowing that such offence 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 68]
h fine not exceeding one thousand 
rupees, if he or his agent or manager, knowing that such offence is 
being or has been committed, or having reason to believe it is likely 
to be committed, do not give the earliest notice thereof in his or 
their power to the principal officer at the nearest police-station, and do not, in the case of his or their having reason to believe that 
it was about to be committed, use all lawful means in his or their 
power to prevent it and, in the event of its taking place, do not use 
all lawful means in his or their power to disperse or suppress the 
riot or unlawful assembly. 
155. 
Liability of person for whose benefit riot is committed. 
155. Liability of person for whose benefit riot is committed.- -
Whenever a riot is committed for the benefit or on behalf of any 
person who is the owner or occupier of any land respecting which such 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 69]
                 
                     
                 
              
             
             
             
                 
   
 
 
 
  
                 
 
 
 
                   
            
                      
             
                  
          
 
                     
 
                
                 
              
             
        
 
 
 
  
       
 
 
              
                 
              
              
              
            
               
  
 
  
           
 
 
                  
                 riot takes place or who claims any interest in such land, or in the subject of any dispute which gave rise to the riot, or who has 
accepted or derived any benefit therefrom, such person shall be 
punishable with fine, if he or his agent or manager, having reason to 
believe that such riot was likely to be committed or that the unlawful 
assembly by which such riot was committed was likely to be held, shall not respectively use all lawful means in his or their power to prevent 
such assembly or riot from taking place, and for suppressing and 
dispersing the same. 
156. 
Liability of agent of owner or occupier for whose benefit riot is 
committed. 
156. Liability of agent of owner or occupier for whose benefit 
riot is committed.--Whenever a riot is committed for the benefit or on 
behalf of any person who is the owner or occupier of any land 
respecting which such riot takes place, or who claims any interest in 
such land, or in the subject of any dispute which gave rise to the 
riot, or who has accepted or derived any benefit therefrom, 
the agent or manager of such person shall be punishable with 
fine, if such agent or manager, having reason to believe that such riot was likely to be committed, or that the unlawful assembly by 
which such riot was committed was likely to be held, shall not use all 
lawful means in his power to prevent such riot or assembly from taking 
place and for suppressing and dispersing the sam
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 69]
power to prevent such riot or assembly from taking 
place and for suppressing and dispersing the same. 
157. 
Harbouring persons hired for an unlawful assembly. 
157. Harbouring persons hired for an unlawful assembly.--Whoever 
harbours, receives or assembles, in any house or premises in his 
occupation or charge, or under his control any persons knowing that 
such persons have been hired, engaged or employed, or are about to be 
hired, engaged or employed, to join or become members of an unlawful 
assembly, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both. 
158. 
Being hired to take part in an unlawful assembly or riot; 
158. Being hired to take part in an unlawful assembly or riot;- -
Whoever is engaged, or hired, or offers or attempts to be hired or 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 70]
              
             
             
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
                       
                 
                             
              
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                  
             
  
 
 
 
    
  
                   
           
               
      
  
  
 
 
        
 
                                     
 
                          
 
 
   
 
 
                 
   
 135 engaged, to do or assist in doing any of the acts specified in section 
141, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both. 
or to go armed. 
or to go armed.--and whoever, being so engaged or hired as 
aforesaid, goes armed, or engages or offers to go armed, with any 
deadly weapon or with anything which used as a weapon of offence is 
likely to cause death, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or 
with both. 
159. 
Affray. 
159. Affray.--When two or more persons, by fighting in a public 
place, disturb the public peace, they are said to "commit an affray". 
160. 
Punishment for committing affray. 
160. Punishment for committing affray.--Whoever commits an 
affray, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for 
a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to 
one hundred rupees, or with both. 
CHAPTER IX 
OF OFFENCES BY OR RELATING TO PUBLIC SERVANTS 
CHAPTER IX 
OF OFFENCES BY OR RELATING TO PUBLIC SERVANTS 
161 to 165A. 
161 to 165A.Rep. by the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (49 of 
1988), s. 31. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 71]
 
 
 
 
                
 
 
 
                 
            
                     
              
                 
              
           
                               
                 
                 
           
                 
     
 
 
 
  
               
 
 
 
                
              
              
                
                 
                    
           
              
  
 
 
 
      
 
 
             
              
              
              
  
 
 
 
 166. 
Public servant disobeying law, with intent to cause injury to any 
person. 
166. Public servant disobeying law, with intent to cause injury 
to any person.--Whoever, being a public servant, knowingly disobeys any direction of the law as to the way in which he is to conduct himself as such public servant, intending to cause, or knowing it to 
be likely that he will, by such disobedience, cause injury to any 
person, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both. 
IIIustration 
A, being an officer directed by law to take property in execution, 
in order to satisfy a decree pronounced in Z's favour by a Court of 
Justice, knowingly disobeys that direction of law, with the knowledge 
that he is likely thereby to cause injury to Z. A has committed the 
offence defined in this section. 
167. 
Public servant framing an incorrect document with intent to cause 
injury. 
167. Public servant framing an incorrect document with intent to 
cause injury.--Whoever, being a public servant, and being, as such public servant, charged with the preparation or translation of any 
document, frames or translates that document in a manner which he knows or believes to be incorrect, intending thereby to cause or 
knowing it to be likely that he may thereby cause injury to any 
person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for 
a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
168. 
Public serva
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 71]
ription for 
a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
168. 
Public servant unlawfully engaging in trade. 
168. Public servant unlawfully engaging in trade.--Whoever, being 
a public servant, and being legally bound as such public servant not 
to engages in trade, engages in trade, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or 
with both. 
169. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 72]
 
        
 
 
               
                 
           
                  
             
              
                     
 
 
 
 
  
    
 
 
               
               
                 
               
              
               
    
 
 
 
 
 
  
            
 
 
 
                  
               
              
                     
                
                    
           
                 
        
  
  
  
     
 
 
                                    
 136 Public servant unlawfully buying or bidding for property. 
169. Public servant unlawfully buying or bidding for property.- -
Whoever, being a public servant, and being legally bound as such 
public servant, not to purchase or bid for certain property, purchases 
or bids for that property, either in his own name or in the name of 
another, or jointly, or in shares with others, shall be punished with 
simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with 
fine, or with both; and the property, if purchased, shall be confiscated. 
170. 
Personating a public servant. 
170. Personating a public servant.--Whoever pretends to hold any 
particular office as public servant, knowing that he does not hold 
such office or falsely personates any other person holding such 
office, and in such assumed character does or attempts to do any act 
under colour of such office, shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with 
fine, or with both. 
171. 
Wearing garb or carrying token used by public servant with fraudulent 
intent. 
171. Wearing garb or carrying token used by public servant with 
fraudulent intent.--Whoever, not belonging to a certain class of public servants, wears any garb or carries any token resembling any garb or token used by that class of public servants, with the 
intention that it may be believed, or with the knowledge that it is 
likely to be believed, that he belongs to that class of public 
servants, 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 72]
the knowledge that it is 
likely to be believed, that he belongs to that class of public 
servants, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description, 
for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, or with both. 
CHAPTER IXA 
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO ELECTIONS 
1*[CHAPTER IXA 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 73]
                             
 
 
 
 
 
    
  
              
   
 
                     
          
 
                      
                    
             
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
        
                        
                 
                  
      
 
                      
                   
                
       
 
     
 
                     
          
                   
           
                        
            
                 
                 
           
 
 
 
 
 
    OF OFFENCES RELATING TO ELECTIONS 
171A. 
"Candidate", "Electoral right" defined. 
171A. "Candidate", "Electoral right" defined.--For the purposes 
of this Chapter-
2*[(a) "candidate" means a person who has been nominated as 
a candidate at any election;] 
(b) "electoral right" means the right of a person to stand, 
or not to stand as, or to withdraw from being, a candidate or to 
vote or refrain from voting at an election. 
171B. 
Bribery. 
171B. Bribery.--(1) Whoever -
(i) gives a gratification to any person with the object of 
inducing him or any other person to exercise any electoral right 
or of rewarding any person for having exercised any such right; 
or 
(ii) accepts either for himself or for any other person any 
gratification as a reward for exercising any such right or for 
inducing or attempting to induce any other person to exercise any such right, 
commits the offence of bribery: 
Provided that a declaration of public policy or a promise of 
public action shall not be an offence under this section. 
(2) A person who offers, or agrees to give, or offers or attempts 
to procure, a gratification shall be deemed to give a gratification. 
(3) A person who obtains or agrees to accept or attempts to 
obtain a gratification shall be deemed to accept a gratification, and a person who accepts a gratification as a motive for doing what he 
does not intend to do, or as a reward for doing what he has not done, 
shall be deemed to have accepted the gratification as a reward. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 73]
rd for doing what he has not done, 
shall be deemed to have accepted the gratification as a reward. 
171C. 
Undue influence at elections. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 74]
 
 
                 
                
           
 
                
   
 
                      
                   
 
                        
                       
                  
       
 
              
              
 
 
                              
 
 
 
  
                 
             
             
    
  
 
  
   
 
 
               
                
                
               
                 
                      
    
  
 
  
   
 
 
                 
           ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------
137 171C. Undue influence at elections.--(1) Whoever voluntarily 
interferes or attempts to interfere with the free exercise of any 
electoral right commits the offence of undue influence at an election. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -
section (1), whoever -
(a) threatens any candidate or voter, or any person in whom 
a candidate or voter is interested, with injury of any kind, or 
(b) induces or attempts to induce a candidate or voter to 
believe that he or any person in whom he is interested will become or will be rendered an object of Divine displeasure or of 
spiritual censure, 
shall be deemed to interfere with the free exercise of the electoral right of such candidate or voter, within the meaning of sub-section 
(1). 
1. Chapter IXA was ins. by Act 39 of 1920, s. 2. 
2. Subs. by Act 40 of 1975, s. 9. for cl. (a), (w.e.f. 6-8-1975). 
(3) A declaration of public policy or a promise of public action, 
or the mere exercise or a legal right without intent to interfere with 
an electoral right, shall not be deemed to be interference within the 
meaning of this section. 
171D. 
Personation at elections. 
171D. Personation at elections.--Whoever at an election applies 
for a voting paper on votes in the name of any other person, whether 
living or dead, or in a fictitious name, or who having voted once at 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 74]
 of any other person, whether 
living or dead, or in a fictitious name, or who having voted once at 
such election applies at the same election for a voting paper in his 
own name, and whoever abets, procures or attempts to procure the 
voting by any person in any such way, commits the offence of personation at an election. 
171E. 
Punishment for bribery. 
171E. Punishment for bribery.--Whoever commits the offence of 
bribery shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 75]
              
 
                   
 
 
                  
        
  
 
  
         
 
 
                      
                  
               
                 
    
  
 
 
 
       
  
                
             
                 
                
                  
      
  
 
  
       
  
               
               
             
           
               
                
      
 
                
             
                   
                  
         
  a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both: 
Provided that bribery by treating shall be punished with fine 
only. 
Explanation.-"Treating" means that form of bribery where the 
gratification consists in food, drink, entertainment, or provision. 
171F. 
Punishment for undue influence or personation at an election. 
171F. Punishment for undue influence or personation at an 
election.--Whoever commits the offence of undue influence or 
personation at an election shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to one year or with 
fine, or with both. 
171G. False statement in connection with an election. 
171G. False statement in connection with an election.--Whoever 
with intent to affect the result of an election makes or publishes any 
statement purporting to be a statement of fact which is false and 
which he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to 
be true, in relation to the personal character or conduct of any 
candidate shall be punished with fine. 
171H. 
Illegal payments in connection with an election. 
171H. Illegal payments in connection with an election.--Whoever 
without the general or special authority in writing of a candidate 
incurs or authorizes expenses on account of the holding of any public 
meeting, or upon any advertisement, circular or publication, or in any other way whatsoever for the purpose of promoting or procuring the 
election of such candidate, shall be punished with fine which may 

<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 75]
e of promoting or procuring the 
election of such candidate, shall be punished with fine which may 
extend to five hundred rupees : 
Provided that if any person having incurred any such expenses not 
exceeding the amount of ten rupees without authority obtains within 
ten days from the date on which such expenses were incurred the 
approval in writing of the candidate, he shall be deemed to have 
incurred such expenses with the authority of the candidate. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 76]
 
 
 
     
 
              
                
              
            
      
 
 
  
 
 
         
  
                                    
 
                    
  
 
  
         
 
 
               
                  
           
             
               
                
  
 
                     
               
               
          
 
 
  
 
  
               
  
 
 
                     
         
                   
             138 171-I. 
Failure to keep election accounts. 
171-I. Failure to keep election accounts.--Whoever being required 
by any law for the time being in force or any rule having the force of 
law to keep accounts of expenses incurred at or in connection with an 
election fails to keep such accounts shall be punished with fine which 
may extend to five hundred rupees.] 
CHAPTER X 
OF CONTEMPTS OF THE LAWFUL AUTHORITY OF PUBLIC SERVANTS 
CHAPTER X 
OF CONTEMPTS OF THE LAWFUL AUTHORITY OF PUBLIC SERVANTS 
172. Absconding to avoid service of summons or other proceeding. 
172. Absconding to avoid service of summons or other proceeding. -
Whoever absconds in order to avoid being served with a summons, 
notice or order proceeding from any public servant legally competent, 
as such public servant, to issue such summons, notice or order, shall 
be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
one month, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or 
with both; 
or, if the summons or notice or order is to attend in person or 
by agent, or to produce a document in a Court of Justice, with simple 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
173. 
Preventing service of summons or other proceeding, or preventing 
publication thereof. 
173. Preventing service of summons or other proceeding, or 
preventing publication thereof.--Whoever in any manner intentionally prevents the serving on himself, or on any other person, of any summons,
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 76]
in any manner intentionally prevents the serving on himself, or on any other person, of any summons, notice or order proceeding from any public servant legally 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 77]
                
 
 
                
     
                  
        
 
               
             
         
 
                  
                 
    
 
                 
                 
             
            
  
 
 
 
         
 
 
                       
              
               
              
         
 
                  
               
      
 
                  
                 
    
 
                 
             
                
       
                              
                    
                 
            
  
                        
                    competent, such public servant, to issue such summons, notice or order, 
or intentionally prevents the lawful affixing to any place of any 
such summons, notice or order, 
or intentionally removes any such summons, notice or order from 
any place to which it is lawfully affixed, 
or intentionally prevents the lawful making of any proclamation, 
under the authority of any public servant legally competent, as such public servant, to direct such proclamation to be made, 
shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both; 
or, if the summons, notice, order or proclamation is to attend in 
person or by agent, or to produce a document in a Court of Justice, 
with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or 
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
174. 
Non-attendance in obedience to an order from public servant. 
174. Non-attendance in obedience to an order from public 
servant.--Whoever, being legally bound to attend in person or by an 
agent at a certain place and time in obedience to a summons, notice, 
order, or proclamation proceeding from any public servant legally 
competent, as such public servant, to issue the same, 
intentionally omits to attend at that place or time, or departs 
from the place where he is bound to attend
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 77]
onally omits to attend at that place or time, or departs 
from the place where he is bound to attend before the time at which it 
is lawful for him to depart, 
shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to five hundred 
rupees, or with both; 
or, if the summons, notice, order or proclamation is to attend in 
person or by agent in a Court of Justice, with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
Illustrations 
(a) A, being legally bound to appear before the 1*[High Court] 
at Calcutta, in obedience to a subpoena issuing from that Court, 
intentionally omits to appear. A has committed the offence defined in 
this section. 
(b) A, being legally bound to appear before a 2*[District 
Judge], as a witness, in obedience to a summons issued by that 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 78]
           
     
 
 
 
  
           
   
                     
           
                       
                
              
               
 
 
           
 
        
 
 
 
                    
               
               
  
 
                              
 
                           
              
       
 
 
 
 
 
               
     
 
 
                 
           
                 
                  
                
              
                 
    
 
                   
                   
                      
           ----------------------------------------------------------------------
139 2*[District Judge] intentionally omits to appear. A has committed the 
offence defined in this section. 
175. 
Omission to produce document to public servant by person legally bound 
to produce it. 
175. Omission to produce document to public servant by person 
legally bound to produce it.--Whoever, being legally bound to produce or deliver up any document to any public servant, as such, 
intentionally omits so to produce or deliver up the same, shall be 
punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with 
both; 
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for "Supreme Court". 
2. Subs. ibid., for "Zila Judge". 
or, if the document is to be produced or delivered up to a Court 
of Justice, with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or 
with both. 
Illustration 
A, being legally bound to produce a document before a 
1*[District court], intentionally omits to produce the same. A has 
committed the offence defined in this section. 
176. 
Omission to give notice or information to public servant by person 
legally bound to give it. 
176. Omission to give notice or information to public servant by 
person legally bound to give it.--Whoever, being legally bound to give any notice or to furnish information 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 78]
egally bound to give it.--Whoever, being legally bound to give any notice or to furnish information on any subject to any public 
servant, as such, intentionally omits to give such notice or to 
furnish such information in the manner and at the time required by 
law, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both; 
or, if the notice or information required to be given respects 
the commission of an offence, or is required for the purpose of preventing the commission of an offence, or in order to the apprehension of an offender, with simple imprisonment for a term which 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 79]
                     
     
 
                      
               
            
              
           
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
              
             
              
                      
               
          
                  
                   
                      
           
               
 
                             
 
                 
              
            
              
 
                   
             
                  
                
             
                   
                
            
              
          
 
           
 
           
 
         
 
 
                      ----------------------------------------------------------------------may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees, or with both; 
2*[or, if the notice or information required to be given is 
required by an order passed under sub-section (1) of section 565 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with 
fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.] 
177. 
Furnishing false information. 
177. Furnishing false information.--Whoever, being legally bound 
to furnish information on any subject to any public servant, as such, 
furnishes, as true, information on the subject which he knows or has 
reason to believe to be false shall be punished with simple 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine 
which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both; 
or, if the information which he is legally bound to give respects 
the commission of an offence, or is required for the purpose of 
preventing the commission of an offence, or in order to the 
apprehension of an offender, with imprisonment of either description 
for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
Illustrations 
(a) A, a landholder, knowing of the commission of a murder within 
the limits of his esta
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 79]
strations 
(a) A, a landholder, knowing of the commission of a murder within 
the limits of his estate, wilfully misinforms the Magistrate of the 
district that the death has occurred by accident in consequence of the 
bite of a snake. A is guilty of the offence defined in this section. 
(b) A, a village watchman, knowing that a considerable body of 
strangers has passed through his village in order to commit a dacoity 
in the house of Z, a wealthy merchant residing in a neighbouring 
place, and being bound under clause 5, section VII, 3*Regulation 
III, 1821, of the Bengal Code, to give early and punctual information of the above fact to the officer of the nearest police station, 
wilfully misinforms the police officer that a body of suspicious 
characters passed through the village with a view to commit dacoity in 
a certain distant place in a different direction. Here A is guilty of 
the offence defined in the latter part of this section. 
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for "Zila Court". 
2. Ins. by Act 22 of 1939, s. 2. 
3. Rep. by Act 17 of 1862. 
1*[Explanation.-In section 176 and in this section the word 140 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 80]
              
            
              
               
            
    
 
 
 
 
 
             
  
 
 
                  
             
             
                
             
                     
     
  
 
  
        
 
 
               
              
                  
               
               
               
          
  
 
  
    
 
 
                  
                  
              
           
                  
     
 
 
 
 
 
               "offence" includes any act committed at any place out of 2*[India], which, if committed in 2*[India], would be punishable under any of the 
following sections, namely, 302, 304, 382, 392, 393, 394, 395, 396, 
397, 398, 399, 402, 435, 436, 449, 450, 457, 458, 459 and 460; and the 
word "offender" includes any person who is alleged to have been guilty 
of any such act.] 
178. 
Refusing oath or affirmation when duly required by public servant to 
make it. 
178. Refusing oath or affirmation when duly required by public 
servant to make it.--Whoever refuses to bind himself by an oath 3*[or affirmation] to state the truth, when required so to bind himself by a 
public servant legally competent to require that he shall so bind 
himself, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees, or with both. 
179. 
Refusing to answer public servant authorized to question. 
179. Refusing to answer public servant authorized to question.- -
Whoever, being legally bound to state the truth on any subject to any 
public servant, refuses to answer any question demanded of him 
touching that subject by such public servant in the exercise of the 
legal powers of such public servant, shall be punished with simple 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
180. 
Refusing to sign statement. 
180. Refusing to sign statement.--Whoever refuses to sign any 
s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 80]

180. 
Refusing to sign statement. 
180. Refusing to sign statement.--Whoever refuses to sign any 
statement made by him, when required to sign that statement by a 
public servant legally competent to require that he shall sign that 
statement, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees, or with both. 
181. 
False statement on oath or affirmation to public servant or person 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 81]
       
 
 
                 
             
              
             
               
                
              
                      
                
         
 
 
 
 
 
                
        
 
 
                 
                
            
                
        
 
                       
                      
              
                          
           
 
             
                
     
 
           
 
                
 
           
 
                
 
 
 
 
                             
 
                
             
             
                    
       ----------------------------------------------------------------------authorized to administer an oath or affirmation. 
181. False statement on oath or affirmation to public servant or 
person authorized to administer an oath or affirmation.--Whoever, 
being legally bound by an oath 3*[or affirmation] to state the truth on any subject to any public servant or other person authorized by law 
to administer such oath 3*[or affirmation], makes, to such public 
servant or other person as aforesaid, touching that subject, any 
statement which is false, and which he either knows or believes to be 
false or does not believe to be true, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
three years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
182. 
False information, with intent to cause public servant to use his 
lawful power to the injury of another person. 
4*[182. False information, with intent to cause public servant 
to use his lawful power to the injury of another person.--Whoever gives to any public servant any information which he knows or believes 
to be false, intending thereby to cause, or knowing it to be likely 
that he will thereby cause such public servant -
(a) to do or omit anything which such public servant ought 
not to do or omit if the true state of facts respecting which such information is given were known by him, or 
(b) to us
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 81]
 the true state of facts respecting which such information is given were known by him, or 
(b) to use the lawful power of such public servant to the 
injury or annoyance of any person, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees, or with both. 
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 1894, s. 5 
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and sch. for "the States". 
3. Ins. by Act 10 of 1873, s. 15. 
4. Subs. by Act 3 of 1895, s. 1, for the original s. 182. 
Illustrations 
(a) A informs a Magistrate that Z, a police-officer, subordinate 
to such Magistrate, has been guilty of neglect of duty or misconduct, 
knowing such information to be false, and knowing it to be likely that 
the information will cause the Magistrate to dismiss Z. A has committed the offence defined in this section. 141 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 82]
 
                 
              
                
             
      
 
                 
                
              
             
           
                
  
 
 
 
  
                 
  
 
 
                
             
            
                 
            
                
    
 
 
 
 
 
             
 
 
 
                 
               
                  
                 
                 
          
 
 
 
 
 
             
  
 
 
                    
           
              (b) A falsely informs a public servant that Z has contraband salt 
in a secret place, knowing such information to be false, and knowing 
that it is likely that the consequence of the information will be a 
search of Z's premises, attended with annoyance to Z. A has committed 
the offence defined in this section. 
(c) A falsely informs a policeman that he has been assaulted and 
robbed in the neighbourhood of a particular village. He does not 
mention the name of any person as one of his assailants, but knows it 
to be likely that in consequence of this information the police will make enquiries and institute searches in the village to the annoyance 
of the villagers or some of them. A has committed an offence under 
this section.] 
183. 
Resistance to the taking of property by the lawful authority of a 
public servant. 
183. Resistance to the taking of property by the lawful authority 
of a public servant.--Whoever offers any resistance to the taking of any property by the lawful authority of any public servant, knowing or 
having reason to believe that he is such public servant, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees, or with both. 
184. 
Obstructing sale of property offered for sale by authority of public 
servant. 
184. Obstructing sale of property offered for sale by authority 
of public servant.--Whoever intentionally obstructs any sale of prope
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 82]
offered for sale by authority 
of public servant.--Whoever intentionally obstructs any sale of property offered for sale by the lawful authority of any public 
servant, as such, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine 
which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
185. 
Illegal purchase or bid for property offered for sale by authority of 
public servant. 
185. Illegal purchase or bid for property offered for sale by 
authority of public servant.--Whoever, at any sale of property held by the lawful authority of a public servant, as such, purchases or bids 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 83]
                 
               
                 
             
             
                 
     
 
 
 
  
        
 
 
                        
           
          
              
            
  
 
 
 
                      
 
 
 
                  
                  
             
             
              
           
 
                     
              
               
              
                 
               
               
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
               
               
           142 for any property on account of any person, whether himself or any 
other, whom he knows to be under a legal incapacity to purchase that 
property at that sale, or bids for such property not intending to 
perform the obligations under which he lays himself by such bidding, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, or with both. 
186. 
Obstructing public servant in discharge of public functions. 
186. Obstructing public servant in discharge of public 
functions.--Whoever voluntarily obstructs any public servant in the 
discharge of his public functions, shall be punished with imprisonment 
of either description for a term which may extend to three months, or 
with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
187. Omission to assist public servant when bound by law to give 
assistance. 
187. Omission to assist public servant when bound by law to give 
assistance.--Whoever, being bound by law to render or furnish 
assistance to any public servant in the execution of his public duty, 
intentionally omits to give such assistance, shall be punished with 
simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with 
fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, or with both; 
and if such assistance be demanded of him by a public servant 
legally competent to make such demand for the purposes of executing 
any pr
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 83]
him by a public servant 
legally competent to make such demand for the purposes of executing 
any process lawfully issued by a Court of Justice, or of preventing 
the commission of an offence, or suppressing a riot, or affray, or of 
apprehending a person charged with or guilty of an offence, or of having escaped from lawful custody, shall be punished with simple 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine 
which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
188. 
Disobedience to order duly promulgated by public servant. 
188. Disobedience to order duly promulgated by public servant.- -
Whoever, knowing that, by an order promulgated by a public servant 
lawfully empowered to promulgate such order, he is directed to abstain 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 84]
              
         
 
               
             
            
               
       
 
                 
               
             
                
     
                
            
               
           
 
                              
 
                
            
               
             
  
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
                 
                 
                
               
                
              
              
  
 
 
 
 
 
                   
    
 
 
                  
              
                   
                
             from a certain act, or to take certain order with certain property in 
his possession or under his management. disobeys such direction, 
shall, if such disobedience causes or tends to cause obstruction, 
annoyance or injury, or risk of obstruction, annoyance or injury, to any persons lawfully employed, be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month or with fine which may extend 
to two hundred rupees, or with both: 
and if such disobedience causes or tends to cause danger to human 
life, health or safety, or causes or tends to cause a riot or affray, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees, or with both. 
Explanation.-It is not necessary that the offender should intend 
to produce harm, or contemplate his disobedience as likely to produce 
harm. It is sufficient that he knows of the order which he disobeys, 
and that his disobedience produces, or is likely to produce, harm. 
Illustration 
An order is promulgated by a public servant lawfully empowered to 
promulgated such order, directing that a religious procession shall 
not pass down a certain street. A knowingly disobeys the order, and 
thereby causes danger of riot. A has committed the offence defined in 
this section. 
189. 
Threat of injury to public servant. 
189. Threat of injury to publi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 84]
defined in 
this section. 
189. 
Threat of injury to public servant. 
189. Threat of injury to public servant.--Whoever holds out any 
threat of injury to any public servant, or to any person in whom he 
believes that public servant to be interested, for the purpose of 
inducing that public servant to do any act, or to forbear or delay to 
do any act, connected with the exercise of the public functions of 
such public servant, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or 
with both. 
190. 
Threat of injury to induce person to refrain from applying for 
protection to public servant. 
190. Threat of injury to induce person to refrain from applying 
for protection to public servant.--Whoever holds out any threat of injury to any person for the purpose of inducing that person to 
refrain or desist from making a legal application for protection against any injury to any public servant legally empowered as such to 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 85]
              
             
           
 
 
  
 
 
        
 
                                     
 
                    
 
 
 
  
   
  
                
                 
                    
              
              
 
                
       
 
                  
               
               
               
     
 
 
 
 
                             
 
                      
               
         
 
                    
              
               
         
                  
               
                
              
                   
 143 give such protection, or to cause such protection to be given, shall 
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which 
may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both. 
CHAPTER XI 
OF FALSE EVIDENCE AND OFFENCES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE 
CHAPTER XI 
OF FALSE EVIDENCE AND OFFENCES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE 
191. 
Giving false evidence. 
191. Giving false evidence.--Whoever, being legally bound by an 
oath or by an express provision of law to state the truth, or being 
bound by law to make a declaration upon any subject, makes any 
statement which is false, and which he either knows or believes to be 
false or does not believe to be true, is said to give false evidence. 
Explanation 1.-A statement is within the meaning of this section 
whether it is made verbally or otherwise. 
Explanation 2.-A false statement as to the belief of the person 
attesting is within the meaning of this section, and a person may be guilty of giving false evidence by stating that he believes a thing 
which he does not believe, as well as by stating that he knows a thing 
which he does not know. 
Illustrations 
(a) A, in support of a just claim which B has against Z for one 
thousand rupees, falsely swears on a trial that he heard Z admit the 
justice of B's claim. A has given false evidence. 
(b) A, being bound by an oath to state the truth, states that he 
believes a certain signature to be the handwriting of 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 85]
y an oath to state the truth, states that he 
believes a certain signature to be the handwriting of Z, when he does 
not believe it to be the handwriting of Z. Here A states that which he 
knows to be false, and therefore gives false evidence. 
(c) A, knowing the general character of Z's handwriting, states 
that he believes a certain signature to be the handwriting of Z; A in 
good faith believing it to be so. Here A's statement is merely as to 
his belief, and is true as to his belief, and therefore, although the 
signature may not be the handwriting of Z, A has not given false evidence. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 86]
 
                    
                    
              
          
                  
            
               
             
     
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
            
                
                    
           
             
            
              
                   
                 
             
 
 
                             
 
                    
                 
                
 
                      
                   
   
 
                        
           
                    
                 
               
 
  
 
  
    
 
 
             
              (d) A, being bound by an oath to state the truth, states that he 
knows that Z was at a particular place on a particular day, not knowing anything upon the subject. A gives false evidence whether Z 
was at that place on the day named or not. 
(e) A, an interpreter or translator, gives or certifies as a true 
interpretation or translation of a statement or document, which he is 
bound by oath to interpret or translate truly, that which is not and 
which he does not believe to be a true interpretation or translation. 
A has given false evidence. 
192. 
Fabricating false evidence. 
192. Fabricating false evidence.--Whoever causes any circumstance 
to exist or makes any false entry in any book or record, or makes any 
document containing a false statement, intending that such 
circumstance, false entry or false statement may appear in evidence in 
a judicial proceeding, or in a proceeding taken by law before a public 
servant as such, or before an arbitrator, and that such circumstance, 
false entry or false statement, so appearing in evidence, may cause 
any person who in such proceeding is to form an opinion upon the 
evidence, to entertain an erroneous opinion touching any point 
material to the result of such proceeding is said "to fabricate false 
evidence". 
Illustrations 
(a) A puts jewels into a box belonging to Z, with the intention 
that they may be found in that box, and that 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 86]
 jewels into a box belonging to Z, with the intention 
that they may be found in that box, and that this circumstance may 
cause Z to be convicted of theft. A has fabricated false evidence. 
(b) A makes a false entry in his shop-book for the purpose of 
using it as corroborative evidence in a Court of Justice. A has 
fabricated false evidence. 
(c) A, with the intention of causing Z to be convicted of a 
criminal conspiracy, writes a letter in imitation of Z's handwriting, purporting to be addressed to an accomplice in such criminal 
conspiracy, and puts the letter in a place which he knows that the 
officers of the police are likely to search. A has fabricated false evidence. 
193. 
Punishment for false evidence. 
193. Punishment for false evidence.--Whoever intentionally gives 
false evidence in any of a judicial proceeding, or fabricates false 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 87]
                  
          
                
  
 
                
                   
             
    
 
 
 
 
               
 
                
                    
               
   
                               
                           
             
                
        
                  
                 
                       
          
                               
                    
                   
                
       
  
 
  
          
   
 
 
                
             
             
              
                
              
              
    
 144 evidence for the purpose of being used in any stage of a judicial 
proceeding, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description 
for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable 
to fine; 
and whoever intentionally gives or fabricates false evidence in 
any other case, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also 
be liable to fine. 
Explanation 1.-A trial before a Court-martial 1****is a judicial 
proceeding. 
Explanation 2.-An investigation directed by law preliminary to a 
proceeding before a Court of Justice, is a stage of a judicial 
proceeding, though that investigation may not take place before a 
Court of Justice. 
Illustration 
A, in an enquiry before a Magistrate for the purpose of 
ascertaining whether Z ought to be committed for trial, makes on oath 
a statement which he knows to be false. As this enquiry is a stage of 
a judicial proceeding, A as given false evidence. 
Explanation 3.-An investigation directed by a Court of Justice 
according to law, and conducted under the authority of a Court of Justice, is a stage of a judicial proceeding, though that 
investigation may not take place before a Court of Justice. 
Illustration 
A, in an enquiry before an officer deputed by a Court of Justice 
to ascertain on the spot the boundaries of land, makes on oath a 
s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 87]
r deputed by a Court of Justice 
to ascertain on the spot the boundaries of land, makes on oath a 
statement which he knows to be false. As this enquiry is a stage of a 
judicial proceeding, A has given false evidence. 
194. 
Giving or fabricating false evidence with intent to procure conviction 
of capital offence; 
194. Giving or fabricating false evidence with intent to procure 
conviction of capital offence.--Whoever gives or fabricates false evidence, intending thereby to cause, or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby cause, any person to be convicted of an offence which 
is capital 2*[by the laws for the time being in force in 3*[India]] 
shall be punished with 4*[imprisonment for life], or with rigorous 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also 
be liable to fine; 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 88]
 
        
 
 
               
           
             
        
  
 
 
 
          
         
 
 
 
                
                 
          
                  
                
                     
           
              
        
                               
                      
                 
             
                     
             
    
 
 
 
 
 
      
  
               
                 
              
        
 
               
            
 
                      
      
 
                
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------If innocent person be thereby convicted and executed. 
If innocent person be thereby conviceted and executed.--and if an 
innocent person be convicted and executed in consequence of such false 
evidence, the person who gives such false evidence shall be punished 
either with death or the punishment hereinbefore described. 
195. 
Giving or fabricating false evidence with intent to procure conviction 
of offence punishable with imprisonment for life or imprisonment. 
195. Giving or fabricating false evidence with intent to procure 
conviction of offence punishable with imprisonment for life or 
imprisonment.--Whoever gives or fabricates false evidence intending 
thereby to cause, or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby 
cause, any person to be convicted of an offence which 2*[by the law 
for the time being in force in 3*[India]] is not capital, but 
punishable with 4*[imprisonment for life], or imprisonment for a term 
of seven years or upwards, shall be punished as a person convicted of 
that offence would be liable to be punished. 
Illustration 
A gives false evidence before a Court of Justice, intending 
thereby to cause Z to be convicted of a dacoity. The punishment of 
dacoity is 4*[imprisonment for life], or rigorous imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to ten years, with or without fine. A, 
therefore, is liable to 5*[imprisonment for life] or imprisonment, 

<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 88]
ears, with or without fine. A, 
therefore, is liable to 5*[imprisonment for life] or imprisonment, 
with or without fine. 
196. 
Using evidence known to be false. 
196. Using evidence known to be false.--Whoever corruptly uses or 
attempts to use as true or genuine evidence any evidence which he 
knows to be false or fabricated, shall be punished in the same manner 
as if he gave or fabricated false evidence. 
1. The words "or before a Military Court of Request" were omitted by 
the Cantonments Act, 1889 (13 of 1889). 
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1948, for "by the law of British India or 
England". 
3. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the States". 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 89]
                
      
 
             
 
 
  
 
 
 
     
  
                 
                   
             
             
                 
  
 
 
 
 
 
         
  
                    
                  
            
            
  
 
  
                
 
                          
                  
                
                  
              
               
                
               
     
  
 
 
 
          
 145 4. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for 
life". 
5. Subs. by s. 117 and Sch., ibid., for "such transportation". 
197. 
Issuing or signing false certificate. 
197. Issuing or signing false certificate.--Whoever issues or 
signs any certificate required by law to be given or signed, or 
relating to any fact of which such certificate is by law admissible in 
evidence, knowing or believing that such certificate is false in any 
material point, shall be punished in the same manner as if he gave 
false evidence. 
198. Using as true a certificate known to be false. 
198. Using as true a certificate known to be false.--Whoever 
corruptly uses or attempts to use any such certificate as a true 
certificate, knowing the same to be false in any material point, shall 
be punished in the same manner as if he gave false evidence. 
199. 
False statement made in declaration which is by law receivable as 
evidence. 
199. False statement made in declaration which is by law 
receivable as evidence.--Whoever, in any declaration made or subscribed by him, which declaration any Court of Justice, or any 
public servant or other person, is bound or authorized by law to 
receive as evidence of any fact, makes any statement which is false, and which he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe 
to be true, touching any point material to the object for which the 
declaration is made or used, shall be punished in the same manner as 
if he gave false evidence. 
200. 
Using as true such declaration knowing it to be fals
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 89]
me manner as 
if he gave false evidence. 
200. 
Using as true such declaration knowing it to be false. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 90]
 
                    
                       
            
            
               
               
    
  
 
  
                  
    
 
 
                   
             
                 
                
              
            
      
  
    
 
 
                   
            
            
         
  
      
  
                
               
             
                
      
 
 
        
  
                       
               
               
              
             
        
 
                              200. Using as true such declaration knowing it to be flase.- -
Whoever corruptly uses or attempts to use as true any such declaration, knowing the same to be false in any material point, shall 
be punished in the same manner as if he gave false evidence. 
Explanation.-A declaration which is inadmissible merely upon the 
ground of some informality, is a declaration within the meaning of 
sections 199 and 200. 
201. 
Causing disappearance of evidence of offence, or giving false 
information to screen offender. 
201. Causing disappearance of evidence of offence, or giving 
false information to screen offender.--Whoever, knowing or having 
reason to believe that an offence has been committed, causes any 
evidence of the commission of that offence to disappear, with the 
intention of screening the offender from legal punishment, or with 
that intention gives any information respecting the offence which he 
knows or believes to be false, 
if a capital offence; 
if a capital offence.--shall, if the offence which he knows or 
believes to have been committed is punishable with death, be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine; 
if punishable with imprisonment for life; 
if punishable with imprisonment for life.--and if the offence is 
punishable with 1*[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment 
which may extend to ten years, shall be punished with imp
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 90]
risonment for life], or with imprisonment 
which may extend to ten years, shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to three years, and 
shall also be liable to fine; 
if punishable with less than ten years' imprisonment. 
if punishable with less than ten years' imprisonment.- -
and if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for any term not 
extending to ten years, shall be punished with imprisonment of the 
description provided for the offence, for a term which may extend to 
one-fourth part of the longest term of the imprisonment provided for 
the offence, or with fine, or with both. 
Illustration 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 91]
 
                   
                     
            
  
 
  
           
 
 
 
                    
           
              
           
             
            
 
                
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
              
             
              
             
               
    
                    
                 
          
              
                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
  
                      
             
             
                ----------------------------------------------------------------------
146 A, knowing that B has murdered Z, assists B to hide the body with 
the intention of screening B from punishment. A is liable to 
imprisonment of either description for seven years, and also to fine. 
202. 
Intentional omission to give information of offence by person bound to 
inform. 
202. Intentional omission to give information of offence by 
person bound to inform.--Whoever, knowing or having reason to believe that an offence has been committed, intentionally omits to give any information respecting that offence which he is legally bound to give, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both. 
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for 
life". 
203. 
Giving false information respecting an offence committed. 
203. Giving false information respecting an offence committed.- -
Whoever, knowing or having reason to believe that an offence has been 
committed, gives any information respecting that offence which he 
knows or believes to be false, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with 
fine, or with both. 
1*[Explanation.-In spections 201 and 202 and in this section 
the word "offence" includes any act committed at any place out of 
2*[India], which, if committed in 2*[India], would be punishable under 
any of the following sections, namely, 302, 304, 38
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 91]
mmitted in 2*[India], would be punishable under 
any of the following sections, namely, 302, 304, 382, 392, 393, 394, 
395, 396, 397, 398, 399, 402, 435, 436, 449, 450, 457, 458, 459 and 
460.] 
204. 
Destruction of document to prevent its production as evidence. 
204. Destruction of document to prevent its production as 
evidence.--Whoever secrets or destroys any document which he may be 
lawfully compelled to produce as evidence in a Court of Justice, or in any proceeding lawfully held before a public servant, as such, or 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 92]
                   
           
             
              
                
               
    
 
 
 
  
                    
 
                    
              
               
                   
              
             
            
 
 
 
  
            
     
 
 
               
          
                
                
             
                 
                 
              
                 
                      
             
       
 
 
 
  
            
 
 
 
                     
         
               
            obliterates or renders illegible the whole or any part of such 
document with the intention of preventing the same from being produced 
or used as evidence before such Court or public servant as aforesaid, 
or after he shall have been lawfully summoned or required to produce 
the same for that purpose, shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
205. 
False personation for purpose of act or proceeding in suit or 
prosecution. 
205. False personation for purpose of act or proceeding in suit 
or prosecution.--Whoever falsely personates another, and in such assumed character makes any admission or statement, or confesses 
judgment, or causes any process to be issued or becomes bail or 
security, or does any other act in any suit or criminal prosecution, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
206. 
Fraudulent removal or concealment of property to prevent its seizure 
as forfeited or in execution. 
206. Fraudulent removal or concealment of property to prevent its 
seizure as forfeited or in execution.--Whoever fraudulently removes, conceals, transfers or delivers to any person any property or any 
interest therein, intending thereby to prevent that property or interest therein from being taken as a forfeiture or in satisfaction 
of a fine, under a sen
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 92]
erty or interest therein from being taken as a forfeiture or in satisfaction 
of a fine, under a sentence which has been pronounced, or which he 
knows to be likely to be pronounced, by a Court of Justice or other 
competent authority, or from being taken in execution of a decree or 
order which has been made, or which he knows to be likely to be made by a Court of Justice in a civil suit, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two 
years, or with fine, or with both. 
207. 
Fraudulent claim to property to prevent its seizure as forfeited or in 
execution. 
207. Fraudulent claim to property to prevent its seizure as 
forfeited or in execution.--Whoever fraudulently accepts, receives or claims any property or any interest therein, knowing that he has no right or rightful claim to such property or interest, or practices any 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 93]
            
             
                  
              
              
                  
                 
                   
              
  
 
           
 
                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
                  
             
                    
              
                  
              
             
             
            
                               
 
                      
             
                    
                
                      
                   
    
 
 
 
 
  
      
  
                        
               
                  
           
              ----------------------------------------------------------------------
147 deception touching any right to any property or any interest therein, 
intending thereby to prevent that property or interest therein from 
being taken as a forfeiture or in satisfaction of a fine, under a 
sentence which has been pronounced, or which he knows to be likely to 
be pronounced by a Court of Justice or other competent authority, or 
from being taken in execution of a decree or order which has been made, or which he knows to be likely to be made by a Court of Justice 
in a civil suit, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or 
with both. 
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 1894, s. 7. 
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the States". 
208. 
Fraudulently suffering decree for sum not due. 
208. Fraudulently suffering decree for sum not due.--Whoever 
fraudulently causes or suffers a decree or order to be passed against 
him at the suit of any person for a sum not due or for a larger sum 
than is due to such person or for any property or interest in property 
to which such person is not entitled, or fraudulently causes or 
suffers a decree or order to be executed against him after it has been 
satisfied, or for anything in respect of which it has been satisfied, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of eithe
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 93]
or anything in respect of which it has been satisfied, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
Illustration 
A institutes a suit against Z. Z, knowing that A is likely to 
obtain a decree against him, fraudulently suffers a judgment to pass 
against him for a larger amount at the suit of B, who has no just 
claim against him, in order that B, either on his own account or for 
the benefit of Z, may share in the proceeds of any sale of Z's property which may be made under A's decree. Z has committed an 
offence under this section. 
209. 
Dishonestly making false claim in Court. 
209. Dishonesty making false claim in Court.--Whoever 
fraudulently or dishonestly, or with intent to injure or annoy any 
person, makes in a Court of Justice any claim which he knows to be 
false, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 94]
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
                  
               
                      
                
                
                 
             
           
               
  
 
  
         
 
 
                      
                
            
                 
              
              
               
    
 
                  
               
               
                
         
 
 
 
  
                  
      
 
 
                      
             
             
    
 
 
    
 
 210. 
Fraudulently obtaining decree for sum not due. 
210. Fraudulently obtaining decree for sum not due.--Whoever 
fraudulently obtains a decree or order against any person for a sum 
not due, or for a larger sum than is due or for any property or interest in property to which he is not entitled, or fraudulently 
causes a decree or order to be executed against any person after it 
has been satisfied or for anything in respect of which it has been 
satisfied, or fraudulently suffers or permits any such act to be done 
in his name, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
211. 
False charge of offence made with intent to injure. 
211. False charge of offence made with intent to injure.- -
Whoever, with intent to cause injury to any person, institutes or 
causes to be instituted any criminal proceeding against that person, 
or falsely charges any person with having committed an offence, 
knowing that there is no just or lawful ground for such proceeding or 
charge against that person, shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with 
fine, or with both; 
and if such criminal proceeding be instituted on a false charge 
of an offence punishable with death 1*[imprisonment for life], or 
imprisonment for seven years or upwards, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
seven years,
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 94]
 be punishable with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
212. 
Harbouring offender-if a capital offence, if punishable with 
imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment. 
212. Harbouring offender.--Whenever an offence has been 
committed, whoever harbours or conceals a person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be the offender, with the intention of screening him from legal punishment, 
if a capital offence; 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 95]
                 
            
             
 
 
         
 
 
              
              
               
            
         
 
                    
                   
              
                       
           
 
                
      
 
 
 
 
 
                  
               
           
               
                
              
     
 
                 
              
                               
                  
                 
                
              
  
  
 
 
 
            
                     
 
  
          
            ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------
148 if a capital offence;--shall, if the offence is punishable with 
death, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine; 
if punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment. 
if punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment.- -
and if the offence is punishable with 1*[imprisonment for life], or 
with imprisonment which may extend to ten years, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
three years, and shall also be liable to fine; 
and if the offence is punishable with imprisonment which may 
extend to one year, and not to ten years, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of the description provided for the offence for a term 
which may extend to one-fourth part of the longest term of 
imprisonment provided for the offence, or with fine, or with both. 
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for 
life". 
1*["Offence" in this section includes any act committed at any 
place out of 2*[India], which, if committed in 2*[India], would be 
punishable under any of the following sections, namely, 302, 304, 382, 
392, 393, 394, 395, 396, 397, 398, 399, 402, 435, 436, 449, 450, 457, 
458, 459 an
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 95]
, 302, 304, 382, 
392, 393, 394, 395, 396, 397, 398, 399, 402, 435, 436, 449, 450, 457, 
458, 459 and 460; and every such act shall, for the purposes of this 
section, be deemed to be punishable as if the accused person had been 
guilty of it in 2*[India].] 
Exception.-This provision shall not extend to any case in which 
the harbour or concealment is by the husband or wife of the offender. 
Illustration 
A, knowing that B has committed dacoity, knowingly conceals B in 
order to screen him from legal punishment. Here, as B is liable to 
3*[imprisonment for life], A is liable to imprisonment of either 
description for a term not exceeding three years, and is also liable 
to fine. 
213. 
Taking gift, etc., to screen an offender from punishment-if a capital 
offence; if punishable with imprisonment for life, or with 
imprisonment. 
213. Taking gift, etc., to screen an offender from punishment--Whoever 
accepts or attempts to obtain, or agrees to accept, any gratification 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 96]
                
               
              
              
      
 
 
    
 
 
                 
            
             
 
 
         
 
 
              
              
               
            
         
 
                
             
                 
             
     
 
 
 
  
          
             
    
  
               
            
                
                       
                 
             
              
  
 
 
    
  
                  
            
             
 
 for himself or any other person, or any restitution of property to 
himself or any other person, in consideration of his concealing an 
offence or of his screening any person from legal punishment for any 
offence, or of his not proceeding against any person for the purpose 
of bringing him to legal punishment, 
if a capital offence; 
if a capital offence;-shall, if the offence is punishable with 
death, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine; 
if punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment. 
if punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment.- -
and if the offence is punishable with 3*[imprisonment for life], or 
with imprisonment which may extend to ten years, shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
three years, and shall also be liable to fine; 
and if the offence is punishable with imprisonment not extending 
to ten years, shall be punished with imprisonment of the description 
provided for the offence for a term which may extend to one fourth 
part of the longest term of imprisonment provided for the offence, or 
with fine, or with both. 
214. 
Offering gift or restoration of property in consideration of screening 
offender-if a capital offence; if punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment. 
214. Offering gift or restoration of property in consideration of 
screening offender.-
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 96]
prisonment. 
214. Offering gift or restoration of property in consideration of 
screening offender.--Whoever gives or causes, or offers or agrees to give or cause, any gratification to any person, or 4*[restores or 
causes the restoration of] any property to any person, in 
consideration of that person's concealing an offence, or of his 
screening any person from legal punishment for any offence, or of his 
not proceeding against any person for the purpose of bringing him to legal punishment, 
if a capital offence; 
if a capital offence;-shall, if the offence is punishable with 
death, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine; 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 97]
         
 
 
               
               
               
            
         
 
           
 
                
 
                
       
                  
          
 
 
 
 
                
             
                
             
     
 
                    
            
 
                                                            
 
 
 
  
         
 
 
                     
              
                                    
                
                
              
             
 
 
 
  
          
                      
      
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------
149 if punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment. 
if punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment. -
and if the offence is punishable with 3*[imprisonment for life] or 
with imprisonment which may extend to ten years, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
three years, and shall also be liable to fine; 
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 1894, s. 7. 
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the States". 
3. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for 
life". 
4. Subs. by Act 42 of 1953, s. 4 and the Third Sch., for "to restore 
or cause the restoration of". 
and if the offence is punishable with imprisonment not extending 
to ten years, shall be punished with imprisonment of the description 
provided for the offence for a term which may extend to one-fourth 
part of the longest term of imprisonment provided for the offence, or 
with fine, or with both. 
1*[Exception.-The provisions of sections 213 and 214 do not 
extend to any case in which the offence may lawfully be compounded.] 
2* * * * * 
215. 
Taking gift to help to recover stolen property, etc. 
215. Taking gift to help to recover stolen property, etc.- -
Whoever takes or agrees or consents to take any gratification under 

<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 97]
cover stolen property, etc.- -
Whoever takes or agrees or consents to take any gratification under 
pretence or on account of helping any person to recover any movable 
property of which he shall have been deprived by any offence 
punishable under this Code, shall, unless he uses all means in his 
power to cause the offender to be apprehended and convicted of the offence, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
216. 
Harbouring offender who has escaped from custody or whose apprehension 
has been ordered-if a capital offence; if punishable with 
imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 98]
 
                  
            
               
    
 
                      
                     
             
           
               
      
  
    
  
                 
              
             
             
  
         
 
 
               
                  
            
             
  
 
                    
                  
              
                    
           
 
                  
                 
                   
              
             
                
                 
         
 
                   
               
  
 
 
 
 
 
      
 216. Harbouring offender who has escaped from custody or whose 
apprehension has been ordered.--Whenever any person convicted of or 
charged with an offence, being in lawful custody for that offence, 
escapes from such custody, 
or whenever a public servant, in the exercise of the lawful 
powers of such public servant, orders a certain person to be 
apprehended for an offence, whoever, knowing of such escape or order 
for apprehension, harbours or conceals that person with the intention 
of preventing him from being apprehended, shall be punished in the manner following, that is to say, 
if a capital offence; 
if a capital offence;--if the offence for which the person was in 
custody or is ordered to be apprehended is punishable with death, he 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine; 
if punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment. 
if punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment. -
if the offence is punishable with 3*[imprisonment for life] or 
imprisonment for ten years, he shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to three years, with or 
without fine; 
and if the offence is punishable with imprisonment which may 
extend to one year and not to ten years, he shall be punished with 
imprisonment of the description provi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 98]
d to one year and not to ten years, he shall be punished with 
imprisonment of the description provided for the offence for a term 
which may extend to one-fourth part of the longest term of the imprisonment provided for such offence or with fine, or with both. 
4*["Offence" in this section includes also any act or omission 
of which a person is alleged to have been guilty out of 5*[India], which, if he had been guilty of it in 5*[India], would have been punishable as an offence, and for which he is, under any law relating 
to extradition, 6*or otherwise liable to be apprehended or detained 
in custody in 5*[India], and every such act or omission shall, for 
the purposes of this section, be deemed to be punishable as if the 
accused person had been guilty of it in 5*[India].] 
Exception.-The provision does not extend to the case in which 
the harbour or concealment is by the husband or wife of the person to 
be apprehended. 
216A. 
Penalty for harbouring robbers or dacoits. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 99]
 
                
                 
        
 
               
               
                
      
                                          
          
           
 
 
 
 
              
               
          
                 
 
 
                 
                
      
 
                  
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      
                  
   
 
 
 
 
 
            
      
 
 
                  
            
            
                
                 
               
                 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------
150 7*[216A. Penalty for harbouring robbers or dacoits.--Whoever, 
knowing or having reason to believe that any persons are about to 
commit or have recently committed robbery or dacoity, 
1. Subs. by Act 8 of 1882, s. 6, for the original Exception. 
2. Illustration rep. by Act 10 of 1882, s. 2 and Sch. I. 
3. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for 
life". 
4. Ins. by Act 10 of 1886, s. 23. 
5. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the States". 
6. The words "or under the Fugitive Offenders Act, 1881" omitted by 
s. 3 and Sch., ibid. 
7. Ins. by Act 3 of 1894, s. 8. 
harbours them or any of them, with the intention of facilitating the commission of such robbery or dacoity or of screening them or any of 
them from punishment, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section it is immaterial 
whether the robbery or dacoity is intended to be committed, or has 
been committed, within or without 1*[India]. 
Exception.-This provision does not extend to the case in which 
the harbour is by the husband or wife of the offender.] 
216B. 
[Repealed.] 
2*[216B. Definition of "harbour" in sections 212, 216 and 
216A.] Rep. by the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 1942 (
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 99]
 of "harbour" in sections 212, 216 and 
216A.] Rep. by the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 1942 (8 of 
1942), s. 3. 
217. 
Public servant disobeying direction of law with intent to save person 
from punishment or property from forfeiture. 
217. Public servant disobeying direction of law with intent to 
save person from punishment or property from forfeiture.--Whoever, 
being a public servant, knowingly disobeys any direction of the law as 
to the way in which he is to conduct himself as such public servant, 
intending thereby to save, or knowing it to be likely that he will 
thereby save, any person from legal punishment, or subject him to a less punishment than that to which he is liable, or with intent to 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 100]
              
                    
            
          
 
 
 
  
           
       
 
 
                   
            
               
              
                 
               
                
              
              
                
                  
                
        
 
 
 
 
 
           
   
 
 
                   
               
                   
           
               
             
    
  
 
  
              
        
                        
           
               
            
                
              save, or knowing that he is likely thereby to save, any property from forfeiture or any charge to which it is liable by law, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
218. 
Public servant framing incorrect record or writing with intent to save 
person from punishment or property from forfeiture. 
218. Public servant framing incorrect record or writing with 
intent to save person from punishment or property from forfeiture.- -
Whoever, being a public servant, and being as such public servant, charged with the preparation of any record or other writing, frames 
that record or writing in a manner which he knows to be incorrect, 
with intent to cause, or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby 
cause, loss or injury to the public or to any person, or with intent 
thereby to save, or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby save, 
any person from legal punishment, or with intent to save, or knowing 
that he is likely thereby to save, any property from forfeiture or 
other charge to which it is liable by law, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
three years, or with fine, or with both. 
219. 
Public servant in judicial proceeding corruptly making report, etc., 
contrary to law. 
219. Public servant in judicial proceeding corruptly making 
report, etc., contrary to law.--W
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 100]
law. 
219. Public servant in judicial proceeding corruptly making 
report, etc., contrary to law.--Whoever, being a public servant, 
corruptly or maliciously makes or pronounces in any stage of a 
judicial proceeding, any report, order, verdict, or decision which he 
knows to be contrary to law, shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both. 
220. 
Commitment for trial or confinement by person having authority who 
knows that he is acting contrary to law. 
220. Commitment for trial or confinement by person having 
authority who knows that he is acting contrary to law.--Whoever, being 
in any office which gives him legal authority to commit persons for 
trial or to confinement, or to keep persons in confinement, corruptly 
or maliciously commits any person for trial or to confinement, or keeps any person in confinement, in the exercise of that authority, 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 101]
                    
            
          
 
 
 
 
 
            
  
 
 
                    
           
               
               
         
             
              
     
 
                    
                     
            
             
 
                
 
           
 
 
 
                     
                     
            
                     
            
    
                     
                       
            
                     
        
  
 
 
 
            
        
 
 
                    
                   
             ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------
151 knowing that in so doing he is acting contrary to law, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both. 
221. 
Intentional omission to apprehend on the part of public servant bound 
to apprehend. 
221. Intentional omission to apprehend on the part of public 
servant bound to apprehend.--Whoever, being a pubic servant, legally bound as such public servant to apprehend or to keep in confinement 
any person charged with or liable to be apprehended for an offence, intentionally omits to apprehend such person, or intentionally suffers 
such person to escape, or intentionally aids such person in escaping 
or attempting to escape from such confinement, shall be punished as 
follows, that is to say: -
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to seven years, with or without fine, if the person in 
confinement, or who ought to have been apprehended, was charged with, 
or liable to be apprehended for, an offence punishable with death; or 
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the States". 
2. Ins. by Act 3 of 1894, s. 8. 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to three years, with or without fine, if the person in 
confinemen
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 101]
tion for a term which may 
extend to three years, with or without fine, if the person in 
confinement, or who ought to have been apprehended, was charged with, or liable to be apprehended for, an offence punishable with 
1*[imprisonment for life] or imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to ten years; or 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to two years, with or without fine, if the person in 
confinement, or who ought to have been apprehended, was charged with, 
or liable to be apprehended for, an offence punishable with 
imprisonment for a term less than ten years. 
222. 
Intentional omission to apprehend on the part of public servant bound 
to apprehend person under sentence or lawfully committed. 
222. Intentional omission to apprehend on the part of public 
servant bound to apprehend person under sentence or lawfully committed.--Whoever, being a public servant, legally bound as such 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 102]
            
                    
           
            
           
         
 
                  
                
              
       
                     
                     
             
               
                   
           
                     
                 
               
                    
              
 
 
 
 
 
 
              
 
 
 
                
          
                 
                 
            
              
       
 
 
 
 
 
          
  
                        
        
           
                
              
              
              
  public servant to apprehend or to keep in confinement any person under 
sentence of a Court of Justice for any offence 2*[or lawfully 
committed to custody], intentionally omits to apprehend such person, 
or intentionally suffers such person to escape or intentionally aids 
such person in escaping or attempting to escape from such confinement, 
shall be punished as follows, that is to say: -
with 1*[imprisonment for life] or with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to fourteen years, with or 
without fine, if the person in confinement, or who ought to have been 
apprehended, is under sentence of death; or 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to seven years, with or without fine, if the person in 
confinement, or who, ought to have been apprehended, is subject, by a 
sentence of a Court of Justice, or by virtue of a commutation of such sentence, to 1*[imprisonment for life] 3*** 4*** 5*** 6*** or 
imprisonment for a term of ten years or upwards; or 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to three years, or with fine, or with both, if the person in 
confinement, or who ought to have been apprehended is subject, by a 
sentence of a Court of Justice, to imprisonment for a term not 
extending to ten years 2*[or if the person was lawfully committed to 
custody]. 
223. 
Escape from confin
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 102]
ding to ten years 2*[or if the person was lawfully committed to 
custody]. 
223. 
Escape from confinement or custody negligently suffered by public 
servant. 
223. Escape from confinement or custody negligently suffered by 
public servant.--Whoever, being a public servant legally bound as such 
public servant to keep in confinement any person charged with or 
convicted of any offence 2*[or lawfully committed to custody], 
negligently suffers such person to escape from confinement, shall be 
punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to two 
years, or with fine, or with both. 
224. 
Resistance or obstruction by a person to his lawful apprehension. 
224. Resistance or obstruction by a person to his lawful 
apprehension.--Whoever intentionally offers any resistance or illegal 
obstruction to the lawful apprehension of himself for any offence with 
which he is charged or of which he has been convicted, or escapes or 
attempts to escape from any custody in which he is lawfully detained 
for any such offence, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 103]
 
               
                 
                
    
 
                
       
                          
        
                                   
      
                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
  
               
              
                
               
                
             
            
 
                     
              
                    
                   
            
           
 
                   
             
            
             
    
 
                   
               
               
                  
          
                 
 
                    ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------
152 Explanation.-The punishment in this section is in addition to the 
punishment for which the person to be apprehended or detained in 
custody was liable for the offence with which he was charged, or of 
which he was convicted. 
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for 
life". 
2. Ins. by Act 27 of 1870, s. 8. 
3. The words "or penal servitude for life" omitted by Act 17 of 
1949, s. 2. 
4. The words "or to" omitted by Act 36 of 1957, s. 3 and Sch. II. 
5. The word "transportation" omitted by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and 
Sch. 
6. The words "or penal servitude" omitted by Act 17 of 1949, s. 2. 
225. 
Resistance or obstruction to lawful apprehension of another person. 
225. Resistance or obstruction to lawful apprehension of another 
person.--Whoever intentionally offers any resistance or illegal 
obstruction to the lawful apprehension of any other person for an 
offence, or rescues or attempts to rescue any other person from any 
custody in which that person is lawfully detained for an offence, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both; 
or, if the person to be apprehended, or the person rescued or 
attempted t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 103]
with fine, or with both; 
or, if the person to be apprehended, or the person rescued or 
attempted to be rescued, is charged with or liable to be apprehended 
for an offence punishable with 1*[imprisonment for life] or 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine; 
or, if the person to be apprehended or rescued, or attempted to 
be rescued, is charged with or liable to be apprehended for an offence 
punishable with death, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine; 
or, if the person to be apprehended or rescued, or attempted to 
be rescued, is liable under the sentence of a Court of Justice, or by virtue of a commutation of such a sentence, to 1*[imprisonment for life], 2*** 3*** 4*** or imprisonment, for a term of ten years or 
upwards, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for 
a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to 
fine; 
or, if the person to be apprehended or rescued, or attempted to 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 104]
                   
            
            
 
 
 
 
 
                
       
 
 
                    
                 
             
                
                 
              
          
 
                    
                   
          
 
                     
                   
 
 
 
 
 
           
      
 
 
              
             
                                
              
                               
                   
            
                    
 
 
                
      
                                   
      
               
                   
                
 
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------be rescued, is under sentence of death, shall be punished with 
1[imprisonment for life] or imprisonment of either description for a 
term not exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
225A. 
Omission to apprehend, or sufferance of escape, on part of public 
servant, in cases not otherwise, provided for. 
5*[225A. Omission to apprehend, or sufferance of escape, on 
part of public servant, in cases not otherwise, provided for.- -
Whoever, being a public servant legally bound as such public servant 
to apprehend, or to keep in confinement, any person in any case not provided for in section 221, section 222 or section 223, or in any 
other law for the time being in force, omits to apprehend that person 
or suffers him to escape from confinement, shall be punished -
(a) if he does so intentionally, with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to three years, or with 
fine or with both; and 
(b) if he does so negligently, with simple imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
225B. 
Resistance or obstruction to lawful apprehension, or escape or rescue 
in cases not otherwise provided for. 
225B. Resistance or obstruction to lawful apprehension, o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 104]
cue 
in cases not otherwise provided for. 
225B. Resistance or obstruction to lawful apprehension, or escape 
or rescue in cases not otherwise provided for.--Whoever, in any case 
not provided for in section 224 or section 225 or in any other law for 
the time being in force, intentionally offers any resistance or 
illegal obstruction to the lawful apprehension of himself or of any 
other person, or escapes or attempts to escape from any custody in which he is lawfully detained, or rescues or attempts to rescue any 
other person from any custody in which that person is lawfully 
detained, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description 
for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with 
both.] 
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for 
life". 
2. The words "or to" omitted by Act 36 of 1957, s. 3 and Sch. II. 
3. The word "transportation" omitted by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch. 
4. The words "penal servitude" rep. by Act 17 of 1949, s. 2. 
5. Ss. 225A and 225B were subs. by Act 10 of 1886, s. 24(1), for s. 
225A, which had been ins. by Act 27 of 1870, s.9. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 105]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
                 
            
 
 
 
 
 
       
  
             
            
             
            
                  
                   
       
  
 
 
 
                
  
 
 
               
          
                
                
              
              
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
                        
           
                   
                        
                   153 
226. 
[Repealed.] 
226. [Unlawful return from transportation.] Rep. by the Code of 
Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1955 (26 of 1955), s. 117 and Sch. 
227. 
Violation of condition of remission of punishment. 
227. Violation of condition of remission of punishment.--Whoever, 
having accepted any conditional remission of punishment, knowingly 
violates any condition on which such remission was granted, shall be 
punished with the punishment to which he was originally sentenced, if 
he has already suffered no part of that punishment, and if he has 
suffered any part of that punishment, then with so much of that 
punishment as he has not already suffered. 
228. 
Intentional insult or interruption to public servant sitting in 
judicial proceeding. 
228. Intentional insult or interruption to public servant sitting 
in judicial proceeding.--Whoever intentionally offers any insult, or 
causes any interruption to any public servant, while such public 
servant is sitting in any stage of a judicial proceeding, shall be 
punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with 
both. 
228A. 
Disclosure of identity of the victim of certain offences, etc. 
1*[228A. Disclosure of identity of the victim of certain 
offences, etc.--(1) Whoever prints or publishes the name or any matter 
which may make known the identity of any person against whom an 
offence under section 376, section 376A, section 376B, section 376C or 
section 376D is alleged or found to have been committed (her
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 105]
on 376A, section 376B, section 376C or 
section 376D is alleged or found to have been committed (hereafter in this section referred to as the victim) shall be punished with 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 106]
             
        
 
                       
                    
          
 
                          
                    
                    
          
 
                     
      
 
                                           
        
                  
                   
                 
 
                
                   
            
   
                     
               
           
            
           
 
                
               
     
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
               
           
                
                       
                
          
             
                 
     
 
             ----------------------------------------------------------------------imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two 
years and shall also be liable to fine. 
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) extends to any printing or 
publication of the name or any matter which may make known the identity of the victim if such printing or publication is -
(a) by or under the order in writing of the officer-in-
charge of the police station or the police officer making the 
investigation into such offence acting in good faith for the 
purposes of such investigation; or 
(b) by, or with the authorisation in writing of, the victim; 
or 
(c) where the victim is dead or minor or of unsound mind, 
by, or with the authorisation in writing of, the next-of-kin of 
the victim: 
Provided that no such authorisation shall be given by the next-
of-kin to anybody other than the chairman or the secretary, by 
whatever name called, of any recognised welfare institution or 
organisation. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section, "recognised 
welfare institution or organisation" means a social welfare 
institution or organisation recognised in this behalf by the Central 
or State Government. 
(3) Whoever prints or publishes any matter in relation to any 
proceeding before a court with respect to an offence referred to in 
sub-section (
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 106]
 relation to any 
proceeding before a court with respect to an offence referred to in 
sub-section (1) without the previous permission of such court shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to two years and shall also be liable to fine. 
Explanation.-The printing or publication of the judgment of any 
High Court or the Supreme Court does not amount to an offence within 
the meaning of this section.] 
229. 
Personation of a juror or assessor. 
229. Personation of a juror or assessor.--Whoever, by personation 
or otherwise, shall intentionally cause, or knowingly suffer himself 
to be returned, empanelled or sworn as a juryman or assessor in any 
case in which he knows that he is not entitled by law to be so 
returned, empanelled or sworn, or knowing himself to have been so returned, empanelled or sworn contrary to law, shall voluntarily serve 
on such jury or as such assessor, shall be punished with imprisonment 
of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or 
with fine, or with both. 
1. Ins. by Act 43 of 1983, s. 2 (w.e.f. 25-12-1983). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 107]
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
        
 
                                
 
                  
  
 
  
  
  
                  
                 
        
 
 
  
 
 
                  
              
             
               
       
                              
            
 
                     
           
 
                   
             
                      
            
                       
                        
                    
 
 
 
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
154 
CHAPTER XII 
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO COIN AND GOVERNMENT STAMPS 
CHAPTER XII 
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO COIN AND GOVERNMENT STAMPS 
230. 
"Coin" defined. 
230. "Coin" defined.--1*[Coin is metal used for the time being 
as money, and stamped and issued by the authority of some State or 
Sovereign Power in order to be so used.] 
Indian coin 
Indian coin--2*[Indian coin is metal stamped and issued by the 
authority of the Government of India in order to be used as money; and 
metal which has been so stamped and issued shall continue to be Indian 
coin for the purposes of this Chapter, notwithstanding that it may 
have ceased to be used as money.] 
Illustrations 
(a) Cowries are not coin. 
(b) Lumps of unstamped copper, though used as money, are not 
coin. 
(c) Medals are not coin, inasmuch as they are not intended to be 
used as money. 
(d) The coin denominated as the Company's rupee is 3[Indian 
coin]. 
4*(e)The "Farukhabad rupee", which was formerly used as 
money under the authority of the Government of India, is 
3[Indian coin] although it is no longer so used.] 
231. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 108]
  
 
 
                
                
            
           
                    
               
            
 
  
 
  
   
 
 
                  
                   
             
            
          
 
 
 
 
 
       
  
                  
              
              
             
                
             
               
  
 
 
 
        
 
 
                   
             
                       
            
                      
          
                
      
 Counterfeiting coin. 
231. Counterfeiting coin.--Whoever counterfeits or knowingly 
performs any part of the process of counterfeiting coin, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
Explanation.-A person commits this offence who intending to 
practise deception, or knowing it to be likely that deception will thereby be practised, causes a genuine coin to appear like a different coin. 
232. 
Counterfeiting Indian coin. 
232. Counterfeiting Indian coin.--Whoever counterfeits, or 
knowingly performs any part of the process of counterfeiting 
3*[Indian coin], shall be punished with 5*[imprisonment for life], 
or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend 
to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
233. 
Making or selling instrument for counterfeiting coin. 
233. Making or selling instrument for counterfeiting coin.- -
Whoever makes or mends, or performs any part of the process of making 
or mending, or buys, sells or disposes of, any die or instrument, for the purpose of being used, or knowing or having reason to believe that 
it is intended to be used, for the purpose of counterfeiting coin, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extended to three years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
234. 
Making or selling instrument for counterfeiting Indian coin. 
234. Making or selling instrument for counterfeiting Indian 
co
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 108]
ent for counterfeiting Indian coin. 
234. Making or selling instrument for counterfeiting Indian 
coin.--Whoever makes or mends, or performs any part of the process of 
making or mending or buys, sells or disposes of, any die or instrument, for the purpose of being used, or knowing or having reason 
to believe that it is intended to be used, for the purpose of 
counterfeiting 3[Indian coin], shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and 
shall also be liable to fine. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 109]
 
               
            
         
           
                
      
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
                
    
 
 
                    
            
                 
             
               
                
         
  
   
 
 
                         
                 
               
    
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
                
               
              
       
  
 
  
      
 
 
               
            ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------
155 1. Subs. by Act 19 of 1872, s. 1, for the original paragraph. 
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for the former paragraph. 
3. Subs., ibid., for "the Queen's coin". 
4. Ins. by Act 6 of 1896, s. 1(2). 
5. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for 
life". 
235. 
Possession of instrument or material for the purpose of using the 
same for counterfeiting coin. 
235. Possession of instrument or material for the purpose of 
using the same for counterfeiting coin.--Whoever is in possession of any instrument or material, for the purpose of using the same for 
counterfeiting coin, or knowing or having reason to believe that the 
same is intended to be used for that purpose, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
three years, and shall also be liable to fine; 
if Indian coin. 
if Indian coin.--and if the coin to be counterfeited is 
1*[Indian coin], shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also 
be liable to fine. 
236. 
Abetting in India the counterfeiting out of India of coin. 
236. Abetting in India the counterfeiting out of India of coin.- -
Whoever, being within 2*[India] abets the counterfeiting of coin 
out of 2*[India] shall be punished in the same manner as if he abetted the counterfeiting of such coin within 2*[India]. 
237. 
Import or export of counterfeit coin. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 109]
tted the counterfeiting of such coin within 2*[India]. 
237. 
Import or export of counterfeit coin. 
237. Import or export of counterfeit coin.--Whoever imports into 
2*[India], or exports therefrom, any counterfeit coin, knowingly or 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 110]
                  
            
           
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
                      
                     
                  
                        
          
                
 
 
 
 
  
             
 
 
                       
          
                       
            
                
             
                  
 
 
 
 
 
                    
 
 
 
                
                 
             
                  
            
                
             
             
 
 
 
 
 
                   
       having reason to believe that the same is counterfeit, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
238. 
Import or export of counterfeits of the Indian coin. 
238. Import or export of counterfeits of the Indian coin.- -
Whoever imports into 2*[India], or exports therefrom, any 
counterfeit coin, which he knows or has reason to believe to be a 
counterfeit of 1*[Indian coin], shall be punished with 
3*[Imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
239. 
Delivery of coin possessed with knowledge that it is counterfeit. 
239. Delivery of coin possessed with knowledge that it is 
counterfeit.--Whoever, having any counterfeit coin, which at the time 
when he became possessed of it, he knew to be counterfeit, 
fraudulently or with intent that fraud may be committed, delivers the 
same to any persons or attempts to induce any person to receive it, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
240. 
Delivery of Indian coin, possessed with knowledge that it is 
counterfeit. 
240. Delivery of Indian coin, possessed with knowledge that it is 
counterfeit.--Whoever having any counterfeit coin, which is a counterfeit of 1*[Indian coin], and which, at the time when he became 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 110]
 counterfeit coin, which is a counterfeit of 1*[Indian coin], and which, at the time when he became 
possessed of it, he knew to be a counterfeit of 1*[Indian coin], fraudulently or with intent that fraud may be committed, delivers the 
same to any person, or attempts to induce any person to receive it, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
241. 
Delivery of coin as genuine, which, when first possessed, the 
deliverer did not know to be counterfeit. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 111]
 
 
                  
           
                
                    
               
                      
             
                  
        
 
            
 
                
 
                
      
 
 
 
  
                              
 
                      
              
               
                
            
                
                 
          
  
 
 
 
            
     
 
 
                   
         
                   
              
                  
                
         
 
 
 
 
 
             
    
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------
156 241. Delivery of coin as genuine, which, when first possessed, 
the deliverer did not know to be counterfeit.--Whoever delivers to any 
other person as genuine, or attempts to induce any other person to 
receive as genuine, any counterfeit coin which he knows to be counterfeit, but which he did not know to be counterfeit at the time 
when he took it into his possession, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two 
years, or with fine to an amount which may extend to ten times the 
value of the coin counterfeited, or with both. 
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for "the Queen's coin". 
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951 s. 3 and Sch., for "the States". 
3. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for 
life". 
Illustration 
A, a coiner, delivers counterfeit Company's rupees to his 
accomplice B, for the purpose of uttering them. B sells the rupees to C, another utterer, who buys them knowing them to be counterfeit. C 
pays away the rupees for goods to D, who receives them, not knowing 
them to be counterfeit. D, after receiving the rupees, discovers that 
they are counterfeit and pays them away as if they were good. Here D 
is punishable only under this section, but B and C are punishable 
under section 239 or 240, as the
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 111]

is punishable only under this section, but B and C are punishable 
under section 239 or 240, as the case may be. 
242. 
Possession of counterfeit coin by person who knew it to be counterfeit 
when he became possessed thereof. 
242. Possession of counterfeit coin by person who knew it to be 
counterfeit when he became possessed thereof.--Whoever, fraudulently or with intent that fraud may be committed, is in possession of 
counterfeit coin, having known at the time when he became possessed thereof that such coin was counterfeit, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
three years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
243. 
Possession of Indian coin by person who knew it to be counterfeit when 
he became possessed thereof. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 112]
 
                        
         
                   
             
                       
         
                
  
  
 
  
                
      
 
 
                     
          
             
              
              
                   
                
         
 
 
 
 
 
      
  
               
           
              
                
         
 
 
 
  
        
  
 
 
               
        
                 
                
                
      
                    
                243. Possession of Indian coin by person who knew it to be 
counterfeit when he became possessed thereof.--Whoever, fraudulently or with intent that fraud may be committed, is in possession of 
counterfeit coin, which is a counterfeit of 1*[Indian coin], having 
known at the time when he became possessed of it that it was counterfeit, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description 
for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable 
to fine. 
244. 
Person employed in mint causing coin to be of different weight or 
composition from that fixed by law. 
244. Person employed in mint causing coin to be of different 
weight or composition from that fixed by law.--Whoever, being employed 
in any mint lawfully established in 2*[India], does any act, or omits 
what he is legally bound to do, with the intention of causing any coin 
issued from that mint to be of a different weight or composition from 
the weight or composition fixed by law, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
245. 
Unlawfully taking coining instrument from mint. 
245. Unlawfully taking coining instrument from mint.--Whoever, 
without lawful authority, takes out of any mint, lawfully established 
in 2[India], any coining tool or instrument, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
seven years, and shall also be liable to
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 112]
nment of either description for a term which may extend to 
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
246. 
Fraudulently or dishonestly diminishing weight or altering composition 
of coin. 
246. Fraudulently or dishonestly diminishing weight or altering 
composition of coin.--Whoever, fraudulently or dishonestly performs on any coin any operation which diminishes the weight or alters the composition of that coin, shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to three years, and 
shall also be liable to fine. 
Explanation.-A person who scoops out part of the coin and puts 
anything else into the cavity alters the composition of the coin. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 113]
 
 
 
 
 
        
   
 
 
               
             
              
             
                
         
 
             
 
                
 
               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              
  
 
 
                  
             
           
                
             
             
  
 
  
              
    
 
 
                
             
             
                     
           
             
    
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------
157 247. 
Fraudulently or dishonestly diminishing weight or altering composition 
of Indian coin. 
247. Fraudulently or dishonestly diminishing weight or altering 
composition of Indian coin.--Whoever fraudulently or dishonestly performs on 3*[any Indian coin] any operation which diminishes the 
weight or alters the composition of that coin, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
1. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for "the Queen's coin". 
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the States". 
3. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for "any of the Queen's coin". 
248. 
Altering appearance of coin with intent that it shall pass as coin of 
different description. 
248. Altering appearance of coin with intent that it shall pass 
as coin of different description.--Whoever performs on any coin any operation which alters the appearance of that coin, with the intention that the said coin shall pass as a coin of a different description, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
249. 
Altering appearance of Indian coin with intent that it shall pass as 
coin of different description. 
249. Altering appearance of Indian coin with intent that it shall 
pass as coin of different description.--Whoever performs on 1*[any Indian coin] any oper
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 113]
t it shall 
pass as coin of different description.--Whoever performs on 1*[any Indian coin] any operation which alters the appearance of that coin, with the intention that the said coin shall pass as a coin of a 
different description, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also 
be liable to fine. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 114]
 
 
 
          
 
                        
          
                 
                
              
                
                           
              
  
 
 
 
           
  
                
          
                 
                
              
                
                           
               
  
 
  
               
  
                     
         
             
                  
            
               
            
           
  
 
 
 
               
   
 250. 
Delivery of coin possessed with knowledge that it is altered. 
250. Delivery of coin possessed with knowledge that it is 
altered.--Whoever, having coin in his possession with respect to which 
the offence defined in section 246 or 248 has been committed, and 
having known at the time when he became possessed of such coin that 
such offence had been committed with respect to it, fraudulently or with intent that fraud may be committed, delivers such coin to any 
other person, or attempts to induce any other person to receive the 
same, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
251. 
Delivery of Indian coin, possessed with knowledge that it is altered. 
251. Delivery of Indian coin, possessed with knowledge that it is 
altered.--Whoever, having coin in his possession with respect to which 
the offence defined in section 247 or 249 has been committed, and 
having known at the time when he became possessed of such coin that 
such offence had been committed with respect to it, fraudulently or 
with intent that fraud may be committed, delivers such coin to any 
other person, or attempts to induce any other person to receive the 
same, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
252. 
Possession of coin by person who knew it to be altered when he became 
possessed thereof. 
252. Possession
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 114]
sion of coin by person who knew it to be altered when he became 
possessed thereof. 
252. Possession of coin by person who knew it to be altered when 
he became possessed thereof.--Whoever fraudulently or with intent that fraud may be committed, is in possession of coin with respect to which 
the offence defined in either of the sections 246 or 248 has been 
committed having known at the time of becoming possessed thereof that such offence had been committed with respect to such coin, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
253. 
Possession of Indian coin by person who knew it to be altered when he 
became possessed thereof. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 115]
 
                        
            
             
              
             
               
            
              
  
 
  
           
      
 
 
                
             
              
                 
               
             
                  
             
                  
         
 
               
 
 
 
 
                                  
   
  
 
  
   
 
 
             
               
                   
                
             
     
 
                
             
     
 
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------
158 253. Possession of Indian coin by person who knew it to be 
altered when he became possessed thereof.--Whoever fraudulently or 
with intent that fraud may be committed, is in possession of coin with 
respect to which the offence defined in either of the sections 247 or 
249 has been committed having known at the time of becoming possessed thereof, that such offence had been committed with respect to such 
coin, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
254. 
Delivery of coin as genuine which, when first possessed, the deliverer 
did not know to be altered. 
254. Delivery of coin as genuine which, when first possessed, the 
deliverer did not know to be altered.--Whoever delivers to any other 
person as genuine or as a coin of a different description from what it 
is, or attempts to induce any person to receive as genuine, or as a 
different coin from what it is, any coin in respect of which he knows 
that any such operation as that mentioned in sections 246, 247, 248 or 
249 has been performed, but in respect of which he did not, at the 
time when he took it into his possession, know that such operation had 
been performed, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to two 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 115]
rmed, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to two 
1. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for "any of the Queen's coin". 
years or with fine to an amount which may extend to ten times the 
value of the coin for which the altered coin is passed, or attempted to be passed. 
255. 
Counterfeiting Government stamp. 
255. Counterfeiting Government stamp.--Whoever counterfeits, or 
knowingly performs any part of the process of counterfeiting, any 
stamp issued by Government for the purpose of revenue shall be 
punished with 1*[imprisonment for life] or with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall 
also be liable to fine. 
Explanation.-A person commits this offence who counterfeits by 
causing a genuine stamps of one denomination to appear like a genuine 
stamp of a different denomination. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 116]
 
 
 
                
  
 
 
                          
           
               
                   
                
               
             
    
 
 
 
 
 
        
  
               
             
               
             
                 
                   
                
         
 
 
 
 
 
     
  
                 
               
              
          
                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
  
             
               
             
                256. 
Having possession of instrument or material for counterfeiting 
Government stamp. 
256. Having possession of instrument or material for 
counterfeiting Government stamp.--Whoever has in his possession any instrument or material for the purpose of being used, or knowing or 
having reason to believe that it is intended to be used, for the purpose of counterfeiting any stamp issued by Government for the 
purpose of revenue, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also 
be liable to fine. 
257. 
Making or selling instrument for counterfeiting Government stamp. 
257. Making or selling instrument for counterfeiting Government 
stamp.--Whoever makes or performs any part of the process of making, 
or buys, or sells, or disposes of, any instrument for the purpose of 
being used, or knowing or having reason to believe that it is intended 
to be used, for the purpose of counterfeiting any stamp issued by 
Government for the purpose of revenue, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
258. 
Sale of counterfeit Government stamp. 
258. Sale of counterfeit Government stamp.--Whoever sells, or 
offers for sale, any stamp which he knows or has reason to believe to 
be a counterfeit of any stamp issued by Government for the purpose of 
revenue, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for 
a term which may extend to sev
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 116]
venue, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for 
a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
259. 
Having possession of counterfeit Government stamp. 
259. Having possession of counterfeit Government stamp.--Whoever 
has in his possession any stamp which he knows to be a counterfeit of 
any stamp issued by Government for the purpose of revenue, intending to use, or dispose of the same as a genuine stamp, or in order that it 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 117]
             
                
      
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
                             
              
                 
          
              
 
 
 
 
 
          
                    
 
  
              
              
           
              
             
                  
                
             
          
                   
 
 
                
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
                    
            
               
               
            
        ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------
159 may be used as a genuine stamp, shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and 
shall also be liable to fine. 
260. 
Using as genuine a Government stamp known to be counterfeit. 
260. Using as genuine a Government stamp known to be 
counterfeit.--Whoever uses as genuine any stamp, knowing it to be a 
counterfeit of any stamp issued by Government for the purpose of 
revenue, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for 
a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both. 
261. 
Effacing writing from substance bearing Government stamp, or removing 
from document a stamp used for it, with intent to cause loss to 
Government. 
261. Effacing writing from substance bearing Government stamp, or 
removing from document a stamp used for it, with intent to cause loss to Government.--Whoever, fraudulently or with intent to cause loss to 
the Government, removes or effaces from any substance, bearing any 
stamp issued by Government for the purpose of revenue, any writing or 
document for which such stamp has been used, or removes from any 
writing or document a stamp which has been used for such writing or 
document, in order that such stamp may be used for a different writing 
or document, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description 
for a term w
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 117]
ferent writing 
or document, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description 
for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for 
life". 
262. 
Using Government stamp known to have been before used. 
262. Using Government stamp known to have been before used.- -
Whoever, fraudulently or with intent to cause loss to the Government, 
uses for any purpose a stamp issued by Government for the purpose of 
revenue, which he knows to have been before used, shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 118]
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
               
               
             
             
                 
                  
                 
            
              
   
 
 
 
  
    
 
 
           
                              
                  
        
 
                          
        
 
                      
               
       
               
                    
               
       
                   
               
               
              
  
                          
            
               
            
                   
              263. 
Erasure of mark denoting that stamp has been used. 
263. Erasure of mark denoting that stamp has been used.--Whoever, 
fraudulently or with intent to cause loss to Government, erases or 
removes from a stamp issued by Government for the purpose of revenue, any mark, put or impressed upon such stamp for the purpose of denoting 
that the same has been used, or knowingly has in his possession or 
sells or disposes of any such stamp from which such mark has been 
erased or removed, or sells or disposes of any such stamp which he 
knows to have been used, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, 
or with both. 
263A. 
Prohibition of fictitious stamps. 
1*[263A. Prohibition of fictitious stamps.--(1) Whoever -
(a) makes, knowingly utters, deals in or sells any 
fictitious stamp, or knowingly uses for any postal purpose any 
fictitious stamp, or 
(b) has in his possession, without lawful excuse, any 
fictitious stamp, or 
(c) makes or, without lawful excuse, has in his possession 
any die, plate, instrument or materials for making any fictitious 
stamp, 
shall be punished with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees. 
(2) Any such stamp, die, plate, instrument or materials in the 
possession of any person for making any fictitious stamp 2*[may be 
seized and, if seized] shall be forfeited. 
(3) In this section "fictitio
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 118]
ictitious stamp 2*[may be 
seized and, if seized] shall be forfeited. 
(3) In this section "fictitious stamp" means any stamp falsely 
purporting to be issued by Government for the purpose of denoting a 
rate of postage, or any facsimile or imitation or representation, 
whether on paper or otherwise, of any stamp issued by Government for 
that purpose. 
(4) In this section and also in sections 255 to 263, both 
inclusive, the word "Government", when used in connection with, or in 
reference to, any stamp issued for the purpose of denoting a rate of 
postage, shall, notwithstanding anything in section 17, be deemed to 
include the person or persons authorized by law to administer executive Government in any part of India, and also in any part of Her 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 119]
       
 
 
  
 
 
       
  
                                    
                          
 
 
 
  
       
 
 
               
               
           
             
  
 
 
 
       
 
 
                     
                 
             
                
            
          
 
             
 
                      
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
                
              
               ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------
160 Majesty's dominions or in any foreign country.] 
CHAPTER XIII 
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 
CHAPTER XIII 
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 
264. 
Fraudulent use of false instrument for weighing. 
264. Fraudulent use of false instrument for weighing.--Whoever, 
fraudulently uses any instrument for weighing which he knows to be 
false, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both. 
265. 
Fraudulent use of false weight or measure. 
265. Fraudulent use of false weight or measure.--Whoever, 
fraudulently uses any false weight or false measure of length or 
capacity, or fraudulently uses any weight or any measure of length or 
capacity as a different weight or measure from what it is, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to one year, or with fine, or with both. 
1. S. 263A ins. by Act 3 of 1895, s. 2. 
2. Subs. by Act 42 of 1953, s. 4 and the Third Sch., for "may be 
seized and". 
266. 
Being in possession of false weight or measure. 
266. Being in possession of false weight or measure.--Whoever is 
in possession of any instrument for weighing, or of any weight, or of 
any measure of length or capacity, which he knows to be false, 1**** 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 120]
              
            
        
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
                 
               
              
                
                 
               
  
 
 
  
  
          
  
 
 
                                    
 
          
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
                  
               
               
               
          
         
 
                     
    
 
 
 
  
                
 
 
 intending that the same may be fraudulently used, shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
one year, or with fine, or with both. 
267. 
Making or selling false weight or measure. 
267. Making or selling false weight or measure.--Whoever makes, 
sells or disposes of any instrument for weighing, or any weight, or 
any measure of length or capacity which he knows to be false, in order 
that the same may be used as true, or knowing that the same is likely 
to be used as true, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or 
with both. 
CHAPTER XIV 
OF OFFENCES AFFECTING THE PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY, CONVENIENCE, DECENCY 
AND MORALS 
CHAPTER XIV 
OF OFFENCES AFFECTING THE PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY, CONVENIENCE, DECENCY 
AND MORALS 
268. 
Public nuisance. 
268. Public nuisance.--A person is guilty of a public nuisance 
who does any act or is guilty of an illegal omission which causes any 
common injury, danger or annoyance to the public or to the people in 
general who dwell or occupy property in the vicinity, or which must 
necessarily cause injury, obstruction, danger or annoyance to persons 
who may have occasion to use any public right. 
A common nuisance is not excused on the ground that it causes 
some convenience or advantage. 
269. 
Negligent act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to 
life. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 121]
                       
             
               
                  
            
          
 
 
 
 
 
                
 
 
 
                       
              
                 
               
             
       
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
            
                    
              
             
           
            
             
       
 
 
 
  
        
 
 
                  
               
                
                 
             
                   
        
 
 
 
 
 269. Negligent act likely to spread infection of disease 
dangerous to life.--Whoever unlawfully or negligently does any act 
which is, and which he knows or has reason to believe to be, likely to 
spread the infection of any disease dangerous to life, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to six months, or with fine, or with both. 
270. 
Malignant act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to 
life. 
270. Malignant act likely to spread infection of disease 
dangerous to life.--Whoever malignantly does any act which is, and which he knows or has reason to believe to be, likely to spread the 
infection of any disease dangerous to life, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two 
years, or with fine, or with both. 
271. 
Disobedience to quarantine rule. 
271. Disobedience to quarantine rule.--Whoever knowingly disobeys 
any rul e made and promulgated 2*[by the 3* Government 4*] for 
putting any vessel into a state of quarantine, or for regulating the 
intercourse of vessels in a state of quarantine with the shore or with 
other vessels, for regulating the intercourse between places where an 
infectious disease prevails and other places, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both. 
272. 
Adulteration of food or drink intended for sale. 
272. Adulteration of food or drink intended for sale
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 121]
ulteration of food or drink intended for sale. 
272. Adulteration of food or drink intended for sale.-Whoever 
adulterates any article of food or drink, so as to make such article 
noxious as food or drink, intending to sell such article as food or 
drink, or knowing it to be likely that the same will be sold as food 
or drink, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description 
for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
273. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 122]
      
 
 
                
                   
             
 
                  
 
                   
 
               
 
                  
      
 
 
 
 
             
                  
                
          
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
                  
                 
              
              
               
                
             
              
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
                  
               
            
                 
            
                 
                   
                
          ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------
161 Sale of noxious food or drink. 
273. Sale of noxious food or drink.--Whoever sells, or offers or 
exposes for sale, as food or drink, any article which has been 
rendered or has become noxious, or is in a state unfit for food 
1. The word "and" omitted by Act 42 of 1953, s. 4 and the third Sch. 
2. Subs. by the A. O. 1937, for "by the G. of I., or by any Govt.". 
3. The words "Central or any Provincial" rep. by the A. O. 1950. 
4. The words "or the Crown Representative" were rep. by the A. O. 
1948. 
or drink, knowing or having reason to believe that the same is noxious 
as food or drink, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine 
which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
274. 
Adulteration of drugs. 
274. Adulteration of drugs.--Whoever adulterates any drug or 
medical preparation in such a manner as to lessen the efficacy or 
change the operation of such drug or medical preparation, or to make 
it noxious, intending that it shall be sold or used for, or knowing it 
to be likely that it will be sold or used for, any medicinal purpose, as it had not undergone such adulteration, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six 
months, or with fine which may extend to one t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 122]
ither description for a term which may extend to six 
months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with 
both. 
275. 
Sale of adulterated drugs. 
275. Sale of adulterated drugs.--Whoever, knowing any drug or 
medical preparation to have been adulterated in such a manner as to 
lessen its efficacy, to change its operation, or to render it noxious, sells the same, or offers or exposes it for sale, or issues it from 
any dispensary for medicinal purposes as unadulterated, or causes it 
to be used for medicinal purposes by any person not knowing of the 
adulteration, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 123]
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
                  
                  
          
                 
             
              
 
  
 
 
 
       
  
                    
                  
                                
              
          
  
 
  
     
  
               
                
              
              
        
 
 
 
  
        
 
 
                 
               
                
                 
                
          
 276. 
Sale of drug as a different drug or preparation. 
276. Sale of drug as a different drug or preparation.--Whoever 
knowingly sells, or offers or exposes for sale, or issues from a 
dispensary for medicinal purposes, any drug or medical preparation, as a different drug or medical preparation, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six 
months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with 
both. 
277. 
Fouling water of public spring or reservoir. 
277. Fouling water of public spring or reservoir.--Whoever 
voluntarily corrupts or fouls the water of any public spring or 
reservoir, so as to render it less fit for the purpose for which it is 
ordinarily used, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine 
which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
278. 
Making atmosphere noxious to health. 
278. Making atmosphere noxious to health.--Whoever voluntarily 
vitiates the atmosphere in any place so as to make it noxious to the 
health of persons in general dwelling or carrying on business in the 
neighbourhood or passing along a public way, shall be punished with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees. 
279. 
Rash driving or riding on a public way. 
279. Rash driving or riding on a public way.--Whoever drives any 
vehicle, or rides, on any public way in a manner so rash or negligent 
as to endanger human life, or to be likely to cause hurt or injury to 
any other person, sha
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 123]
ligent 
as to endanger human life, or to be likely to cause hurt or injury to 
any other person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine 
which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 124]
 
 
 
 
    
  
               
                   
              
            
               
  
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
                
                
              
            
        
 
 
 
 
 
  
           
 
                   
             
             
                      
           
                
       
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
                 
                   
                  
               
               
  162 280. 
Rash navigation of vessel. 
280. Rash navigation of vessel.--Whoever navigates any vessel in 
a manner so rash or negligent as to endanger human life, or to be 
likely to cause hurt or injury to any other person, shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or 
with both. 
281. 
Exhibition of false light, mark or buoy. 
281. Exhibition of false light, mark or buoy.--Whoever exhibits 
any false light, mark or buoy, intending or knowing it to be likely 
that such exhibition will mislead any navigator, shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
seven years, or with fine, or with both. 
282. 
Conveying person by water for hire in unsafe or overloaded vessel. 
282. Conveying person by water for hire in unsafe or overloaded 
vessel.--Whoever knowingly or negligently conveys, or causes to be 
conveyed for hire, any person by water in any vessel, when that vessel 
is in such a state or so loaded as to endanger the life of that 
person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend 
to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
283. 
Danger or obstruction in public way or line of navigation. 
283. Danger or obstruction in public way or line of navigation.- -
Whoever, by doing any act, or by omitting to take order with any 
property in his possession or under his charge, causes danger, 
obstruction or
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 124]
 take order with any 
property in his possession or under his charge, causes danger, 
obstruction or injury to any person in any public way or public line 
of navigation, shall be punished, with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 125]
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
                 
                
               
      
                     
                 
          
 
                 
               
      
 
 
 
 
 
         
  
                     
           
                
        
                     
              
                 
  
                  
               
      
 
 
 
 
 
       
  
                 
                 
               
      
                     
                 
          284. 
Negligent conduct with respect to poisonous substance. 
284. Negligent conduct with respect to poisonous substance.- -
Whoever does, with any poisonous substance, any act in a manner so 
rash or negligent as to endanger human life, or to be likely to cause hurt or injury to any person, 
or knowingly or negligently omits to take such order with any 
poisonous substance in his possession as is sufficient to guard against probable danger to human life from such poisonous substance, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to 
one thousand rupees, or with both. 
285. Negligent conduct with respect to fire or combustible matter. 
285. Negligent conduct with respect to fire or combustible 
matter.--Whoever does, with fire or any combustible matter, any act so 
rashly or negligently as to endanger human life, or to be likely to 
cause hurt or injury to any other person, 
or knowingly or negligently omits to take such order with any 
fire or any combustible matter in his possession as is sufficient to 
guard against any probable danger to human life from such fire or combustible matter, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
286. 
Negligent conduct with respect to explosive substance. 
286. Negligent conduct with respect to explosive substance.- -
Whoever does, with any
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 125]
ve substance. 
286. Negligent conduct with respect to explosive substance.- -
Whoever does, with any explosive substance, any act so rashly or 
negligently as to endanger human life, or to be likely to cause hurt 
or injury to any other person, 
or knowingly or negligently omits to take such order with any 
explosive substance in his possession as is sufficient to guard 
against any probable danger to human life from that substance, 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 126]
 
                 
               
      
  
 
  
      
  
              
               
                     
 
                     
                 
           
 
                 
               
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
 
               
              
            
              
                  
           
               
    
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
              
                    
              
                          
                163 shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
287. 
Negligent conduct with respect to machinery.- -
287. Negligent conduct with respect to machinery.--Whoever does, 
with any machinery, any act so rashly or negligently as to endanger 
human life or to be likely to cause hurt or injury to any other 
person, 
or knowingly or negligently omits to take such order with any 
machinery in his possession or under his care as is sufficient to 
guard against any probable danger to human life from such machinery, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to 
one thousand rupees, or with both. 
288. 
Negligent conduct with respect to pulling down or repairing 
buildings. 
288. Negligent conduct with respect to pulling down or repairing 
buildings.--Whoever, in pulling down or repairing any building, 
knowingly or negligently omits to take such order with that building 
as is sufficient to guard against any probable danger to human life 
from the fall of that building, or of any part thereof, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees, or with both. 
289. 
Negligent conduct with respect to animal. 
289. Negligent conduct with respect to animal.--Whoever knowingly 
or negligently omits to take suc
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 126]

289. Negligent conduct with respect to animal.--Whoever knowingly 
or negligently omits to take such order with any animal in his 
possession as is sufficient to guard against any probable danger to 
human life, or any probable danger of grievous hurt from such animal, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 127]
     
 
 
 
 
 
            
  
                     
                 
             
      
  
 
 
 
       
 
 
               
            
                     
            
             
     
  
 
 
 
      
 
 
                     
                 
          
                
             
                  
              
             
     
         
                     
                    
                 
                    
                
         
 
                      
                
                       thousand rupees, or with both. 
290. 
Punishment for public nuisance in cases not otherwise provided for. 
290. Punishment for public nuisance in cases not otherwise 
provided for.-Whoever commits a public nuisance in any case not 
otherwise punishable by this Code, shall be punished with fine which 
may extend to two hundred rupees. 
291. 
Continuance of nuisance after injunction to discontinue. 
291. Continuance of nuisance after injunction to discontinue.- -
Whoever repeats or continues a public nuisance, having been enjoined 
by any public servant who has lawful authority to issue such 
injunction not to repeat or continue such nuisance, shall be punished 
with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or 
with fine, or with both. 
292. 
Sale, etc., of obscene books, etc. 
1*[292. Sale, etc., of obscene books, etc.--2*[(1) For the 
purposes of sub-section (2), a book, pamphlet, paper, writing, 
drawing, painting representation, figure or any other object, shall be 
deemed to be obscene if it is lascivious or appeals to the prurient 
interest or if its effect, or (where it comprises two or more distinct 
items) the effect of any one of its items, is, if taken as a whole, such as to tend to deprave and corrupt persons who are likely, having 
regard to all relevant circumstances, to read, see or hear the matter 
contained or embodied in it.] 
3*[(2)] Whoever -
(a) sells, lets to hire, distributes, publicly exhibits o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 127]
ned or embodied in it.] 
3*[(2)] Whoever -
(a) sells, lets to hire, distributes, publicly exhibits or 
in any manner puts into circulation, or for purposes of sale, 
hire, distribution, public exhibition or circulation, makes, 
reduces or has in his possession any obscene book, pamphlet, paper, drawing, painting, representation or figure or any other 
obscene object whatsoever, or 
(b) imports, exports or conveys any obscene object for any 
of the purposes aforesaid, or knowing or having reason to believe 
that such object will be sold, let to hire, distributed or 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 128]
               
 
                       
                     
                    
               
               
 
                      
                                                      
 
                
 
           
 
              
 
 
 
 
 
                          
        
 
             
                
              
          
                 
     
 
           
                     
        
                           
                                         
                      
                   
                              
           
 
                      
          
 
                                                
               
 
                           
                    
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------
164 publicly exhibited or in any manner put into circulation, or 
(c) takes part in or receives profits from any business in 
the course of which he knows or has reason to believe that any 
such obscene objects are, for any of the purposes aforesaid, 
made, produced, purchased, kept, imported, exported, conveyed, publicly exhibited or in any manner put into circulation, or 
(d) advertises or makes known by any means whatsoever that 
any person is engaged or is ready to engage in any act which is an offence under this section, or that any such obscene object can be procured from or through any person, or 
1. Subs. by Act 8 of 1925, s. 2, for the original s. 292. 
2. Ins. by Act 36 of 1969, s. 2 
3. S. 292 renumbered as sub-section (2) thereof by s. 2, ibid. 
(e) offers or attempts to do any act which is an offence 
under this section, 
shall be punished 1 [on first conviction with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to two years, and with fine 
which may extend to two thousand rupees, and, in the event of a second 
or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment of either description fo
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 128]
 and, in the event of a second 
or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment of either description for 
a term which may extend to five years, and also with fine which may 
extend to five thousand rupees]. 
2*[Exception-This section does not extend to -
(a) any book, pamphlet, paper, writing, drawing, painting, 
representation or figure -
(i) the publication of which is proved to be justified 
as being for the public good on the ground that such book, 
pamphlet, paper, writing, drawing, painting, representation or figure is in the interest of science, literature, art or 
learning or other objects of general concern, or 
(ii) which is kept or used bona fide for religious 
purposes; 
(b) any representation sculptured, engraved, painted or 
otherwise represented on or in -
(i) any ancient monument within the meaning of the 
Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 
1958 (24 of 1958), or 
(ii) any temple, or on any car used for the conveyance 
of idols, or kept or used for any religious purpose.]] 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 129]
 
 
 
 
        
  
                      
             
              
             
                
                
               
               
              
        
 
 
 
  
    
 
 
                  
 
 
                    
 
                        
            
 
             
            
 
              
 
          
 
                
 
                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
                 
                   
                        ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------
165 293. 
Sale, etc., of obscene objects to young person. 
3*[293. Sale, etc., of obscene objects to young person.- -
Whoever sells, lets to hire, distributes, exhibits or circulates to 
any person under the age of twenty years any such obscene object as is 
referred to in the last preceding section, or offers or attempts so to do, shall be punished 1[on first conviction with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to three years, and 
with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, and, in the event 
of a second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and also with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees].] 
294. 
Obscene acts and songs. 
4*[294. Obscene acts and songs.--Whoever, to the annoyance of 
others, 
(a) does any obscene act in any public place, or 
(b) sings, recites or utters any obscene song, ballad or 
words, in or near any public place, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to three months, or with fine, or with both.] 
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1969, s. 2, for certain words. 
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for Exception. 
3. Subs. by Act 8 of 1925, s. 2, for the original s. 293. 
4. Subs. by Act 3 of 1895, s. 3, for the original s. 294. 
294A. 
Keeping lottery office. 
1*[294A. Keeping lottery office.--Whoever keeps a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 129]
 original s. 294. 
294A. 
Keeping lottery office. 
1*[294A. Keeping lottery office.--Whoever keeps any office or 
place for the purpose of drawing any lottery 2*[not being 3*[a 
State lottery] or a lottery authorised by the 4*[State] 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 130]
         
               
 
                  
                
                
                  
            
 
 
  
 
 
     
 
                                     
 
                           
 
 
 
 
 
                 
    
 
 
                      
                
               
            
                
           
                
              
  
  
 
  
           
          
                      
           
                
                 
                              
            
            
        
  Government], shall be punished with imprisonment of either description 
for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both. 
And whoever publishes any proposal to pay any sum, or to deliver 
any goods, or to do or forbear doing anything for the benefit of any person, on any event or contingency relative or applicable to the drawing of any ticket, lot, number or figure in any such lottery 
shall be punished with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.] 
CHAPTER XV 
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO RELIGION 
CHAPTER XV 
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO RELIGION 
295. 
Injuring or defiling place of worship, with intent to insult the 
religion of any class. 
295. Injuring or defiling place of worship, with intent to 
insult the religion of any class.--Whoever destroys, damages or 
defiles any place of worship, or any object held sacred by any class 
of persons with the intention of thereby insulting the religion of any 
class of persons or with the knowledge that any class of persons is 
likely to consider such destruction, damage or defilement as an insult 
to their religion, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
295A. 
Deliberate and malicious acts intended to outrage religious feelings 
of any class by insulting its religion or religious beliefs. 
5*[295A. Deliberate and malicious acts intended to outrage 
religious feelings of any class by 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 130]
fs. 
5*[295A. Deliberate and malicious acts intended to outrage 
religious feelings of any class by insulting its religion or religious beliefs.--Whoever, with deliberate and malicious intention of 
outraging the religious feelings of any class of 6*[citizens of 
India], 7*[by words, either spoken or written, or by signs or by visible representations or otherwise] insults or attempts to insult 
the religion or the religious beliefs of that class, shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
8*[three years], or with fine, or with both.] 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 131]
 
 
 
   
 
              
              
             
             
       
 
 
 
 
 
     
  
                    
             
             
              
     
 
                    
            
                      
              
       
 
             
 
              
 
                   
                   
                       
       
 
          
 
           
 
            
 
             
 
          
 
 
 
 
                 
             
 
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------296. 
Disturbing religious assembly. 
296. Disturbing religious assembly.--Whoever voluntarily causes 
disturbance to any assembly lawfully engaged in the performance of 
religious worship, or religious ceremonies, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one 
year, or with fine, or with both. 
297. 
Trespassing on burial places, etc. 
297. Trespassing on burial places, etc.--Whoever, with the 
intention of wounding the feelings of any person, or of insulting the 
religion of any person, or with the knowledge that the feelings of any 
person are likely to be wounded, or that the religion of any person is 
likely to be insulted thereby, 
commits any trespass in any place of worship or on any place of 
sepulture, or any place set apart for the performance of funeral rites 
or as a depository for the remains of the dead, or offers any 
indignity to any human corpse, or causes disturbance to any persons 
assembled for the performance of funeral ceremonies, 
1. S. 294A ins. by Act 27 of 1870, s. 10. 
2. Subs. by the A. O. 1937, for "not authorised by Government". 
3. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "a lottery organised 
by the Central Government or the Government of a Part A State or 
a Part B State" which had been subs. by the A.O. 1950, for "a 
State lottery". 
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for "Provincial". 
5. I
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 131]
 subs. by the A.O. 1950, for "a 
State lottery". 
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for "Provincial". 
5. Ins. by Act 25 of 1927, s. 2. 
6. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for "His Majesty's subjects". 
7. Subs. by Act 41 of 1961, s.3, for certain words. 
8. Subs. by s.3, ibid., for "two years". 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both. 166 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 132]
 
 
 
                
 
 
 
                     
               
                
               
                  
           
              
 
 
  
  
      
  
                                    
 
                          
 
                             
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
                  
             
              
                
  
                              
                        
              
               
                   
 
 
                            
                 
                     
                 
 
 
                      
                298. 
Uttering words, etc., with deliberate intent to wound religious 
feelings. 
298. Uttering words, etc., with deliberate intent to wound 
religious feelings.--Whoever, with the deliberate intention of wounding the religious feelings of any person, utters any word or 
makes any sound in the hearing of that person or makes any gesture in the sight of that person or places any object in the sight of that 
person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for 
a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both. 
CHAPTER XVI 
OF OFFENCES AFFECTING THE HUMAN BODY 
CHAPTER XVI 
OF OFFENCES AFFECTING THE HUMAN BODY 
Of offences affecting life 
299. 
Culpable homicide. 
299. Culpable homicide.--Whoever causes death by doing an act 
with the intention of causing death, or with the intention of causing 
such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, or with the knowledge 
that he is likely by such act to cause death, commits the offence of 
culpable homicide. 
Illustrations 
(a) A lays sticks and turf over a pit, with the intention of 
thereby causing death, or with the knowledge that death is likely to 
be thereby caused. Z, believing the ground to be firm, treads on it, falls in and is killed. A has committed the offence of culpable 
homicide. 
(b) A knows Z to be behind a bush. B does not know it. A, 
intending to cause, or knowing it to be likely to cause Z's de
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 132]
ehind a bush. B does not know it. A, 
intending to cause, or knowing it to be likely to cause Z's death, 
induces B to fire at the bush. B fires and kills Z. Here B may be 
guilty of no offence; but A has committed the offence of culpable 
homicide. 
(c) A, by shooting at a fowl with intent to kill and steal it, 
kills B, who is behind a bush; A not knowing that he was there. Here, 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 133]
                
                  
          
 
                 
                 
              
   
                
                  
           
      
                         
             
                  
                
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
              
                 
       
 
 
 
                   
                         
 
                 
                   
           
 
                      
           
               
                
   
 
                             
 
                        
    
                      
               
              
                
                 167 although A was doing an unlawful act, he was not guilty of culpable 
homicide, as he did not intend to kill B or to cause death by doing 
an act that he knew was likely to cause death. 
Explanation 1.-A person who causes bodily injury to another who 
is labouring under a disorder, disease or bodily infirmity, and 
thereby accelerates the death of that other, shall be deemed to have 
caused his death. 
Explanation 2.-Where death is caused by bodily injury, the person 
who causes such bodily injury shall be deemed to have caused the 
death, although by resorting to proper remedies and skilful treatment 
the death might have been prevented. 
Explanation 3.-The causing of the death of a child in the 
mother's womb is not homicide. But it may amount to culpable homicide 
to cause the death of a living child, if any part of that child has 
been brought forth, though the child may not have breathed or been 
completely born. 
300. 
Murder. 
300. Murder.--Except in the cases hereinafter excepted, culpable 
homicide is murder, if the act by which the death is caused is done 
with the intention of causing death, or-
2ndly.-If it is done with the intention of causing such bodily 
injury as the offender knows to be likely to cause the death of the 
person to whom the harm is caused. or-
3rdly.-If it is done with the intention of causing bodily injury 
to any pers
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 133]
he harm is caused. or-
3rdly.-If it is done with the intention of causing bodily injury 
to any person and the bodily injury intended to be inflicted is 
sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death, or-
4thly.-If the person committing the act knows that it is so 
imminently dangerous that it must, in all probability, cause death, or 
such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, and commits such act 
without any excuse for incurring the risk of causing death or such 
injury as aforesaid. 
Illustrations 
(a) A shoots Z with the intention of killing him. Z dies in 
consequence. A commits murder. 
(b) A, knowing that Z is labouring under such a disease that a 
blow is likely to cause his death, strikes him with the intention of 
causing bodily injury. Z dies in consequence of the blow. A is guilty 
of murder, although the blow might not have been sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause the death of a person in a sound 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 134]
                
               
                
               
                
      
 
                
                 
               
     
 
                     
               
           
 
                  
              
             
               
     
 
              
               
              
                  
              
      
 
                  
         
 
              
             
 
 
                              
 
                   
            
                 
              
   
 
                         
                 
                  
                    
 
 
                        
             
                  
       168 state of health. But if A, not knowing that Z is labouring under any 
disease, gives him such a blow as would not in the ordinary course of 
nature kill a person in a sound state of health, here A, although he 
may intend to cause bodily injury, is not guilty of murder, if he did 
not intend to cause death, or such bodily injury as in the ordinary 
course of nature would cause death. 
(c) A intentionally gives Z a sword-cut or club-wound sufficient 
to cause the death of a man in the ordinary course of nature. Z dies 
in consequence. Here A is guilty of murder, although he may not have 
intended to cause Z's death. 
(d) A without any excuse fires a loaded cannon into a crowd of 
persons and kills one of them. A is guilty of murder, although he may 
not have had a premeditated design to kill any particular individual. 
Exception 1.-When culpable homicide is not murder.-Culpable 
homicide is not murder if the offender, whilst deprived of the power 
of self-control by grave and sudden provocation, causes the death of 
the person who gave the provocation or causes the death of any other 
person by mistake or accident. 
The above exception is subject to the following provisos: -
First.-That the provocation is not sought or voluntarily provoked 
by the offender as an excuse for killing or doing 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 134]
rovocation is not sought or voluntarily provoked 
by the offender as an excuse for killing or doing harm to any person. 
Secondly.-That the provocation is not given by anything done in 
obedience to the law, or by a public servant in the lawful exercise of 
the powers of such public servant. 
Thirdly.-That the provocation is not given by anything done in 
the lawful exercise of the right of private defence. 
Explanation.-Whether the provocation was grave and sudden enough 
to prevent the offence from amounting to murder is a question of fact. 
Illustrations 
(a) A, under the influence of passion excited by a provocation 
given by Z, intentionally kills Y, Z's child. This is murder, inasmuch 
as the provocation was not given by the child, and the death of the 
child was not caused by accident or misfortune in doing an act caused 
by the provocation. 
(b) Y gives grave and sudden provocation to A. A, on this 
provocation, fires a pistol at Y, neither intending nor knowing 
himself to be likely to kill Z, who is near him, but out of sight. A 
kills Z. Here A has not committed murder, but merely culpable homicide. 
(c) A is lawfully arrested by Z, a bailiff. A is excited to 
sudden and violent passion by the arrest, and kills Z. This is murder, inasmuch as the provocation was given by a thing done by a public servant in the exercise of his powers. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 135]
 
                   
                 
                 
   
                     
                
             
               
        
 
                 
              
                 
             
     
 
                 
               
                  
                   
          
          
 
                              
 
                        
               
              
              
    
 
                  
                  
            
               
                  
            
 
                  
              
          
        
                  
       
 
                   
             
           
 
 
                               
 (d) A appears as a witness before Z, a Magistrate. Z says that he 
does not believe a word of A's deposition, and that A has perjured himself. A is moved to sudden passion by these words, and kills Z. 
This is murder. 
(e) A attempts to pull Z's nose. Z, in the exercise of the right 
of private defence, lays hold of A to prevent him from doing so. A is 
moved to sudden and violent passion in consequence, and kills Z. This 
is murder, inasmuch as the provocation was giving by a thing done in 
the exercise of the right of private defence. 
(f) Z strikes B. B is by this provocation excited to violent rage. 
A, a bystander, intending to take advantage of B's rage, and to cause 
him to kill Z, puts a knife into B's hand for that purpose. B kills Z 
with the knife. Here B may have committed only culpable homicide, but A is guilty of murder. 
Exception 2.-Culpable homicide is not murder if the offender in 
the exercise in good faith of the right of private defence or person 
or property, exceeds the power given to him by law and causes the 
death of the person against whom he is exercising such right of 
defence without premeditation, and without any intention of doing more 
harm than is necessary for the purpose of such defence. 
Illustration 
Z attempts to horsewhip A, not in such a manner as t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 135]
for the purpose of such defence. 
Illustration 
Z attempts to horsewhip A, not in such a manner as to cause 
grievous hurt to A. A draws out a pistol. Z persists in the assault. A 
believing in good faith that he can by no other means prevent himself 
from being horsewhipped, shoots Z dead. A has not committed murder, 
but only culpable homicide. 
Exception 3.-Culpable homicide is not murder if the offender, 
being a public servant or aiding a public servant acting for the 
advancement of public justice, exceeds the powers given to him by law, and causes death by doing an act which he, in good faith, believes to 
be lawful and necessary for the due discharge of his duty as such 
public servant and without ill-will towards the person whose death is 
caused. 
Exception 4.-Culpable homicide is not murder if it is committed 
without premeditation in a sudden fight in the heat of passion upon a 
sudden quarrel and without the offender's having taken undue advantage 
or acted in a cruel or unusual manner. 
Explanation.-It is immaterial in such cases which party offers 
the provocation or commits the first assault. 
Exception 5.-Culpable homicide is not murder when the person 
whose death is caused, being above the age of eighteen years, suffers 
death or takes the risk of death with his own consent. 
Illustration 169 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 136]
                
              
             
 
 
 
 
  
             
   
 
 
                    
           
                 
               
            
             
               
        
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
                  
               
    
 
 
 
  
     
 
 
             
                
   
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
                
              
             
               
                   
             A, by instigation, voluntarily causes Z, a person under eighteen 
years of age, to commit suicide. Here, on account of Z's youth, he was 
incapable of giving consent to his own death; A has therefore abetted 
murder. 
301. 
Culpable homicide by causing death of person other than person whose 
death was intended. 
301. Culpable homicide by causing death of person other than 
person whose death was intended.--If a person, by doing anything which he intends or knows to be likely to cause death, commits culpable homicide by causing the death of any person, whose death he neither 
intends nor knows himself to be likely to cause, the culpable homicide 
committed by the offender is of the description of which it would have 
been if he had caused the death of the person whose death he intended 
or knew himself to he likely to cause. 
302. 
Punishment for murder. 
302. Punishment for murder.--Whoever commits murder shall be 
punished with death, or 1*[imprisonment for life], and shall also 
be liable to fine. 
303. 
Punishment for murder by life-convict. 
303. Punishment for murder by life-convict.--Whoever, being under 
sentence of 1*[imprisonment for life], commits murder, shall be 
punished with death. 
304. 
Punishment for culpable homicide not amounting to murder. 
304. Punishment for culpable homicide not amounting to murder.- -
Whoever commits culpable homicide not amounting to murder shall be 
punished with 1*[imprisonment for life], or imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also 
be liable to fine, i
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 136]
f either 
description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also 
be liable to fine, if the act by which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing death. or of causing such bodily injury 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 137]
      
 
                  
                  
               
              
   
 
 
 
  
    
 
 
                    
               
              
              
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
                        
               
                
                  
                                
                  
 
              
                
    
 
                         
               
       
 
                
      
 
              
 
             
 
 
 
 
 
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------as is likely to cause death; 
or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to ten years, or with fine, or with both, if the act is done 
with the knowledge that it is likely to cause death, but without any 
intention to cause death, or to cause such bodily injury as is likely to cause death. 
304A. 
Causing death by negligence. 
2*[304A. Causing death by negligence.--Whoever causes the 
death of any person by doing any rash or negligent act not amounting 
to culpable homicide shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or 
with both.] 
304B. Dowry death. 
3*[304B. Dowry death.--(1) Where the death of a woman is 
caused by any burns or bodily injury or occurs otherwise than under 
normal circumstances within seven years of her marriage and it is 
shown that soon before her death she was subjected to cruelty or 
harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband for, or in 
connection with, any demand for dowry, such death shall be called 
"dowry death", and such husband or relative shall be deemed to have 
caused her death. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section, "dowry" shall 
have the same meaning as in section 2 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 
1961 (28 of 1961). 
(2) Whoever commits dowry death shall be punished with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years but 
which may extend to imprisonme
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 137]
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years but 
which may extend to imprisonment for life.] 
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for 
life". 
2. S. 304A was ins. by Act 27 of 1870, s. 12. 
3. Ins. by Act 43 of 1986, s. 10 (w.e.f. 19-11-1986). 
305. 170 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 138]
 
        
 
 
                     
             
               
                 
              
              
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
              
                    
             
        
  
 
  
   
 
 
               
                
                
             
                                      
            
 
 
 
   
 
 
                
                 
         
 
                             
 
                          
              
      
 
                       
             
             
 Abetment of suicide of child or insane person. 
305. Abetment of suicide of child or insane person.--If any 
person under eighteen years of age, any insane person, any delirious 
person, any idiot, or any person in a state of intoxication commits 
suicide, whoever abets the commission of such suicide, shall be 
punished with death or 1*[imprisonment for life], or imprisonment 
for a term not exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
306. 
Abetment of suicide. 
306. Abetment of suicide.--If any person commits suicide, whoever 
abets the commission of such suicide, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten 
years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
307. 
Attempt to murder. 
307. Attempt to murder.--Whoever does any act with such intention 
or knowledge, and under such circumstances that, if he by that act 
caused death, he would be guilty of murder, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten 
years, and shall also be liable to fine; and, if hurt is caused to any 
person by such act, the offender shall be liable either to 
1*[imprisonment for life], or to such punishment as is hereinbefore 
mentioned. 
Attempts by life-convicts. 
Attempts by life-convicts.-2*[When any person offending under 
this section is under sentence of 1*[imprisonment for life], he 
may, if hurt is caused, be punished with death.] 
Illustrations 
(a) A shoots at Z with i
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 138]
life], he 
may, if hurt is caused, be punished with death.] 
Illustrations 
(a) A shoots at Z with intention to kill him, under such 
circumstances that, if death ensued A would be guilty of murder. A is liable to punishment under this section 
(b) A, with the intention of causing the death of a child of 
tender years, exposes it in a desert place A has committed the offence defined by this section, though the death of the child does not ensue. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 139]
                     
               
               
                     
      
 
                     
                
              
                      
       
 
 
 
 
 
     
  
                
           
               
           
              
                
             
           
 
                
      
 
          
 
             
 
 
 
                               
                     
             
                
     
  
 
  
    
  
                   
            
               
        
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------
171 (c) A, intending to murder Z, buys a gun and loads it. A has not 
yet committed the offence. A fires the gun at Z. He has committed the 
offence defined in this section, and, if by such firing he wounds Z, 
he is liable to the punishment provided by the latter part of 
3*[the first paragraph of] this section. 
(d) A, intending to murder Z by poison, purchases poison and 
mixes the same with food which remains in A's keeping; A has not yet 
committed the offence in this section. A places the food on Z's table 
or delivers it to Z's servants to place it on Z's table. A has 
committed the offence defined in this section. 
308. 
Attempt to commit culpable homicide. 
308. Attempt to commit culpable homicide.--Whoever does any act 
with such intention or knowledge and under such circumstances that, if 
he by that act caused death, he would be guilty of culpable homicide 
not amounting to murder, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, 
or with both; and, if hurt is caused to any person by such act, shall 
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which 
may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both. 
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for 
life". 
2. Ins. by Act 27 of 1870, 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 139]
bs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for 
life". 
2. Ins. by Act 27 of 1870, s.11. 
3. Ins. by Act 12 of 1891, s.2 and Sch. II. 
Illustration 
A, on grave and sudden provocation, fires a pistol at Z, under 
such circumstances that if he there by caused death he would be guilty 
of culpable homicide not amounting to murder. A has committed the 
offence defined in this section. 
309. 
Attempt to commit suicide. 
309. Attempt to commit suicide.--Whoever attempts to commit 
suicide and does any act towards the commission of such offence, shall 
be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
one year 1*[or with fine, or with both.] 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 140]
 
 
 
 
 
  
                  
            
                  
      
  
 
 
 
 
  
                    
          
 
            
                 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
                
                
                     
            
                
               
             
    
 
                 
     
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
                   
            
                
                      
             
        310. 
Thug. 
310. Thug.--Whoever, at any time after the passing of this Act, 
shall have been habitually associated with any other or others for the 
purpose of committing robbery or child-stealing by means of or 
accompanied with murder, is a thug. 
311. 
Punishment. 
311. Punishment.--Whoever is a thug, shall be punished with 
2[imprisonment for life], and shall also be liable to fine. 
Of the causing of miscarriage, of injuries to unborn children, of the 
exposure of infants, and of the concealment of births. 
312. 
Causing miscarriage. 
312. Causing miscarraige.--Whoever voluntarily causes a woman 
with child to miscarry, shall if such miscarriage be not caused in 
good faith for the purpose of saving the life of the woman, be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both; and, if the woman 
be quick with child, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also 
be liable to fine. 
Explanation.-A woman who causes herself to miscarry, is within 
the meaning of this section. 
313. 
Causing miscarriage without woman's consent. 
313. Causing miscarriage without woman's consent.--Whoever 
commits the offence defined in the last preceding section without the 
consent of the woman, whether the woman is quick with child or not, 
shall be punished with 2*[imprisonment for life], or with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 140]
cription for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 141]
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
                
              
                           
         
 
 
      
 
 
                     
                  
         
 
                      
           
 
 
 
 
 
               
    
 
 
                  
               
             
                  
 
 
                     
       
                
      
 
 
 
 
                  
                 
                    
             
       
 
 
 
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------314. 
Death caused by act done with intent to cause miscarriage. 
314. Death caused by act done with intent to cause miscarriage.- -
Whoever, with intent to cause the miscarriage of a woman with child, 
does any act which causes the death of such woman, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
ten years, and shall also be liable to fine; 
if act done without woman's consent. 
if act done without woman's consent.--and if the act is done 
without the consent of the woman, shall be punished either with 
2*[imprisonment for life], or with the punishment above mentioned. 
Explanation.-It is not essential to this offence that the 
offender should know that the act is likely to cause death. 
315. 
Act done with intent to prevent child being born alive or to cause it 
to die after birth. 
315. Act done with intent to prevent child being born alive or to 
cause it to die after birth.--Whoever before the birth of any child does any act with the intention of thereby preventing that child from being born alive or causing it to die after its birth, and does by 
such 
1. Subs. by Act 8 of 1882, s. 7, for "and shall also be liable to 
fine". 
2. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for life". 
act prevent that child from being born alive, or causes it to die 
after its birth, shall, if such act be not caused in good faith fo
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 141]
 born alive, or causes it to die 
after its birth, shall, if such act be not caused in good faith for 
the purpose of saving the life of the mother, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten 
years, or with fine, or with both. 
316. 172 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 142]
 
                 
 
 
 
                     
            
                    
                   
           
              
 
                              
 
                      
                
              
                
            
 
 
 
 
 
               
     
 
 
                   
                 
               
                 
               
                
        
                
               
        
  
 
  
         
  
                    
             
              
                
           
             
 
                                 
  Causing death of quick unborn child by act amounting to culpable 
homicide. 
316. Causing death of quick unborn child by act amounting to 
culpable homicide.--Whoever does any act under such circumstances, that if he thereby caused death he would be guilty of culpable 
homicide, and does by such act cause the death of a quick unborn 
child, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
Illustration 
A, knowing that he is likely to cause the death of a pregnant 
woman, does an act which, if it caused the death of the woman, would amount to culpable homicide. The woman is injured, but does not die; 
but the death of an unborn quick child with which she is pregnant is 
thereby caused. A is guilty of the offence defined in this section. 
317. 
Exposure and abandonment of child under twelve years, by parent or 
person having care of it. 
317. Exposure and abandonment of child under twelve years, by 
parent or person having care of it.--Whoever being the father or 
mother of a child under the age of twelve years, or having the care of 
such child, shall expose or leave such child in any place with the 
intention of wholly abandoning such child, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
seven years, or with fine, or with both. 
Explanation.-This section i
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 142]
or a term which may extend to 
seven years, or with fine, or with both. 
Explanation.-This section is not intended to prevent the trial of 
the offender for murder or culpable homicide, as the case may be, if 
the child die in consequence of the exposure. 
318. 
Concealment of birth by secret disposal of dead body. 
318. Concealment of birth by secret disposal of dead body.- -
Whoever, by secretly burying or otherwise disposing of the dead body 
of a child whether such child die before or after or during its birth, 
intentionally conceals or endeavors to conceal the birth of such child, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
Of hurt 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 143]
 
 
 
 
 
                 
       
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
                       
   
 
           
 
                  
                   
 
                
 
                  
          
                 
 
                  
                     
                   
             
 
 
  
 
  
   
  
                  
            
                    
            
 
 
 
 
 
    173 319. 
Hurt. 
319. Hurt.--Whoever causes bodily pain, disease or infirmity to 
any person is said to cause hurt. 
320. 
Grievous hurt. 
320. Grievous hurt.--The following kinds of hurt only are 
designated as "grievous": -
First.-Emasculation. 
Secondly.-Permanent privation of the sight of either eye. 
Thirdly.-Permanent privation of the hearing of either ear. 
Fourthly.-Privation of any member or joint. 
Fifthly.-Destruction or permanent impairing of the powers of 
any member or joint. 
Sixthly.-Permanent disfiguration of the head or face. 
Seventhly.-Fracture or dislocation of a bone or tooth. 
Eighthly.-Any hurt which endangers life or which causes the 
sufferer to be during the space of twenty days in severe bodily 
pain, or unable to follow his ordinary pursuits. 
321. 
Voluntarily causing hurt. 
321. Voluntarily causing hurt.--Whoever does any act with the 
intention of thereby causing hurt to any person, or with the knowledge 
that he is likely thereby to cause hurt to any person, and does 
thereby cause hurt to any person, is said "voluntarily to cause hurt". 
322. 
Voluntarily causing grievous hurt. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 144]
 
 
                
              
                
          
 
                
                
                       
           
                  
     
 
                              
 
                     
                    
               
             
  
 
 
 
     
  
             
             
             
               
    
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
                  
             
                 
                 
              
               
                     
                
                  
                
        
 
 
 
 
 322. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt.--Whoever voluntarily 
causes hurt, if the hurt which he intends to cause or knows himself to 
be likely to cause is grievous hurt, and if the hurt which he causes 
is grievous hurt, is said "voluntarily to cause grievous hurt". 
Explanation.-A person is not said voluntarily to cause grievous 
hurt except when he both causes grievous hurt and intends or knows 
himself to be likely to cause grievous hurt. But he is said 
voluntarily to cause grievous hurt, if intending or knowing himself to be likely to cause grievous hurt of one kind, he actually causes 
grievous hurt of another kind. 
Illustration 
A, intending of knowing himself to be likely permanently to 
disfigure Z's face, gives Z a blow which does not permanently 
disfigure Z's face, but which causes Z to suffer severe bodily pain 
for the space of twenty days. A has voluntarily caused grievous hurt. 
323. Punishment for voluntarily causing hurt. 
323. Punishment for voluntarily causing hurt.--Whoever, except in 
the case provided for by section 334, voluntarily causes hurt, shall 
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which 
may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees, or with both. 
324. 
Voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous weapons or means. 
324. Voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous weapons or means.- -
Whoever, except in the case provided for by section
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 144]
y causing hurt by dangerous weapons or means.- -
Whoever, except in the case provided for by section 334, voluntarily 
causes hurt by means of any instrument for shooting, stabbing or 
cutting, or any instrument which, used as a weapon of offence, is 
likely to cause death, or by means of fire or any heated substance, or by means of any poison or any corrosive substance, or by means of any 
explosive substance or by means of any substance which it is 
deleterious to the human body to inhale, to swallow, or to receive 
into the blood, or by means of any animal, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
325. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 145]
      
 
 
              
               
                   
             
    
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
                  
                
                 
                
                 
                  
              
                 
                  
                 
             
        
 
                
      
 
 
 
  
 
  
               
    
 
 
               
               
            
           
             
            
             
             
 
 
 
 
 
                  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------
174 Punishment for voluntarily causing grievous hurt 
325. Punishment for voluntarily causing grievous hurt.-Whoever, 
except in the case provided for by section 335, voluntarily causes 
grievous hurt, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also 
be liable to fine. 
326. 
Voluntarily causing grievous hurt by dangerous weapons or means. 
326. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt by dangerous weapons or 
means.--Whoever, except in the case provided for by section 335, 
voluntarily causes grievous hurt by means of any instrument for 
shooting, stabbing or cutting, or any instrument which, used as a 
weapon of offence, is likely to cause death, or by means of fire or 
any heated substance, or by means of any poison or any corrosive 
substance, or by means of any explosive substance, or by means of any 
substance which it is deleterious to the human body to inhale, to 
swallow, or to receive into the blood, or by means of any animal, 
shall be punished with 1*[imprisonment for life], or with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten 
years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
1. Subs, by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for 
life". 
327. 
Voluntarily causing hurt to extort property, or to constrain to an 
illegal to 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 145]
n for 
life". 
327. 
Voluntarily causing hurt to extort property, or to constrain to an 
illegal to an act. 
327. Voluntarily causing hurt to extort property, or to constrain 
to an illegal to an act.--Whoever voluntarily causes hurt, for the purpose of extorting from the sufferer, or from any person interested in the sufferer, any property or valuable security, or of constraining 
the sufferer or any person interested in such sufferer to do anything 
which is illegal or which may facilitate the commission of an offence, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
328. 
Causing hurt by means of poison, etc., with intent to commit and 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 146]
 
 
 
                 
                
          
                   
                 
                  
            
           
 
 
 
 
 
           
    
 
 
                
         
                 
              
           
             
             
             
        
 
 
 
  
                     
   
 
 
                 
            
             
              
                  
            
                  
                
                    
            
                
  
                              
 
                       
              
 
 offence. 
328. Causing hurt by means of poison, etc., with intent to commit 
and offence.--Whoever administers to or causes to be taken by any 
person any poison or any stupefying, intoxicating or unwholesome drug, or other thing with intent to cause hurt to such person, or with 
intent to commit or to facilitate the commission of an offence or 
knowing it to be likely that he will thereby cause hurt, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
329. 
Voluntarily causing grievous hurt to extort property, or to constrain 
to an illegal act. 
329. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt to extort property, or to 
constrain to an illegal act.--Whoever voluntarily causes grievous hurt for the purpose of extorting from the sufferer or from any person 
interested in the sufferer any property or valuable security, or of 
constraining the sufferer or any person interested in such sufferer to 
do anything that is illegal or which may facilitate the commission of 
an offence, shall be punished with 1*[imprisonment for life], or 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten 
years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
330. 
Voluntarily causing hurt to extort confession or to compel 
restoration of property. 
320. Voluntarily causing hurt to extort confession or to compel 
restoration of property.-
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 146]
roperty. 
320. Voluntarily causing hurt to extort confession or to compel 
restoration of property.--Whoever voluntarily causes hurt, for the purpose of extorting from the sufferer or from any person interested in the sufferer, any confession or any information which may lead to 
the detection of an offence or misconduct, or for the purpose of 
constraining the sufferer or any person interested in the sufferer to 
restore or to cause the restoration of any property or valuable 
security or to satisfy any claim or demand, or to give information which may lead to the restoration of any property or valuable 
security, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description 
for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable 
to fine. 
Illustriations 
(a) A, a police-officer, tortures Z in order to induce Z to 
confess that he committed a crime. A is guily of an offence under this 
section. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 147]
                    
             
   
 
                     
                
   
 
                     
            
  
 
 
 
            
   
 
 
                
               
              
                     
                     
               
 
 
                
      
 
 
 
 
              
              
                   
            
             
     
 
 
 
  
          
  
                  
             
               
                
            
                 
              
                
        
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------
175 (b) A, a police-officer, tortures B to induce him to point out 
where certain stolen property is deposited. A is guilty of an offence 
under this section. 
(c) A, a revenue officer, tortures z in order to compel him to 
pay certain arrears of revenue due from Z. A is guilty of an offence 
under this section. 
(d) A, a zamindar, tortures a raiyat in order to compel him to 
pay his rent. A is guilty of an offence under this section. 
331. 
Voluntarily causing grievous hurt to extort confession, or to compel 
restoration of property. 
331. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt to extort confession, or 
to compel restoration of property.--Whoever voluntarily causes grievous hurt for the purpose of extorting from the sufferer or from 
any person interested in the sufferer any confession or any 
information which may lead to the detection of an offence or 
misconduct, or for the purpose of constraining the sufferer or any 
person 
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for 
life". 
interested in the sufferer to restore or to cause the restoration of 
any property or valuable security, or to satisfy any claim or demand 
or to give information which may lead to the restoration of any property or valuable security shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a te
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 147]
ny property or valuable security shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall 
also be liable to fine. 
332. 
Voluntarily causing hurt to deter public servant from his duty. 
332. Voluntarily causing hurt to deter public servant from his 
duty.--Whoever voluntarily causes hurt to any person being a public 
servant in the discharge of his duty as such public servant, or with 
intent to prevent or deter that person or any other public servant from discharging his duty as such public servant, or in consequence of 
anything done or attempted to be done by that person in the lawful 
discharge of his duty as such public servant, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
three years, or with fine, or with both. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 148]
 
 
 
 
              
 
 
 
                 
          
                 
               
            
             
                 
            
           
  
 
  
     
 
 
                      
           
                 
            
             
               
 
 
 
 
  
      
 
 
              
          
             
                 
             
                
     
                      
      
  
 
 
 
        
 333. 
Voluntarily causing grievous hurt to deter public servant from his 
duty. 
333. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt to deter public servant 
from his duty.--Whoever voluntarily causes grievous hurt to any person being a public servant in the discharge of his duty as such public servant, or with intent to prevent or deter that person or any other 
public servant from discharging his duty as such public servant, or in 
consequence of anything done or attempted to be done by that person in 
the lawful discharge of his duty as such public servant, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
334. 
Voluntarily causing hurt on provocation. 
334. Voluntarily causing hurt on provocation.--Whoever 
voluntarily causes hurt on grave and sudden provocation, if he neither 
intends nor knows himself to be likely to cause hurt to any person 
other than the person who gave the provocation, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one 
month, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with 
both. 
335. 
Voluntarily causing grievous hurt on provocation. 
335. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt on provocation.--Whoever 
1*[voluntarily] causes grievous hurt on grave and sudden provocation, 
if he neither intends nor knows himself to be likely to cause grievous 
hurt to any person other than the person who gave the provocation 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
wh
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 148]
n who gave the provocation 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to four years, or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or with both. 
Explanation.-The last two sections are subject to the same 
provisos as Exception 1, section 300. 
336. 
Act endangering life or personal safety of others. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 149]
 
               
              
           
               
            
 
 
 
 
 
           
  
                  
             
               
           
                
       
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              
 
 
 
                  
           
                 
               
               
           
 
                  
  
 
  
  
 
 
                 
              
                 
   
                   
               ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------176 336. Act endangering life or personal safety of others.--Whoever 
does any act so rashly or negligently as to endanger human life or the 
personal safety others, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to three months or with fine 
which may extend to two hundred and fifty rupees, or with both. 
337. 
Causing hurt by act endangering life or personal safety of others. 
337. Causing hurt by act endangering life or personal safety of 
others.--Whoever causes hurt to any person by doing any act so rashly 
or negligently as to endanger human life, or the personal safety of 
others, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for 
a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend 
to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
1. Ins. by Act 8 of 1882, s. 8, 
338. 
Causing grievous hurt by act endangering life or personal safety of 
others. 
338. Causing grievous hurt by act endangering life or personal 
safety of others.--Whoever causes grievous hurt to any person by doing 
any act so rashly or negligently as to endanger human life, or the 
personal safety of others, shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with 
fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
Of wrongful restraint and wrongful confinement 
339. 
Wrongful restraint. 
339
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 149]
upees, or with both. 
Of wrongful restraint and wrongful confinement 
339. 
Wrongful restraint. 
339. Wrongful restraint.--Whoever voluntarily obstructs any 
person so as to prevent that person from proceeding in any direction 
in which that person has a right to proceed, is said wrongfully to 
restrain that person. 
Exception.-The obstruction of a private way over land or water 
which a person in good faith believes himself to have a lawful right 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 150]
            
 
                              
 
                         
                   
        
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
                
                 
          
  
 
                             
 
                        
                     
        
 
                   
                 
   
  
 
  
    
  
                 
            
                
      
 
 
 
 
 
    
  
               
               
                
           
  
 
 to obstruct, is not an offence within the meaning of this section. 
Illustration 
A obstructs a path along which Z has a right to pass. A not 
believing in good faith that he has a right to stop the path. Z is 
thereby prevented from passing. A wrongfully restrains Z. 
340. 
Wrongful confinement. 
340. Wrongful confinement.--Whoever wrongfully restrains any 
person in such a manner as to prevent that person from proceeding 
beyond certain circumscribing limits, is said "wrongfully to confine" 
that person. 
Illustrations 
(a) A causes Z to go within a walled space, and locks Z. Z is 
thus prevented from proceeding in any direction beyond the 
circumscribing line of wall. A wrongfully confines z. 
(b) A places men with firearms at the outlets of a building, and 
tells Z that they will fire at Z if Z attempts leave the building. A 
wrongfully confines Z. 
341. 
Punishment for wrongful restraint. 
341. Punishment for wrongful restraint.--Whoever wrongfully 
restrains any person shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to 
five hundred rupees, or with both. 
342. 
Punishment for wrongful confinement. 
342. Punishment for wrongful confinement.--Whoever wrongfully 
confines any person shall be punished with simple imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with 
fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
343. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 150]
 both. 
343. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 151]
 
       
 
 
                    
                  
            
          
  
 
 
 
       
 
                       
                   
            
           
 
 
  
 
  
               
 
  
               
               
                
           
                     
             
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
             
                    
              
              
                  
           
            
                   
     
  177 Wrongful confinement for three or more days. 
343. Wrongful confinement for three or more days.--Whoever 
wrongfully confines any person for three days or more, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
344. 
Wrongful confinement for ten or more days. 
344. Wrongful confinement for ten or more days.--Whoever 
wrongfully confines any person for ten days, or more, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
345. 
Wrongful confinement of person for whose liberation writ has been 
issued. 
345. Wrongful confinement of person for whose liberation writ has 
been issued.--Whoever keeps any person in wrongful confinement, knowing that a writ for the liberation of that person has been duly 
issued, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for 
a term which may extend to two years in addition to any term of imprisonment to which he may be liable under any other section of this 
Chapter. 
346. 
Wrongful confinement in secret. 
346. Wrongful confinement in secret.--Whoever wrongfully confines 
any person in such manner as to indicate an intention that the 
confinement of such person may not be known to any person interested 
in the person so confined, or to any public servant, or that the place 
of such confinement may not be known to or discovered by any such person or public servant as hereinbefore mentioned, shall be punished 
wit
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 151]
or discovered by any such person or public servant as hereinbefore mentioned, shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
two years in addition to any other punishment to which he may be 
liable for such wrongful confinement. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 152]
 
 
 
          
 
                   
           
             
                  
               
                
                 
                
         
  
 
 
 
            
 
 
 
                     
          
                  
             
                
                   
                     
               
                     
             
            
         
 
                         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                        
            
               
               
                   
              
                 
                 
             
     
 347. 
Wrongful confinement to extort property, or constrain to illegal act. 
347. Wrongful confinement to extort property, or constrain to 
illegal act.--Whoever wrongfully confines any person for the purpose 
of extorting from the person confined, or from any person interested 
in the person confined, any property or valuable security or of 
constraining the person confined or any person interested in such person to do anything illegal or to give any information which may 
facilitate the commission of an offence, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
three years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
348. 
Wrongful confinement to extort confession, or compel restoration of 
property. 
348. Wrongful confinement to extort confession, or compel 
restoration of property.--Whoever wrongfully confines any person for the purpose of extorting from the person confined or any person 
interested in the person confined any confession or any information 
which may lead to the detection of an offence or misconduct, or for 
the purpose of constraining the person confined or any person 
interested in the person confined to restore or to cause the 
restoration of any property or valuable security or to satisfy any 
claim or demand, or to give information which may lead to the 
restoration of any property or valuable security, shall be punished 
with 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 152]
on which may lead to the 
restoration of any property or valuable security, shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
three years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
Of criminal force and assault 
349. 
Force. 
349. Force.--A person is said to use force to another if he 
causes motion, change of motion, or cessation of motion to that other, 
or if he causes to any substance such motion, or change of motion, or 
cessation of motion as brings that substance into contact with any 
part of that other's body, or with anything which that other is wearing or carrying, or with anything so situated that such contact 
affects that other's sense of feeling: Provided that the person 
causing the motion, or change of motion, or cessation of motion, 
causes that motion, change of motion, or cessation of motion in one of 
the three ways hereinafter described: 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 153]
          
 
                  
                  
             
 
                
    
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
                 
             
                    
                  
               
        
 
                             
 
                       
               
               
                
                   
                   
               
              
           
 
                      
              
               
              
                 
         
 
                   
             
                
                    
                     
    
 
                  
                    
             
                  
                
    178 First.-By his own bodily power. 
Secondly.-By disposing any substance in such a manner that the 
motion or change or cessation of motion takes place without any 
further act on his part, or on the part of any other person. 
Thirdly.-By inducing any animal to move, to change its motion, or 
to cease to move. 
350. 
Criminal force. 
350. Criminal force.--Whoever intentionally uses force to any 
person, without that person's consent, in order to the committing of 
any offence, or intending by the use of such force to cause, or 
knowing it to be likely that by the use of such force he will cause 
injury, fear or annoyance to the person to whom the force is used, is 
said to use criminal force to that other. 
Illustrations 
(a) Z is sitting in a moored boat on a river. A unfastens the 
moorings, and thus intentionally causes the boat to drift down the 
stream. Here A intentionally causes motion to Z, and he does this by 
disposing substances in such a manner that the motion is produced 
without any other action on any person's part. A has therefore 
intentionally used force to Z; and if he has done so without Z's 
consent, in order to the committing of any offence, or intending or 
knowing it to be likely that this use of force will cause injury, fear 
or annoyance to Z, A has used crimin
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 153]
it to be likely that this use of force will cause injury, fear 
or annoyance to Z, A has used criminal force to Z. 
(b) Z is riding in a chariot. A lashes Z's horses and thereby 
causes them to quicken their pace. Here A has caused change of motion 
to Z by inducing the animals to change their motion. A has therefore 
used force to Z; and if A has done this without Z's consent, intending or knowing it to be likely that he may thereby injure, frighten or 
annoy Z, A has used criminal force to Z. 
(c) Z is riding in a palanquin. A, intending to rob Z, seizes the 
pole and stops the palanquin. Here A has caused cessation of motion to 
Z, and he has done this by his own bodily power. A has therefore used 
force to Z; and as A has acted thus intentionally, without Z's 
consent, in order to the commiss ion of an offence. A has used 
criminal force to Z. 
(d) A intentionally pushes against Z in the street. Here A has by 
his own bodily power moved his own person so as to bring it into 
contact with Z. He has therefore intentionally used force to Z; and if 
he has done so without Z's consent, intending or knowing it to be 
likely that he may thereby injure, frighten or annoy Z, he has used criminal force to Z. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 154]
 
                    
                    
             
               
               
                  
              
            
                 
               
                   
         
                      
              
              
                 
              
               
              
   
 
 
                    
                      
    
  
 
  
 
  
                  
             
                 
             
      
 
                    
             
                 
 
                              
                     
                 
    
 
                  
               
                 179 (e) A throws a stone, intending or knowing it to be likely that 
the stone will be thus brought into contact with Z, or with Z's clothes, or with something carried by Z, or that it will strike water, 
and dash up the water against Z's clothes or something carried by Z. 
Here, if the throwing of the stone produce the effect of causing any substance to come into contact with Z, or Z's clothes, A has used 
force to Z, and if he did so without Z's consent, intending thereby to 
injure, frighten or annoy Z, he has used criminal force to Z. 
(f) A intentionally pulls up a Woman's veil. Here A intentionally 
uses force to her, and if he does so without her consent intending or 
knowing it to be likely that he may thereby injure, frighten or 
annoy her, he has used criminal force to her. 
(g) Z is bathing. A pours into the bath water which he knows to 
be boiling. Here A intentionally by his own bodily power causes such 
motion in the boiling water as brings that water into contact with Z, 
or with other water so situated that such contact must affect Z's 
sense of feeling, A has therefore intentionally used force to Z; and 
if he has done this without Z's consent intending or knowing it to be 
likely that he may thereby cause injury, fear or annoyance to Z, A has 
used criminal force. 
(h) A incites a dog to spring upon Z, without Z's
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 154]
ar or annoyance to Z, A has 
used criminal force. 
(h) A incites a dog to spring upon Z, without Z's consent. Here, 
if A intends to cause injury, fear or annoyance to Z, he uses 
criminal force to Z. 
351. 
Assault. 
351. Assault.--Whoever makes any gesture, or any preparation 
intending or knowing it to be likely that such gesture or preparation 
will cause any person present to apprehend that he who makes that 
gesture or preparation is about to use criminal force to that person, is said to commit an assault. 
Explanation.-Mere words do not amount to an assault. But the 
words which a person uses may give to his gestures or preparation such a meaning as may make those gestures or preparations amount to an assault. 
Illustrations 
(a) A shakes his fist at Z, intending or knowing it to be likely 
that he may thereby cause Z to believe that A is about to strike Z. A 
has committed an assault. 
(b) A begins to unloose the muzzle of a ferocious dog, intending 
or knowing it to be likely that he may thereby cause Z to believe that 
he is about to cause the dog to attack Z. A has committed an assault 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 155]
  
 
                    
                      
                
          
       
 
 
 
  
                
 
                   
             
              
           
              
       
                
              
               
  
                   
                    
 
                       
       
 
                 
       
  
 
  
              
  
                       
           
                 
               
                
                 
              
             
       
 
 upon Z. 
(c) A takes up a stick, saying to Z, "I will give you a beating". 
Here, though the words used by A could in no case amount to an 
assault, and though the mere gesture, unaccompanied by any other 
circumstances, might not amount to an assault,the gesture explained by the words may amount to an assault. 
352. 
Punishment for assault or criminal force otherwise than on grave 
provocation. 
352. Punishment for assault or criminal force otherwise than on 
grave provocation.--Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any person otherwise than on grave and sudden provocation given by that 
person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for 
a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend 
to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
Explanation.-Grave and sudden provocation will not mitigate the 
punishment for an offence under this section, if the provocation is 
sought or voluntarily provoked by the offender as an excuse for the 
offence, or 
if the provocation is given by anything done in obedience to the 
law, or by a public servant, in the lawful exercise of the powers of such public servant, or 
if the provocation is given by anything done in the lawful 
exercise of the right of private defence. 
Whether the provocation was grave and sudden enough to mitigate 
the offence, is a question of fact. 
353. 
Assault or criminal force to deter public servant from discharge of 
his duty. 
353. Assault or criminal for
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 155]
or criminal force to deter public servant from discharge of 
his duty. 
353. Assault or criminal force to deter public servant from 
discharge of his duty.--Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any person being a public servant in the execution of his duty as such 
public servant, or with intent to prevent or deter that person from 
discharging his duty as such public servant, or in consequence of anything done or attempted to be done by such person to the lawful 
discharge of his duty as such public servant, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two 
years, or with fine, or with both. 
180 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 156]
 
 
 
 
 
                    
 
 
 
                   
             
               
              
              
  
 
 
 
 
 
            
    
 
 
                 
                
               
             
           
              
 
 
 
 
 
                 
    
  
                     
          
                
                   
             
       
 
 
 
 
 
           
  
                
              
            
             354. 
Assault or criminal force to woman with intent to outrage her 
modesty. 
354. Assault or criminal force to woman with intent to outrage 
her modesty.--Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any woman, intending to outrage or knowing it to be likely that he will there by 
outrage her modesty, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or 
with both. 
355. 
Assault or criminal force with intent to dishonour person, otherwise 
than on grave provocation. 
355. Assault or criminal force with intent to dishonour person, 
otherwise than on grave provocation.--Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any person, intending thereby to dishonour that 
person, otherwise than on grave and sudden provocation given by that 
person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for 
a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
356. 
Assault or criminal force in attempt to commit theft of property 
carried by a person. 
356. Assault or criminal force in attempt to commit theft of 
property carried by a person.--Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any person, in attempting to commit theft on any property which 
that person is then wearing or carrying shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two 
years, or with fine, or with both. 
357. 
Assault or criminal force in attempt wrongfully to confine a person. 
357. Assault or criminal force in attempt wrongfully to confin
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 156]
empt wrongfully to confine a person. 
357. Assault or criminal force in attempt wrongfully to confine a 
person.--Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any person, in 
attempting wrongfully to confine that person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 157]
                
 
  
 
  
       
 
 
                 
                 
                 
                
          
                
   
 
                
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
                 
      
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
                
                 
            
       
  
 
  
    
 
 
                  
                    
                     
              
               
          
 year, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with 
both. 
358. 
Assault or criminal force on grave provocation. 
358. Assault or criminal force on grave provocation.--Whoever 
assaults or uses criminal force to any person on grave and sudden 
provocation given by that person, shall be punished with simple 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine 
which may extend to two hundred rupees, or with both. 
Explanation.-The last section is subject to the same explanation 
as section 352. 
Of kidnapping, abduction, slavery and forced labour 
359. 
Kidnapping. 
359. Kidnapping.--Kidnapping is of two kinds : kidnapping from 
1*[India], and kidnapping from lawful guardianship. 360. 
Kidnapping from India. 
360. Kidnapping from India.--Whoever conveys any person beyond 
the limits of 1*[India] without the consent of that person, or of 
some person legally authorized to consent on behalf of that person, is said to kidnap that person from 1*[India]. 
361. 
Kidnapping from lawful guardianship. 
361. Kidnapping from lawful guardianship.--Whoever takes or 
entices any minor under 2*[sixteen] years of age if a male, or 
under 3*[eighteen] years of age if a female, or any person of 
unsound mind, out of the keeping of the lawful guardian of such minor 
or person of unsound mind, without the consent of such guardian, is 
said to kidnap such minor or person from lawful guardianship. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 158]
              
              
   
 
                
 
             
 
          
 
 
 
 
                 
             
                                  
    
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
                 
               
 
  
 
  
   
  
              
                  
                
         
  
 
 
 
         
  
                         
                
               
               
           
            
 
                       ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------
181 Explanation.-The words "lawful guardian" in this section include 
any person lawfully entrusted with the care or custody of such minor 
or other person. 
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the States." 
2. Subs. by Act 42 of 1949, s. 2, for "fourteen". 
3. Subs., by s. 2, ibid., for "sixteen". 
Exception.-This section does not extend to the act of any person 
who in good faith believes himself to be the father of an illegitimate 
child, or who in good faith believes himself to be entitled to the lawful custody of such child, unless such act is committed for an 
immoral or unlawful purpose. 
362. 
Abduction. 
362. Abduction.--Whoever by force compels, or by any deceitful 
means induces any person to go from any place, is said to abduct that 
person. 
363. 
Punishment for kidnapping. 
363. Punishment for kidnapping.--Whoever kidnaps any person from 
1*[India] or from lawful guardianship, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
363A. 
Kidnapping or maiming a minor for purposes of begging. 
2*[363A. Kidnapping or maiming a minor for purposes of 
begging.--(1) Whoever kidnaps any minor or, not being the lawful 
guardian of a minor, obtains the custody of the minor, in order that 
such minor may be employed or used for the purposes of begging shall 
be punishable with imprisonment of either d
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 158]
y be employed or used for the purposes of begging shall 
be punishable with imprisonment of either description for a term which 
may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
(2) Whoever maims any minor in order that such minor may be 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 159]
             
          
 
                   
                
                   
              
          
 
         
 
             
                             
                                                   
           
                         
              
 
                              
                         
                        
               
 
                              
              
              
 
                           
             
 
                            
             
 
                
 
             
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
               
              
                 
              
                
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------
182 employed or used for the purposes of begging shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine. 
(3) Where any person, not being the lawful guardian of a minor, 
employs or uses such minor for the purposes of begging, it shall be presumed, unless the contrary is proved, that he kidnapped or otherwise obtained the custody of that minor in order that the minor 
might be employed or used for the purposes of begging. 
(4) In this section, -
(a) "begging" means -
(i) soliciting or receiving alms in a public place, 
whether under the pretence of singing, dancing, 
fortunetelling, performing tricks or selling articles or otherwise; 
(ii) entering on any private premises for the purpose of 
soliciting or receiving alms; 
(iii) exposing or exhibiting, with the object of 
obtaining or extorting alms, any sore, wound, injury, deformity or disease, whether of himself or of any other 
person or of an animal; 
(iv) using a minor as an exhibit for the purpose of 
soliciting or receiving alms; 
(b) "minor" means -
(i) in the case of a male, a person under sixteen years 
of age; and 
(ii) in the case of a female, a person under eighteen 
years of age.] 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 159]
r sixteen years 
of age; and 
(ii) in the case of a female, a person under eighteen 
years of age.] 
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the States". 
2. Ins. by Act 52 of 1959, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15-1-1960). 
364. 
Kidnapping or abducting in order to murder. 
364. Kidnapping or abducting in order to murder.--Whoever kidnaps 
or abducts any person in order that such person may be murdered or may 
be so disposed of as to be put in danger of being murdered, shall be 
punished with 1*[imprisonment for life] or rigorous imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 160]
 
                             
                      
                    
     
 
                    
                
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
                
                
              
              
                
             
            
               
           
  
 
 
 
          
 
 
                
           
             
            
           
 
 
 
 
 
          
  
                     
           
                   
              
               
                
             
                   IIIustrations 
(a) A kidnaps Z from 2*[India], intending or knowing it to be 
likely that Z may be sacrificed to an idol. A has committed the 
offence defined in this section. 
(b) A forcibly carries or entices B away from his home in order 
that B may be murdered. A has committed the offence defined in this 
section. 
364A. 
Kidnappin for ransom, etc. 
3*364A. Kidnapping for ransom, etc.-Whoever kidnaps or abducts 
any person or keeps a person in detention after such kidnapping or 
abduction, and threatens to cause death or hurt to such person, or by 
his conduct gives rise to a reasonable appreension that such person 
may be put to death or hurt, or causes hurt or death to such person in 
order to compel the Government or any foreign State or international 
inter-governmental organisation or any other person to do or abstain 
from doing any act or to pay a ransom, shall be punishable with death 
or imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine. 
365. 
Kidnapping or abducting with intent secretly and wrongfully to confine 
person. 
365. Kidnapping or abducting with intent secretly and wrongfully 
to confine person.--Whoever kidnaps or abducts any person with intent to cause that person to be secretly and wrongfully confined, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
366. 
Kidnapping, abducting or inducing woman to compel her marriage, etc. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 160]
also be liable to fine. 
366. 
Kidnapping, abducting or inducing woman to compel her marriage, etc. 
366. Kidnapping, abducting or inducing woman to compel her 
marriage, etc.--Whoever kidnaps or abducts any woman with intent that 
she may be compelled, or knowing it to be likely that she will be 
compelled, to marry any person against her will, or in order that she 
may be forced or seduced to illicit intercourse, or knowing it to be 
likely that she will be forced or seduced to illicit intercourse, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine; 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 161]
             
                  
               
                   
             
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
  
                    
             
                 
                 
               
              
  
  
 
 
 
      
 
 
              
               
              
                 
         
                                                              
                   
        
 
                
      
                
           
           
                  
            
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------3*[and whoever, by means of criminal intimidation as defined in this 
Code or of abuse of authority or any other method of compulsion, 
induces any woman to go from any place with intent that she may be, or 
knowing that it is likely that she will be, forced or seduced to 
illicit intercourse with another person shall also be punishable as 
aforesaid]. 
4*[366A. 
Procuration of minor girl. 
6*[366A. Procuration of minor girl.--Whoever, by any means 
whatsoever, induces any minor girl under the age of eighteen years to 
go from any place or to do any act with intent that such girl may be, 
or knowing that it is likely that she will be, forced or seduced to 
illicit intercourse with another person shall be punishable with 
imprisonment which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable 
to fine. 
366B. 
Importation of girl from foreign country. 
366B. Importation of girl from foreign country.--Whoever imports 
into 2*[India] from any country outside India 7*[or from the State 
of Jammu and Kashmir] any girl under the age of twenty-one years with 
intent that she may be, or knowing it to be likely that she will be, 
forced or seduced to illicit intercourse with another person, 
5* * * * * 
shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to ten 
years, and shall also be liable to fine.] 
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 161]
risonment which may extend to ten 
years, and shall also be liable to fine.] 
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for 
life". 
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the States". 
3. Ins. by Act 42 of 1997 s. 2. 
4. Subs. by Act 24 of 1995, s. 2. 
5. Ins. by Act 20 of 1923, s. 2. 
6. Ins. by s.3, ibid. 
7. Ins. by Act 3 of 1951, s.3 and Sch., 
8. Certain words omitted by s.3 and Sch., ibid. 
367. 183 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 162]
             
  
 
 
                      
          
                
               
                  
                    
            
           
 
 
 
  
         
 
 
 
               
                 
            
              
             
                 
   
 
 
 
  
               
   
 
 
                
           
             
                   
                
         
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
                      
             
             
           
                 
 Kidnapping or abducting in order to subject person to grievous hurt, slavery, etc. 
367. Kidnapping or abducting in order to subject person to 
grievous hurt, slavery, etc.--Whoever kidnaps or abducts any person in order that such person may be subjected, or may be so disposed of as 
to be put in danger of being subjected to grievous hurt, or slavery, 
or to the unnatural lust of any person, or knowing it to be likely 
that such person will be so subjected or disposed of, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
368. 
Wrongfully concealing or keeping in confinement, kidnapped or abducted 
person. 
368. Wrongfully concealing or keeping in confinement, kidnapped 
or abducted person.--Whoever, knowing that any person has been kidnapped or has been abducted, wrongfully conceals or confines such 
person, shall be punished in the same manner as if he had kidnapped or 
abducted such person with the same intention or knowledge, or for the 
same purpose as that with or for which he conceals or detains such 
person in confinement. 
369. 
Kidnapping or abducting child under ten years with intent to steal 
from its person. 
369. Kidnapping or abducting child under ten years with intent to 
steal from its person.--Whoever kidnaps or abducts any child under the age of ten years with the intention of taking dishonestly any movable 
property from the person of such child, shall be punished with 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 162]
n of taking dishonestly any movable 
property from the person of such child, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
370. 
Buying or disposing of any person as a slave. 
370. Buying or disposing of any person as a slave.--Whoever 
imports, exports, removes, buys, sells or disposes of any person as a 
slave, or accepts, receives or detains against his will any person as 
a slave, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for 
a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 163]
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
                
                             
             
    
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
                
                
                
                
             
                     
                    
             
        
 
                      
              
                     
                 
                 
      
 
                     
            
                   
            
             
          
 
  
 
 
 
       
  
                 
              
            
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------371. 
Habitual dealing in slaves. 
371. Habitual dealing in slaves.--Whoever habitually imports, 
exports, removes, buys, sells traffics or deals in slaves, shall be 
punished with 1*[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of either description for a term not exceeding ten years, and shall also 
be liable to fine. 
372. 
Selling minor for purposes of prostitution, etc. 
372. Selling minor for purposes of prostitution, etc.--Whoever 
sells, lets to hire, or otherwise disposes of any 2*[person under 
the age of eighteen years with intent that such person shall at any 
age be employed or used for the purpose of prostitution or illicit 
intercourse with any person or for any unlawful and immoral purpose, 
or knowing it to be likely that such person will at any age be] 
employed or used for any such purpose, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten 
years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
3*[Explanation I.-When a female under the age of eighteen 
years is sold, let for hire, or otherwise disposed of to a prostitute 
or to any person who keeps or manages a brothel, the person so 
disposing of such female shall, until the contrary is proved, be 
presumed to have disposed of her with the intent that sh e shall be 
used for the purpose of prostitution. 
Explanation II.-For the purposes of this section "illicit 
intercourse" means se
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 163]
e of prostitution. 
Explanation II.-For the purposes of this section "illicit 
intercourse" means sexual intercourse between persons not united by marriage, or by any union or tie which though not amounting to a marriage, is recognised by the personal law or custom of the community 
to which they belong or, where they belong to different communities, 
of both such communities, as constituting between them a quasi-marital 
relation.] 
373. 
Buying minor for purposes of prostitution, etc. 
373. Buying minor for purposes of prostitution, etc.--Whoever 
buys, hires or otherwise obtains possession of any 2*[person under 
the age of eighteen years with intent that such person shall at 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 164]
                
      
                        
                  
                     
                  
      
       
 
 
 
             
             
                     
                    
             
        
                      
           
              
              
            
 
               
  
  
 
 
 
   
  
             
               
            
        
                           
 
 
 
 
 
  
                     
            
            
 
             
 
             
 
                          
                   184 1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for 
life". 
2. Subs. by Act 18 of 1924, s. 2, for "minor under the age of eighteen years with intent that such minor shall be employed or 
used for the purpose of prostitution or for any unlawful and 
immoral purpose, or knowing it to be likely that such minor will be". 
3. Ins. by s.3, ibid, 
any age be employed or used for the purpose of prostitution or illicit 
intercourse with any person or for any unlawful and immoral purpose, 
or knowing it to be likely that such person will at any age be] 
employed or used for any such purpose, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
1*[Explanation I.-Any prostitute or any person keeping or 
managing a brothel, who buys, hires or otherwise obtains possession of 
a female under the age of eighteen years shall, until the contrary is 
proved, be presumed to have obtained possession of such female with 
the intent that she shall be used for the purpose of prostitution. 
Explanation II.-"Illicit intercourse" has the same meaning as in 
section 372.] 
374. 
Unlawful compulsory labour. 
374. Unlawful compulsory labour.--Whoever unlawfully compels any 
person to labour against the will of that person, shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
one year, or with fine, or with
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 164]
h imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
one year, or with fine, or with both. 
2*[Sexual offences 
375. 
Rape. 
375. Rape.--A man is said to commit "rape" who, except in the 
case hereinafter excepted, has sexual intercourse with a woman under 
circumstances falling under any of the six following descriptions: -
First.-Against her will. 
Secondly.-Without her consent. 
Thirdly.-With her consent, when her consent has been 
obtained by putting her or any person in whom she is interested 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 165]
            
 
                       
                       
                        
           
                     
                 
                     
               
                  
 
                        
                        
       
 
                   
           
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
                    
             
             
                   
               
                 
           
              
 
           
                    
        
 
 
 
 
                 
             
      
 
       
 
                 
 
                            
                        
 
                            ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------
185 in fear of death or of hurt. 
Fourthly.-With her consent, when the man knows that he is 
not her husband, and that her consent is given because she 
believes that he is another man to whom she is or believes 
herself to be lawfully married. 
Fifthly.-With her consent, when, at the time of giving such 
consent, by reason of unsoundness of mind or intoxication or the 
administration by him personally or through another of any 
stupefying or unwholesome substance, she is unable to understand the nature and consequences of that to which she gives consent. 
Sixthly.-With or without her consent, when she is under 
sixteen years of age. 
Explanation.-Penetration is sufficient to constitute the sexual 
intercourse necessary to the offence of rape. 
Exception.-Sexual intercourse by a man with his own wife, the 
wife not being under fifteen years of age, is not rape. 
376. 
Punishment for rape. 
376. Punishment for rape.--(1) Whoever, except in the cases 
provided for by sub-section (2), commits rape shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less 
than seven years but which may be for life or for a term which may 
extend to ten years and shall also be li
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 165]
en years but which may be for life or for a term which may 
extend to ten years and shall also be liable to fine unless the woman 
raped is his own wife and is not under twelve years of age, in which 
case, he shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years or with fine or with both: 
1. Ins. by Act 18 of 1924, s. 4. 
2. Subs. by Act 43 of 1983, s.3 for the heading "Of rape" and ss. 
375 and 376. 
Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reasons to 
be mentioned in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a 
term of less than seven years. 
(2) Whoever, -
(a) being a police officer commits rape -
(i) within the limits of the police station to which 
he is appointed; or 
(ii) in the premises of any station house whether or 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 166]
                               
                      
                              
                          
 
                     
                                        
                                     
                 
                      
               
                                  
                         
                   
          
 
                      
                         
        
 
              
 
              
                
   
                  
               
          
 
                  
              
                
    
                   
               
                  
                
 
 
              
                 
              
    
 
 
 
 
 not situated in the police station to which he is appointed; or 
(iii) on a woman in his custody or in the custody of a 
police officer subordinate to him; or 
(b) being a public servant, takes advantage of his official 
position and commits rape on a woman in his custody as such public servant or in the custody of a public servant subordinate 
to him; or 
(c) being on the management or on the staff of a jail, 
remand home or other place of custody established by or under any 
law for the time being in force or of a women's or children's 
institution takes advantage of his official position and commits 
rape on any inmate of such jail, remand home, place or institution; or 
(d) being on the management or on the staff of a hospital, 
takes advantage of his official position and commits rape on a 
woman in that hospital; or 
(e) commits rape on a woman knowing her to be pregnant; or 
(f) commits rape on a woman when she is under twelve years 
of age; or 
(g) commits gang rape, 
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall 
not be less than ten years but which may be for life and shall also be 
liable to fine: 
Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reasons to 
be mentioned in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 166]
for adequate and special reasons to 
be mentioned in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment of 
either description for a term of less than ten years. 
Explanation 1.-Where a women's is raped by one or more in a group 
of persons acting in furtherance of their common intention, each of 
the persons shall be deemed to have committed gang rape within the 
meaning of this sub-section. 
Explanation 2.-"women's or children's institution" means an 
institution, whether called and orphanage or a home for neglected 
women or children or a widows' home or by any other name, which is 
established and maintained for the reception and care of women or children. 
Explanation 3.-"hospital" means the precincts of the hospital and 
includes the precincts of any institution for the reception and treatment of persons during convalescence or of persons requiring medical attention or rehabilitation. 
376A. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 167]
         
 
 
                   
                  
              
              
              
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
  
                
                
               
             
             
                     
            
        
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
               
            
                
                   
             
             
              
                  
               
    
                  
            
             
             
     
 
            
              
  
 
 186 Intercourse by a man with his wife during separation. 
376A. Intercourse by a man with his wife during separation.- -
Whoever has sexual intercourse with his own wife, who is living 
separately from him under a decree of separation or under any custom or usage without her consent shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to two years and shall 
also be liable to fine. 
376B. 
Intercourse by public servant with woman in his custody. 
376B. Intercourse by public servant with woman in his custody.- -
Whoever, being a public servant, takes advantage of his official 
position and induces or seduces, any woman, who is in his custody as 
such public servant or in the custody of a public servant subordinate 
to him, to have sexual intercourse with him, such sexual intercourse 
not amounting to the offence of rape, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five 
years and shall also be liable to fine. 
376C. 
Intercourse by superintendent of jail, remand home, etc. 
376C. Intercourse by superintendent of jail, remand home, etc.- -
Whoever, being the superintendent or manager of a jail, remand home or 
other place of custody established by or under any law for the time 
being in force or of a women's or children's institution takes 
advantage of his official position and induces or seduces any female 
inmate of such jail, remand home, place or institution to have 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 167]
n and induces or seduces any female 
inmate of such jail, remand home, place or institution to have sexual intercourse with him, such sexual intercourse not amounting to the 
offence of rape, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to five years and shall also 
be liable to fine. 
Explanation 1.-"Superintendent" in relation to a jail, remand 
home or other place of custody or a women's or children's institution, 
includes a person holding any other office in such jail, remand home, 
place or institution by virtue of which he can exercise any authority 
or control over its inmates. 
Explanation 2.-The expression "women's or children's institution" 
shall have the same meaning as in Explanation 2 to sub-section (2) of 
section 376. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 168]
 
 
 
                
      
 
 
                   
                
                 
            
           
            
              
 
                   
           
                            
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
                    
            
                      
             
        
 
              
         
  
  
 
 
    
 
 
                               
 
                          
                                 
 
 
 
  
 
 
                376D. 
Intercourse by any member of the management or staff of a hospital 
with any woman in that hospital. 
376D. Intercourse by any member of the management or staff of a 
hospital with any woman in that hospital.--Whoever, being on the management of a hospital or being on the staff of a hospital takes 
advantage of his position and has sexual intercourse with any woman in that hospital, such sexual intercourse not amounting to the offence of 
rape, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine. 
Explanation.-The expression "hospital" shall have the same 
meaning as in Explanation 3 to sub-section (2) of section 376.] 
Of unnatural offences 
377. 
Unnatural offences. 
377. Unnatural offences.--Whoever voluntarily has carnal 
intercourse against the order of nature with any man, woman or animal, 
shall be punished with 1*[imprisonment for life], or with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten 
years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
Explanation.-Penetration is sufficient to constitute the carnal 
intercourse necessary to the offence described in this section. 
CHAPTER XVII 
OF OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY 
CHAPTER XVII 
OF OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY 
Of theft 
378. 
Theft. 
378. Theft.--Whoever, intending to take dishonestly any movable 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 169]
               
                  
  
 
                    
                   
              
   
 
                
       
 
 
 
 
                  
      
                        
             
            
 
                    
                
           
 
                  
                      
            
   
 
                             
 
                        
           
                  
   
                       
                
              
          
                     
             
               
    
                     
              
   
 
                   
               
                
                 
          ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------
187 property out of the possession of any person without that person's 
consent, moves that property in order to such taking, is said to 
commit theft. 
Explanation 1.-A thing so long as it is attached to the earth, 
not being movable property, is not the subject of theft; but it 
becomes capable of being the subject of theft as soon as it is severed 
from the earth. 
1. Subs, by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for 
life ". 
Explanation 2.-A moving effected by the same act which effects 
the severance may be a theft. 
Explanation 3.-A person is said to cause a thing to move by 
removing an obstacle which prevented it from moving or by separating 
it from any other thing, as well as by actually moving it. 
Explanation 4.-A person, who by any means causes an animal to 
move, is said to move that animal, and to move everything which, in 
consequence of the motion so caused, is moved by that animal. 
Explanation 5.-The consent mentioned in the definition may be 
express or implied, and may be given either by the person in 
possession, or by any person having for that purpose authority either 
express or implied. 
Illustrations 
(a) A cuts down a tree on Z
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 169]
g for that purpose authority either 
express or implied. 
Illustrations 
(a) A cuts down a tree on Z's ground, with the intention of 
dishonestly taking the tree out of Z's possession without Z's consent. 
Here, as soon as A has severed the tree in order to such taking, he has committed theft. 
(b) A puts a bait for dogs in his pocket, and thus induces Z's 
dog to follow it. Here, if A's intention be dishonestly to take the dog out of Z's possession without Z's consent, A has committed theft as soon as Z's dog has begun to follow A. 
(c) A meets a bullock carrying a box of treasure. He drives the 
bullock in a certain direction, in order that he may dishonestly take the treasure. As soon as the bullock begins to move, A has committed theft of the treasure. 
(d) A being Z's servant, and entrusted by Z with the care of Z's 
plate, dishonestly runs away with the plate, without Z's consent. A has committed theft. 
(e) Z, going on a journey, entrusts his plate to A, the keeper of 
a warehouse, till Z shall return. A carries the plate to a goldsmith 
and sells it. Here the plate was not in Z's possession. It could not 
therefore be taken out of Z's possession, and A has not committed theft, though he may have committed criminal breach of trust. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 170]
 
                     
                
     
                    
              
    
 
                      
                
                
                  
               
                  
 
 
                      
                   
                
               
                   
            
    
 
 
                           
              
              
              
   
 
                      
             
               
      
                        
            
                        
      
                     
             
             
              
                     
  
                       
              
               
         
                   
                 188 (f) A finds a ring belonging to Z on a table in the house which Z 
occupies. Here the ring is in Z's possession, and if A dishonestly removes it, A commits theft. 
(g) A finds a ring lying on the high-road, not in the possession 
of any person. A, by taking it, commits no theft, though he may commit 
criminal misappropriation of property. 
(h) A sees a ring belonging to Z lying on a table in Z's house. 
Not venturing to misappropriate the ring immediately for fear of 
search and detection, A hides the ring in a place where it is highly 
improbable that it will ever be found by Z, with the intention of 
taking the ring from the hiding place and selling it when the loss is 
forgotten. Here A, at the time of first moving the ring, commits 
theft. 
(i) A delivers his watch to Z, a jeweller, to be regulated. Z 
carries it to his shop. A, not owing to the jeweller any debt for 
which the jeweller might lawfully detain the watch as a security, 
enters the shop openly, takes his watch by force out of Z's hand, and 
carries it away. Here A, though he may have committed criminal 
trespass and assault, has not committed theft, inasmuch as what he did 
was not done dishonestly. 
(j) If A owes money to Z for repairing the watch, and if Z 
retains the watch lawfully
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 170]
dishonestly. 
(j) If A owes money to Z for repairing the watch, and if Z 
retains the watch lawfully as a security for the debt, and A takes the 
watch out of Z's possession, with the intention of depriving Z of the 
property as a security for his debt, he commits theft, inasmuch as he 
takes it dishonestly. 
(k) Again, if A, having pawned his watch to Z, takes it out of 
Z's possession without Z's consent, not having paid what he borrowed 
on the watch, he commits theft, though the watch is his own property inasmuch as he takes it dishonestly. 
(l) A takes an article belonging to Z out of Z's possession 
without Z's consent, with the intention of keeping it until he obtains money from Z as a reward for its restoration. Here A takes dishonestly; A has therefor committed theft. 
(m) A, being on friendly terms with Z, goes into Z's library in 
Z's absence, and takes away a book without Z's express consent for the purpose merely of reading it, and with the intention of returning it. Here, it is probable that A may have conceived that he had Z's implied 
consent to use Z's book. If this was A's impression, A has not 
committed theft. 
(n) A asks charity from Z's wife. She gives A money, food and 
clothes, which A knows to belong to Z her husband. Here it is probable 
that A may conceive that Z's wife is authorized to give away alms. If 
this was A's impression, A has not committed theft. 
(o) A is the paramour of Z's wife. She gives a valuable property, 
which A knows to belong to her husband Z, and to be such property as 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 171]
                      
    
 
                  
               
         
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
                    
            
          
 
 
 
  
     
 
 
                
              
            
            
         
  
 
 
 
           
 
 
                      
             
                                      
            
           
  
 
  
             
       
 
 
                    
             
                   
                   she has not authority from Z to give. If A takes the property 
dishonestly, he commits theft. 
(p) A, in good faith, believing property belonging to Z to be A's 
own property, takes that property out of B's possession. Here, as A does not take dishonestly, he does not commit theft. 
379. 
Punishment for theft. 
379. Punishment for theft.--Whoever commits theft shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
380. 
Theft in dwelling house, etc. 
380. Theft in dwelling house, etc.--Whoever commits theft in any 
building, tent or vessel, which building, tent or vessel is used as a 
human dwelling, or used for the custody of property, shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
381. 
Theft by clerk or servant of property in possession of master. 
381. Theft by clerk or servant of property in possession of 
master.--Whoever, being a clerk or servant, or being employed in the 
capacity of a clerk or servant, commits theft in respect of any property in the possession of his master or employer, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
382. 
Theft after preparation made for causing death, hurt or restraint in 
order to the committing of the theft. 
382. Theft after preparation made for causing death, hurt or 
restraint in order to the committing of the t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 171]
eft after preparation made for causing death, hurt or 
restraint in order to the committing of the theft.--Whoever commits theft, having made preparation for causing death, or hurt, or restraint, or fear of death, or of hurt, or of restraint, to any 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 172]
                
             
               
              
       
 
                             
                     
                 
                            
 
 
                   
              
              
       
 
                               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              
               
                     
            
        
 
                             
 
                
                       
  
 
                         
                
               
    
                    
               
                
      
                  
                    
               
         
  189 person, in order to the committing of such theft, or in order to the 
effecting of his escape after the committing of such theft or in order 
to the retaining of property taken by such theft, shall be punished 
with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, 
and shall also be liable to fine. 
Illustrations 
(a) A commits theft on property in Z's possession; and, while 
committing this theft, he has a loaded pistol under his garment, 
having provided this pistol for the purpose of hurting Z in case Z should resist. A has committed the offence defined in this section. 
(b) A picks Z's pocket, having posted several of his companions 
near him, in order that they may restrain Z, if Z should perceive what 
is passing and should resist, or should attempt to apprehend A. A has 
committed the offence defined in this section. 
Of extortion 
383. 
Extortion. 
383. Extortion.--Whoever intentionally puts any person in fear of 
any injury to that person, or to any other, and thereby dishonestly 
induces the person so put in fear to deliver to any person any 
property, or valuable security or anything signed or sealed which may 
be converted into a valuable security, commits "extortion". 
Illustrations 
(a) A threatens to publish a defamatory libel concerning Z unless 
Z gives him money. He thus induces Z to give him money. A has 
comm
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 172]
atory libel concerning Z unless 
Z gives him money. He thus induces Z to give him money. A has 
committed extortion. 
(b) A threatens Z that he will keep Z's child in worngful 
confinement, unless Z will sign and deliver to A a promissory note 
binding Z to pay certain monies to A to Z sings and delivers the note. 
A has committed extortion. 
(c) A threatens to send club-men to plough up Z's field unless Z 
will sign and deliver to B a bond binding Z under a penalty to deliver 
certain produce to B, and thereby induces Z to sign and deliver the 
bond. A has committed extortion. 
(d) A, by putting Z in fear of grievous hurt, dishonestly induces 
Z to sign or affix his seal to a blank paper and deliver it to A. Z 
sings and delivers the paper to A. Here, as the paper so signed may be 
converted into a valuable security A has committed extortion. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 173]
 
 
 
   
 
               
             
           
  
 
  
           
  
                         
          
               
             
            
 
 
 
  
            
 
 
                   
               
                  
            
           
  
 
 
 
                   
  
 
 
                      
               
                
               
                
         
 
 
 
 
 
            
     384. 
Punishment for extortion. 
384. Punishment for extortion.--Whoever commits extortion shall 
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which 
may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
385. 
Putting person in fear of injury in order to commit extortion. 
385. Putting person in fear of injury in order to commit 
extortion.--Whoever, in order to the committing of extortion, puts any 
person in fear, or attempts to put any person in fear, of any injury, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
386. 
Extortion by putting a person in fear of death or grievous hurt. 
386. Extortion by putting a person in fear of death or grievous 
hurt.--Whoever commits extortion by putting any person in fear of 
death or of grievous hurt to that person or to any other, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
387. 
Putting person in fear of death or of grievous hurt, in order to 
commit extortion. 
387. Putting person in fear of death or of grievous hurt, in 
order to commit extortion.--Whoever in order to the committing of extortion, puts or attempts to put any person in fear of death or of 
grievous hurt to that person or to any other, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
388. 
Extortion by threat of accusation of an offence punishable with death 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 173]
lso be liable to fine. 
388. 
Extortion by threat of accusation of an offence punishable with death 
or imprisonment for life, etc. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 174]
 
 
                 
           
              
                
               
                
               
 
                
      
 
 
 
 
             
               
               
      
 
 
 
 
 
               
 
 
 
                 
           
               
            
             
               
             
               
             
    
 
                             
 
 
 
 
 
  
               
 
 
    
 
 
                   
               ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------
190 388. Extortion by threat of accusation of an offence punishable 
with death or imprisonment for life, etc.--Whoever commits extortion 
by putting any person in fear of an accusation against that person or 
any other, of having committed or attempted to commit any offence punishable with death, or with 1*[imprisonment for life], or with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, or of having 
attempted to induce any other person to commit such offence, shall 
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for 
life". 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine; and, 
if the offence be one punishable under section 377 of this Code, may 
be punished with 1*[imprisonment for life]. 
389. Putting person in fear or accusation of offence, in order to commit 
extortion. 
389. Putting person in fear or accusation of offence, in order to 
commit extortion.--Whoever, in order to the committing of extortion, 
puts or attempts to put any person in fear of an accusation, against 
that person or any other, of having committed, or attempted to commit, 
an offence punishable with death or with 1*[imprisonment for life], 
or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, shall 
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 174]
rm which may extend to ten years, shall 
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine; and, if the 
offence be punishable under section 377 of this Code, may be punished 
with 1*[imprisonment for life]. 
Of robbery and dacoity 
390. 
Robbery. 
390. Robbery.--In all robbery there is either theft or extortion. 
When theft is robbery. 
When theft is robbery.--Theft is "robbery" if, in order to the 
committing of the theft, or in committing the theft, or in carrying 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 175]
              
            
              
         
 
 
    
  
                     
             
               
                   
              
               
     
 
                        
             
       
 
                             
                    
               
             
          
                      
              
                
             
  
 
                     
                
             
                 
           
 
                     
                    
            
                    
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
                  
                 
            
            away or attempting to carry away property obtained by the theft, the 
offender, for that end, voluntarily causes or attempts to cause to any 
person death or hurt or wrongful restraint, or fear of instant death 
or of instant hurt, or of instant wrongful restraint. 
When extortion is robbery. 
When extortion is robbery.--Extortion is "robbery" if the 
offender, at the time of committing the extortion, is in the presence 
of the person put in fear, and commits the extortion by putting that 
person in fear of instant death, of instant hurt, or of instant 
wrongful restraint to that person or to some other person, and, by so 
putting in fear, induces the person, so put in fear then and there to 
deliver up the thing extorted. 
Explanation.-The offender is said to be present if he is 
sufficiently near to put the other person in fear of instant death, of 
instant hurt, or of instant wrongful restraint. 
Illustrations 
(a) A holds Z down, and fraudulently takes Z's money and jewels 
from Z's clothes, without Z's consent. Here A has committed theft, 
and, in order to the committing of that theft, has voluntarily caused 
wrongful restraint to Z. A has therefore committed robbery. 
(b) A meets Z on the high road, shows a pistol, and demands Z's 
purse. Z, in consequence, surrenders his purse. Here A has extorted the purse from Z by putting him in fear of 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 175]
n consequence, surrenders his purse. Here A has extorted the purse from Z by putting him in fear of instant hurt, and being at 
the time of committing the extortion in his presence. A has therefore 
committed robbery. 
(c) A meets Z and Z's child on the high road. A takes the child, 
and threatens to filing it down a precipice, unless Z delivers his 
purse. Z, in consequence, delivers his purse. Here A has extorted the 
purse from Z, by causing Z to be in fear of instant hurt to the child 
who is there present. A has therefore committed robbery on Z. 
(d) A obtains property from Z by saying-"Your child is in the 
hands of my gang, and will be put to death unless you send us ten 
thousand rupees". This is extortion, and punishable as such: but it is 
not robbery, unless Z is put in fear of the instant death of his 
child. 
391. 
Dacoity. 
391. Dacoity.--When five or more persons conjointly commit or 
attempt to commit a robbery, or where the whole number of persons 
conjointly committing or attempting to commit a robbery, and persons present and aiding such commission or attempt, amount to five or more, 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 176]
              
 
 
                
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
                 
            
                    
           
      
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
                   
            
            
 
 
 
  
      
 
 
                  
           
              
              
             
              
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
                
                     
              ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------
191 every person so committing, attempting or aiding, is said to commit 
"dacoity". 
1. Subs, by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for 
life." 
392. 
Punishment for robbery. 
392. Punishment for robbery.--Whoever commits robbery shall be 
punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten 
years, and shall also be liable to fine; and, if the robbery be 
committed on the highway between sunset and sunrise, the imprisonment 
may be extended to fourteen years. 
393. 
Attempt to commit robbery. 
393. Attempt to commit robbery.--Whoever attempts to commit 
robbery shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
394. 
Voluntarily causing hurt in committing robbery. 
394. Voluntarily causing hurt in committing robbery.--If any 
person, in committing or in attempting to commit robbery, voluntarily 
causes hurt, such person, and any other person jointly concerned in 
committing or attempting to commit such robbery, shall be punished 
with 1*[imprisonment for life], or with rigorous imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
395. 
Punishment for dacoity. 
395. Punishment for dacoity.--Whoever commits dacoity shall be 
punished with 1*[imprisonment for life], or with rigorous 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 176]
ch may extend to ten years, and shall also 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 177]
    
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
                   
          
              
            
            
 
 
 
  
           
  
                 
            
                 
                      
             
    
  
 
  
           
 
                  
             
              
                
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
  
                 
            
              
    
  
 
 be liable to fine. 
396. 
Dacoity with murder. 
396. Dacoity with murder.--If any one of five or more persons, 
who are conjointly committing dacoity, commits murder in so committing 
dacoity, every one of those persons shall be punished with death, or 
1*[imprisonment for life], or rigorous imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
397. 
Robbery or dacoity, with attempt to cause death or grievous hurt. 
397. Robbery or dacoity, with attempt to cause death or grievous 
hurt.--If, at the time of committing robbery or dacoity, the offender 
uses any deadly weapon, or causes grievous hurt to any person, so 
attempts to cause death or grievous hurt to any person, the 
imprisonment with which such offender shall be punished shall not be 
less than seven years. 
398. 
Attempt to commit robbery or dacoity when armed with deadly weapon. 
398. Attempt to commit robbery or dacoity when armed with deadly 
weapon.--If, at the time of attempting to commit robbery or dacoity, 
the offender is armed with any deadly weapon, the imprisonment with 
which such offender shall be punished shall not be less than seven 
years. 
399. 
Making preparation to commit dacoity. 
399. Making preparation to commit dacoity.--Whoever makes any 
preparation for committing dacoity, shall be punished with rigorous 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also 
be liable to fine. 
400. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 178]
 
       
 
 
                 
                   
           
              
              
    
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
                 
              
                
             
                
           
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
               
                 
               
               
         
 
                    
  
 
  
    
  
           
           
             
           
 
                
      
 
 
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------Punishment for belonging to gang of dacoits. 
400. Punishment for belonging to gang of dacoits.--Whoever, at 
any time after the passing of this Act, shall belong to a gang of 
persons associated for the purpose of habitually committing dacoity, 
shall be punished with 1*[imprisonment for life], or with rigorous 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also 
be liable to fine. 
401. 
Punishment for belonging to gang of thieves. 
401. Punishment for belonging to gang of thieves.--Whoever, at 
any time after the passing of this Act, shall belong to any wandering 
or other gang of persons associated for the purpose of habitually 
committing theft or robbery, and not being a gang of thugs or dacoits, 
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
402. 
Assembling for purpose of committing dacoity. 
402. Assembling for purpose of committing dacoity.--Whoever, at 
any time after the passing of this Act, shall be one of five or more 
persons assembled for the purpose of committing dacoity, shall be 
punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
Of criminal misappropriation of property 
403. 
Dishonest misappropriation of property. 
403. Dishonest misappropriation of property.--Whoever dishonestly 
misappropriates or converts to his own use an
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 178]
st misappropriation of property.--Whoever dishonestly 
misappropriates or converts to his own use any movable property, shall 
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which 
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for 
life." 
192 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 179]
 
                             
                   
                 
                      
          
           
 
                    
              
               
                 
               
      
 
                     
                 
             
                
       
 
                
       
 
                              
 
                   
              
                 
            
                 
              
                         
            
               
                
             
              
   
 
                   
      
 
                   
               
             
                   
    
                              
 
                      
                   
     
 Illustrations 
(a) A takes property belonging to Z out of Z's possession in good 
faith, believing, at the time when he takes it, that the property 
belongs to himself. A is not guilty of theft; but if A, after discovering his mistake, dishonestly appropriates the property to his 
own use, he is guilty of an offence under this section. 
(b) A, being on friendly terms with Z, goes into Z's library in 
Z's absence and takes away a book without Z's express consent. Here, 
if A was under the impression that he had Z's implied consent to take 
the book for the purpose of reading it, A has not committed theft. 
But, if A afterwards sells the book for his own benefit, he is guilty 
of an offence under this section. 
(c) A and B being joint owners of a horse, A takes the horse out 
of B's possession, intending to use it. Here as A has a right to use 
the horse, he does not dishonestly misappropriate it. But, if A sells 
the horse and appropriates the whole proceeds to his own use, he is 
guilty of an offence under this section. 
Explanation 1.-A dishonest misappropriation for a time only is a 
misappropriation with the meaning of this section. 
Illustration 
A finds a Government promissory note belonging to Z, bearing a 
blank endorsement. A
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 179]
 
Illustration 
A finds a Government promissory note belonging to Z, bearing a 
blank endorsement. A, knowing that the note belongs to Z, pledges it 
with a banker as a security or a loan, intending at a future time to 
restore it to Z. A has committed an offence under this section. 
Explanation 2.-A person who finds property not in the possession 
of any other person, and such property for the purpose of protecting 
it for, or of restoring it to, the owner, does not take or 
misappropriate it dishonestly, and is not guilty of an offence; but he is guilty of the offence above defined, if he appropriates it to his 
own use, when he knows or has the means of discovering the owner, or 
before he has used reasonable means to discover and give notice to the 
owner and has kept the property a reasonable time to enable the owner 
to claim it. 
What are reasonable means or what is a reasonable time in such a 
case, is a question of fact. 
It is not necessary that the finder should know who is the owner 
of the property, or that any particular person is the owner of it: it 
is sufficient if, at the time of appropriating it, he does not believe 
it to be his own property, or in good faith believe that the real 
owner cannot be found. 
Illustrations 
(a) A finds a rupee on the high-road, not knowing to whom the 
rupee belong, A picks up the rupee. Here A has not committed the 
offence defined in this section. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 180]
                     
                
               
  
 
                  
                
                          
              
     
 
 
 
                     
            
            
 
                    
              
            
 
                     
              
       
 
 
 
 
 
         
     
 
 
             
           
             
                  
                   
                    
                
               
                 
        
 
                              
 
                      
              
           
     
 
                          
 
 
 
 193 (b) A finds a letter on the road, containing a bank note. From 
the direction and contents of the letter he learns to whom the note 
belongs. He appropriates the note. He is guilty of an offence under 
this section. 
(c) A finds a cheque payable to bearer. He can form no conjecture 
as to the person who has lost the cheque. But the name of the person, 
who has drawn the cheque, appears. A knows that this person can direct 
him to the person in whose favour the cheque was drawn. A appropriates 
the cheque without attempting to discover the owner. He is guilty of 
an offence under this section. 
(d) A sees Z drop his purse with money in it. A pick up the purse 
with the intention of restoring it to Z, bu afterwards appropriates it to his own use. A has committed an offence under this section. 
(e) A finds a purse with money, not knowing to whom it belongs; 
he afterwards discovers that it belongs to Z, and appropriates it to 
his own use. A is guilty of an offence under this section. 
(f) A finds a valuable ring, not knowing to whom it belongs. A 
sells it immediately without attempting to discover the owner. A is 
guilty of an offence under this section. 
404. 
Dishonest misappropriation of property possessed by deceased person at 
the time of his death. 
404. Dishonest misappropriation of property possessed by deceased 
person at the time of his death.-Whoever 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 180]
honest misappropriation of property possessed by deceased 
person at the time of his death.-Whoever dishonestly misappropriates 
or converts to his own use property, knowing that such property was in 
the possession of a deceased person at the time of that person's 
decease, and has not since been in the possession of any person 
legally entitled to such possession, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine, and if the offender at 
the time of such person's decease was employed by him as a clerk or 
servant, the imprisonment may extend to seven years. 
Illustration 
Z dies in possession of furniture and money. His servant A, 
before the money comes into the possession of any person entitled to 
such possession, dishonestly misappropriates it. A has committed the 
offence defined in this section. 
Of criminal breach of trust 
405. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 181]
 
    
 
 
                   
                   
           
              
                 
            
               
          
 
                    
              
           
           
                
              
            
              
                     
            
     
 
                 
               
           
              
             
            
              
 
             
                 
       
             
             
 
 
 
 
                    
            
     
 
                             
                           
             
                 
     
 
                  
              
           
       ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------
194 Criminal breach of trust. 
405. Criminal breach of trust.--Whoever, being in any manner 
entrusted with property, or with any dominion over property, 
dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use that property, 
or dishonestly uses or disposes of that property in violation of any 
direction of law prescribing the mode in which such trust is to be 
discharged, or of any legal contract, express or implied, which he has 
made touching the discharge of such trust, or wilfully suffers any other person so to do, commits "criminal breach of trust". 
1*[2*[Explanation 1].-A person, being an employer 3*[of an 
establishment whether exempted under section 17 of the Employees' Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 (19 of 1952) or not] who deducts the employees' contribution from the wages payable to 
the employee for credit to a Provident Fund or Family Pension Fund 
established by any law for the time being in force, shall be deemed to 
have been entrusted with the amount of the contribution so deducted by 
him and if he makes default in the payment of such contribution to the 
said Fund in violation of the said law shall be deemed to have 
dis
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 181]
ent of such contribution to the 
said Fund in violation of the said law shall be deemed to have 
dishonestly used the amount of the said contribution in violation of a 
direction of law as aforesaid.] 
4*[Explanation 2.-A person, being an employer, who deducts the 
employees contribution from the wages payable to the employee for 
credit to the Employees' State Insurance Fund held and administered by 
the Employees' State Insurance Corporation established under the 
Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948 (34 of 1948), shall be deemed to 
have been entrusted with the amount of the contribution so deducted by 
him and if he makes default in the payment of such contribution to the 
1. Ins. by Act 40 of 1973, s. 9 (w.e.f. 1-11-1973). 
2. Explanation renumbered as Explanation 1 by Act 38 of 1975, s. 9 
(w.e.f. 1-9-1975). 
3. Ins. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 27 (w.e.f. 1-8-1988). 
4. Ins. by Act 38 of 1975, s. 9 (w.e.f. 1-9-1975). 
said Fund in violation of the said Act, shall be deemed to have dishonestly used the amount of the said contribution in violation of a 
direction of law as aforesaid.] 
Illustrations 
(a) A, being executor to the will of a deceased person, 
dishonestly disobeys the law which directs him to divide the effects 
according to the will, and appropriates them to his own use. A has committed criminal breach of trust. 
(b) A is a warehouse-keeper, Z, going on a journey, entrusts his 
furniture to A, under a contract that it shall be returned on payment of a stipulated sum for warehouse-room. A dishonestly sells the goods. A has committed criminal breach of trust. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 182]
 
                   
              
              
                   
              
            
  
 
                    
               
            
             
              
                 
        
 
                  
               
                
                
     
 
                    
            
     
 
 
 
 
 
      
  
                
           
              
   
  
 
 
 
       
 
                  
          
             
             
            
 
 
 
 
 
        (c) A, residing in Calcutta, is agent for Z, residing at Delhi. 
There is an express or implied contract between A and Z, that all sums remitted by Z to A shall be invested by A, according to Z's direction. 
Z remits a lakh of rupees to A, with directions to A to invest the 
same in Company's paper. A dishonestly disobeys the directions and employs the money in his own business. A has committed criminal breach 
of trust. 
(d) But if A, in the last illustration, not dishonestly but in 
good faith, believing that it will be more for Z's advantage to hold 
shares in the Bank of Bengal, disobeys Z's directions, and buys shares 
in the Bank of Bengal, for Z, instead of buying Company's paper, here, 
thought Z should suffer loss, and should be entitled to bring a civil 
action against A, on account of that loss, yet A, not having acted 
dishonestly, has not committed criminal breach of trust. 
(e) A, a revenue-officer, is entrusted with public money and is 
either directed by law, or bound by a contract, express or implied, 
with the Government, to pay into a certain treasury all the public 
money which he holds. A dishonestly appropriates the money. A has 
committed criminal breach of trust. 
(f) A, a carrier, is entrusted by Z with property to be carried 
by land or by water. A dishonestly misappropriates the property. A has 
committed criminal breach of trust. 
406. 
Punishment for criminal breach of trust. 
406. Punishment for criminal breach of trust.--Whoever commits 
c
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 182]
ent for criminal breach of trust. 
406. Punishment for criminal breach of trust.--Whoever commits 
criminal breach of trust shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, 
or with both. 
407. 
Criminal breach of trust by carrier, etc. 
407. Criminal breach of trust by carrier, etc.--Whoever, being 
entrusted with property as a carrier, wharfinger or warehouse-keeper, 
commits criminal breach of trust, in respect of such property, shall 
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which 
may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
408. 
Criminal breach of trust by clerk or servant. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 183]
 
 
                   
               
               
           
                   
             
    
 
 
 
  
             
 
 
 
                   
                
                 
                
                          
            
            
 
                
      
 
 
 
                         
  
 
  
  
  
              
               
                
               
                
               
              
           
       
 
 
 
 
 
    ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------
195 408. Criminal breach of trust by clerk or servant.--Whoever, 
being a clerk or servant or employed as a clerk or servant, and being 
in any manner entrusted in such capacity with property, or with any 
dominion over property, commits criminal breach of trust in respect of that property, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also 
be liable to fine. 
409. 
Criminal breach of trust by public servant, or by banker, merchant or 
agent. 
409. Criminal breach of trust by public servant, or by banker, 
merchant or agent.--Whoever, being in any manner entrusted with 
property, or with any dominion over property in his capacity of a 
public servant or in the way of his business as a banker, merchant, 
factor, broker, attorney or agent, commits criminal breach of trust in 
respect of that property, shall be punished with 1*[imprisonment 
for life], or with imprisonment of either description for a term which 
may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for 
life". 
OF TE RECEIVING OF STOLEN PROPERTY 
410. 
Stolen property. 
410. Stolen property.--Property, the possession whereof has been 
transferred by theft, or by extortion, or by robbery, and property 
which has been criminally misappropriated or in respect 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 183]
 by extortion, or by robbery, and property 
which has been criminally misappropriated or in respect of which 
1***criminal breach of trust has been committed, is designated as "stolen property", 2*[whether the transfer has been made, or the 
misappropriation or breach of trust has been committed, within or 
without 3*[India]]. But, if such property subsequently comes into 
the possession of a person legally entitled to the possession thereof, 
it then ceases to be stolen property. 
411. 
Dishonestly receiving stolen property. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 184]
 
 
            
             
                   
                
        
 
 
 
  
          
 
 
               
        
              
          
                
               
                          
             
             
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
              
              
               
            
           
 
 
 
  
      
 
 
                   
            
                     
            
                   
 
 
                               
 
 
 
 411. Dishonestly receiving stolen property.--Whoever dishonestly 
receives or retains any stolen property, knowing or having reason to 
believe the same to be stolen property, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
three years, or with fine, or with both. 
412. 
Dishonestly receiving property stolen in the commission of a dacoity. 
412. Dishonestly receiving property stolen in the commission of a 
dacoity.--Whoever dishonestly receives or retains any stolen property, 
the possession whereof he knows or has reason to believe to have been 
transferred by the commission of dacoity, or dishonestly receives from 
a person, whom he knows or has reason to believe to belong or to have 
belonged to a gang of dacoits, property which he knows or has reason 
to believe to have been stolen, shall be punished with 
4*[imprisonment for life], or with rigorous imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
413. 
Habitually dealing in stolen property. 
413. Habitually dealing in stolen property.--Whoever habitually 
receives or deals in property which he knows or has reason to believe 
to be stolen property, shall be punished with 4*[imprisonment for 
life], or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
414. 
Assisting in concealment of stolen property. 
414. Assisting in concealment of stolen property.--Whoever 
voluntarily assists in conceal
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 184]
roperty. 
414. Assisting in concealment of stolen property.--Whoever 
voluntarily assists in concealing or disposing of or making away with 
property which he knows or has reason to believe to be stolen 
property, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description 
for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with 
both. 
Of cheating 
415. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 185]
 
 
 
 
             
            
              
                
               
                
            
 
                  
      
 
                             
 
                         
              
              
 
                  
               
                           
                
      
 
 
 
                 
                   
           
     
 
                            
           
              
    
                      
               
             
                   
 
 
                     
          
     
 
                      
             
             
                       
                  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------
196 Cheating. 
415. Cheating.--Whoever, by deceiving any person, fraudulently or 
dishonestly induces the person so deceived to deliver any property to 
any person, or to consent that any person shall retain any property, 
or intentionally induces the person so deceived to do or omit to do 
anything which he would not do or omit if he were not so deceived, and 
which act or omission causes or is likely to cause damage or harm to 
that person in body, mind, reputation or property, is said to "cheat". 
Explanation.-A dishonest concealment of facts is a deception 
within the meaning of this section. 
Illustrations 
(a) A, by falsely pretending to be in the Civil Service, 
intentionally deceives Z, and thus dishonestly induces Z to let him 
have on credit goods for which he does not mean to pay. A cheats. 
1. The words "the" and "offence of" rep. by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and 
Sch. I and Act 8 of 1882, s. 9, respectively. 
2. Ins. by Act 8 of 1882 s. 9. 
3. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "the States". 
4. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for 
life". 
(b) A, by putting a counterfeit mark on an article, intentionally 
deceives Z into a belief that thi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 185]
(b) A, by putting a counterfeit mark on an article, intentionally 
deceives Z into a belief that this article was made by a certain 
celebrated manufacturer, and thus dishonestly induces Z to buy and pay 
for the article. A cheats. 
(c) A, by exhibiting to Z a false sample of an article 
intentionally deceives Z into believing that the article corresponds 
with the sample, and thereby dishonestly induces Z to buy and pay for 
the article. A cheats. 
(d) A, by tendering in payment for an article a bill on a house 
with which A keeps no money, and by which A expects that the bill will 
be dishonoured, intentionally deceives Z, and thereby dishonestly 
induces Z to deliver the article, intending not to pay for it. A 
cheats 
(e) A, by pledging as diamond articles which he knows are not 
diamonds, intentionally deceives Z, and thereby dishonestly induces Z 
to lend money. A cheats. 
(f) A Intentionally deceives Z into a belief that A means to 
repay any money that Z may lend to him and thereby dishonestly induces 
Z to lend him money, A not intending to repay it. A cheats. 
(g) A intentionally deceives Z into a belief that A means to 
deliver to Z a certain quantity of indigo plant which he does not 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 186]
            
                  
                   
               
             
 
                 
                 
         
                          
                 
              
             
    
  
 
 
 
   
  
                    
             
          
                
  
 
                 
       
                              
                      
      
 
                     
   
 
 
 
  
   
  
            
             
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 intend to deliver, and thereby dishonestly induces Z to advance money 
upon the faith of such delivery. A cheats; but if A, at the time of 
obtaining the money, intends to deliver the indigo plant, and 
afterwards breaks his contract and does not deliver it, he does not 
cheat, but is liable only to a civil action for breach of contract. 
(h) A intentionally deceives Z into a belief that A has performed 
A's part of a contract made with Z, which he has not performed, and 
thereby dishonestly induces Z to pay money. A cheats. 
(i) A sells and conveys an estate to B. A, knowing that in 
consequence of such sale he has no right to the property, sells or 
mortgages the same to Z, without disclosing the fact of the previous 
sale and conveyance to B, and receives the purchase or mortgage money 
from Z. A cheats. 
416. 
Cheating by personation. 
416. Cheating by personation.--A person is said to "cheat by 
personation" if he cheats by pretending to be some other person, or by 
knowingly substituting one person for or another, or representing that 
he or any other person is a person other than he or such other person 
really is. 
Explanation.-The offence is committed whether the individual 
personated is a real or imaginary person. 
Illustrations 
(a) A cheats, by pretending to be a certain rich banker of the 
same name. A cheats by personation. 
(b) A cheats by pretending to be B, a person who is deceased. A 
cheats by personation. 
417. 
Punishment for cheating. 
417. Punishment for cheating.-Whoever cheats 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 186]
heats by personation. 
417. 
Punishment for cheating. 
417. Punishment for cheating.-Whoever cheats shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one 
year, or with fine, or with both. 
418. 197 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 187]
             
      
 
 
                    
            
             
                 
                     
          
              
 
 
 
 
 
     
  
               
          
                   
 
  
 
  
       
 
 
                
           
               
              
                
            
                
  
 
                  
 
 
 
 
 
           
   
 
 
                
             
          
                     
          
              
             Cheating with knowledge that wrongful loss may ensue to person whose interest offender is bound to protect. 
418. Cheating with knowledge that wrongful loss may ensue to 
person whose interest offender is bound to protect.--Whoever cheats with the knowledge that he is likely thereby to cause wrongful loss to 
a person whose interest in the transaction to which the cheating 
relates, he was bound either by law, or by legal contract, to 
protect, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for 
a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
419. 
Punishment for cheating by personation. 
419. Punishment for cheating by personation.--Whoever cheats by 
personation shall be punished with imprisonment of either description 
for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with 
both. 420. 
Cheating and dishonestly inducing delivery of property. 
420. Cheating and dishonestly inducing delivery of property.- -
Whoever cheats and thereby dishonestly induces the person deceived to 
deliver any property to any person, or to make, alter or destroy the 
whole or any part of a valuable security, or anything which is signed 
or sealed, and which is capable of being converted into a valuable security, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description 
for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable 
to fine. 
Of fraudulent deeds and dispositions of property 
421. 
Dishonest or fraudulent removal or concealment of property to
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 187]
ds and dispositions of property 
421. 
Dishonest or fraudulent removal or concealment of property to prevent 
distribution among creditors. 
421. Dishonest or fraudulent removal or concealment of property 
to prevent distribution among creditors.--Whoever dishonestly or 
fraudulently removes, conceals or delivers to any person, or transfers 
or causes to be transferred to any person, without adequate 
consideration, any property, intending thereby to prevent, or knowing 
it to be likely that he will thereby prevent the distribution of that property according to law among his creditors or the creditors of any 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 188]
                    
              
  
 
 
 
 
 
               
 
 
 
              
         
                    
                
                
              
  
 
 
 
 
 
          
   
 
 
                     
         
                   
               
                             
                 
              
               
    
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
               
           
           
              
                   
             
       
 
                               
  other person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or 
with both. 
422. 
Dishonestly or fraudulently preventing debt being available for 
creditors. 
422. Dishonestly or fraudulently preventing debt being available 
for creditors.--Whoever dishonestly or fraudulently prevents any debt or demand due to himself or to any other person from being made 
available according to law for payment of his debts or the debts of such other person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or 
with both. 
423. 
Dishonest or fraudulent execution of deed of transfer containing false 
statement of consideration. 
423. Dishonest or fraudulent execution of deed of transfer 
containing false statement of consideration.--Whoever dishonestly or 
fraudulently signs, executes or becomes a party to any deed or 
instrument which purports to transfer or subject to any charge any 
property, or any interest therein, and which contains any false 
statement relating to the consideration for such transfer or charge, 
or relating to the person or persons for whose use or benefit it is 
really intended to operate, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with 
fine, or with both. 
424. 
Dishonest or fraudulent removal or concealment of property. 
424. Dishonest or fraudulent removal or concealment
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 188]
 fraudulent removal or concealment of property. 
424. Dishonest or fraudulent removal or concealment of property. -
Whoever dishonestly or fraudulently conceals or removes any property 
of himself or any other person, or dishonestly or fraudulently assists 
in the concealment or removal thereof, or dishonestly releases any 
demand or claim to which he is entitled, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two 
years, or with fine, or with both. 
Of mischief 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 189]
 
 
 
 
 
                 
                 
             
            
         
 
 
 
                   
               
              
              
                
   
                    
                  
    
 
                             
 
                      
           
 
                  
              
 
 
                  
              
 
 
                          
              
              
                   
  
 
                    
             
    
 
                    
                       
  
 
                  
                   
 
 
                         198 425. 
Mischief. 
425. Mischief.--Whoever with intent to cause, or knowing that he 
is likely to cause, wrongful loss or damage to the public or to any 
person, causes the destruction of any property, or any such change in 
any property or in the situation thereof as destroys or diminishes its 
value or utility, or affects it injuriously, commits "mischief". 
Explanation 1.-It is not essential to the offence of mischief 
that the offender should intend to cause loss or damage to the owner of the property injured or destroyed. It is sufficient if he intends 
to cause, or knows that he is likely to cause, wrongful loss or damage 
to any person by injuring any property, whether it belongs to that 
person or not. 
Explanation 2.-Mischief may be committed by an act affecting 
property belonging to the person who commits the act, or to that 
person and others jointly. 
Illustrations 
(a) A voluntarily burns a valuable security belonging to Z 
intending to cause wrongful loss to Z. A has committed mischief. 
(b) A introduces water in to an ice-house belonging to Z and thus 
causes the ice to melt, intending wrongful loss to Z. A has committed 
mischief. 
(c) A voluntarily throws into a river a ring belonging to Z, with 
the intention of there by causing wrongful loss to Z. A has committed 
mischief. 
(d) A, knowing that his effects are about to be taken in 
execution in o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 189]
A has committed 
mischief. 
(d) A, knowing that his effects are about to be taken in 
execution in order to satisfy a debt due from him to Z, destroys those effects, with the intention of thereby preventing Z from obtaining satisfaction of the debt, and of thus causing damage to Z. A has 
committed mischief. 
(e) A having insured a ship, voluntarily causes the same to be 
cast away, with the intention of causing damage to the underwriters. 
A has committed mischief. 
(f) A causes a ship to be cast away, intending thereby to cause 
damage to Z who has lent money on bottomry on the ship. A has committed mischief. 
(g) A, having joint property with Z in a horse, shoots the horse, 
intending thereby to cause wrongful loss to Z. A has committed 
mischief. 
(h) A causes cattle to enter upon a field belonging to Z, 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 190]
                
      
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
              
            
          
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
                   
                
           
                 
     
 
 
 
 
 
            
  
                    
            
             
           
               
 
 
 
  
                  
       
 
 
                 
            
         
                  
              
             
            
 
 intending to cause and knowing that he is likely to cause damage to Z's crop. A has committed mischief. 
426. 
Punishment for mischief. 
426. Punishment for mischief.--Whoever commits mischief shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to three months, or with fine, or with both. 
427. 
Mischief causing damage to the amount of fifty rupees. 
427. Mischief causing damage to the amount of fifty rupees.- -
Whoever commits mischief and thereby causes loss or damage to the 
amount of fifty rupees or upwards, shall be punished with imprisonment 
of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or 
with fine, or with both. 
428. 
Mischief by killing or maiming animal of the value of ten rupees. 
428. Mischief by killing or maiming animal of the value of ten 
rupees.-Whoever commits mischief by killing, poisoning, maiming or 
rendering useless any animals or animal of the value of the ten rupees 
or upwards, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description 
for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
429. 
Mischief by killing or maiming cattle, etc., of any value or any 
animal of the value of fifty rupees. 
429. Mischief by killing or maiming cattle, etc., of any value or 
any animal of the value of fifty rupees.--Whoever commits mischief by killing, poisoning, maiming or rendering useless, any elephant, camel, horse, mule, buffalo, bull, cow or ox, whatever may be the value 
thereof, of any other animal of the value of fifty rupees or upwards, 
shall be punished
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 190]
 the value 
thereof, of any other animal of the value of fifty rupees or upwards, 
shall be punished with imprisonment or either description for a term 
which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both. 
199 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 191]
 
 
 
 
 
             
 
 
 
                  
              
                
               
             
            
                
     
 
 
 
  
          
 
 
                        
            
                    
                  
           
            
          
 
 
 
  
               
   
                     
          
              
                 
           
              
  
 
  
           
  
                    430. 
Mischief by injury to works of irrigation or by wrongfully diverting 
water. 
430. Mischief by injury to works of irrigation or by wrongfully 
diverting water.--Whoever commits mischief by doing any act which causes, or which he knows to be likely to cause, a diminution of the 
supply of water for agricultural purposes, or for food or drink for 
human beings or for animals which are property, or for cleanliness or 
for carrying on any manufacture, shall be punished with imprisonment 
of either description for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both. 
431. 
Mischief by injury to public road, bridge, river or channel. 
431. Mischief by injury to public road, bridge, river or 
channel.--Whoever commits mischief by doing any act which renders or 
which he knows to be likely to render any public road, bridge, 
navigable river or navigable channel, natural or artificial, 
impassable or less safe for travelling or conveying property, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to five years, or with fine, or with both. 
432. 
Mischief by causing inundation or obstruction to public drainage 
attended with damage. 
432. Mischief by causing inundation or obstruction to public 
drainage attended with damage.--Whoever commits mischief by doing any act which causes or which he knows to be likely to cause an inundation 
or an obstruction to any public drainage attended with injury or 
damage, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term whi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 191]
ded with injury or 
damage, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both. 
433. 
Mischief by destroying, moving or rendering less useful a light-house 
or sea-mark. 
433. Mischief by destroying, moving or rendering less useful a 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 192]
           
              
                 
              
              
             
           
 
 
 
  
              
 
                  
           
                
                   
            
          
  
 
  
            
                   
 
 
 
                
              
                 
              
                
                    
            
               
      
 
 
 
 
 
            
 
 
 
                     
          
             
              
                   
             
            light-house or sea-mark.--Whoever commits mischief by destroying or moving any light-house or other light used as a sea-mark, or any sea-
mark or buoy or other thing placed as a guide for navigators, or by 
any act which renders any such light-house, sea-mark, buoy or other 
such thing as aforesaid less useful as a guide for navigators, shall 
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both. 
434. 
Mischief by destroying or moving, etc., a land-mark fixed by public 
authority. 
434. Mischief by destroying or moving, etc., a land-mark fixed by 
public authority.--Whoever commits mischief by destroying or moving any land-mark fixed by the authority of a public servant, or by any 
act which renders such land-mark less useful as such, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to one year, or with fine, or with both. 
435. 
Mischief by fire or explosive substance with intent to cause damage to 
amount of one hundred or (in case of agricultural produce) ten 
rupees. 
435. Mischief by fire or explosive substance with intent to cause 
damage to amount of one hundred or (in case of agricultural produce) ten rupees.--Whoever commits mischief by fire or any explosive 
substance intending to cause, or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby cause, damage to any property to the amount of one hundred 
rupees or upwards 1*[or
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 192]
 he will thereby cause, damage to any property to the amount of one hundred 
rupees or upwards 1*[or (where the property is agricultural 
produce) ten rupees or upwards], shall be punished with imprisonment 
of either description for a term which may extend to seven years and 
shall also be liable to fine. 
436. 
Mischief by fire or explosive substance with intent to destroy house, 
etc. 
436. Mischief by fire or explosive substance with intent to 
destroy house, etc.--Whoever commits mischief by fire or any explosive 
substance, intending to cause, or knowing it to be likely that he will 
thereby cause. the destruction of any building which is ordinarily 
used as a place of worship or as a human dwelling or as a place for 
the custody of property, shall be punished with 2*[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 193]
           
 
 
 
 
 
              
    
 
 
                     
            
                 
             
                  
            
           
 
           
                 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
   
 
 
                      
                
            
             
                     
               
    
  
 
 
 
             
     
 
 
                   
           
                   
           
                 
               
             
     ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
437. 
Mischief with intent to destroy or make unsafe a decked vessel or one 
of twenty tons burden. 
437. Mischief with intent to destroy or make unsafe a decked 
vessel or one of twenty tons burden.--Whoever commits mischief to any decked vessel or any vessel of a burden of twenty tons or upwards, 
intending to destroy or render unsafe, or knowing it to be likely that 
he will thereby destroy or render unsafe, that vessel, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
1. Ins. by Act 8 of 1882, s. 10 
2. Subs, by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch, for "transportation for 
life". 
200 
438. 
Punishment for the mischief described in section 437 committed by fire 
or explosive substance. 
438. Punishment for the mischief described in section 437 
committed by fire or explosive substance.--Whoever commits, or attempts to commit, by fire or any explosive substance, such mischief as is described in the last preceding section. shall be punished with 
1*[imprisonment for life]. or with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also 
be liable to fine. 
439. 
Punishment for intentionally running vessel aground or ashore with 
intent to commit theft, etc. 
439. Punishme
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 193]
for intentionally running vessel aground or ashore with 
intent to commit theft, etc. 
439. Punishment for intentionally running vessel aground or 
ashore with intent to commit theft, etc.--Whoever intentionally runs any vessel aground or ashore, intending to commit theft of any 
property contained therein or to dishonestly misappropriate any such 
property, or with intent that such theft or misappropriation of 
property may be committed, shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 194]
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
               
               
              
               
            
        
                              
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
               
                  
           
 
               
             
         
 
           
  
 
 
 
 
 
                   
               
                 
           
 
                     
        
 
 
 
  
  
 
                440. 
Mischief committed after preparation made for causing death or hurt. 
440. Mischief committed after preparation made for causing death 
or hurt.-- Whoever commits mischief, having made preparation for 
causing to any person death, or hurt, or wrongful restraint, or fear of death, or hurt, or of wrongful restraint, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five 
years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
Of criminal trespass 
441. 
Criminal trespass. 
441. Criminal trespass.--Whoever enters into or upon property in 
the possession of another with intent to commit an offence or to 
intimidate, insult or annoy any person in possession of such property, 
or having lawfully entered into or upon such property, unlawfully 
remains there with intent thereby to intimidate, insult or annoy any such person, or with intent to commit an offence, 
is said to commit "criminal trespass". 
442. 
House-trespass. 
442. House-trespass.--Whoever commits criminal trespass by 
entering into or remaining in any building, tent or vessel used as a 
human dwelling or any building used as a place for worship, or as a 
place for the custody of property, is said to commit "house-trespass". 
Explanation.-The introduction of any part of the criminal 
trespasser's body is entering sufficient to constitute house-trespass. 
443. 
Lurking house-trespass. 
443. Lurking house-trespass.--Whoever commits house-trespass 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 195]
              
                 
             
    
 
 
 
  
    
  
               
               
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
             
             
               
                
            
                 
                   
             
  
 
                  
       
 
 
 
                 
                
            
         
                    
                    
              
            
                    
              
     
 
                      
            
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------
201 having taken precautions to conceal such house-trespass from some 
person who has a right to exclude or eject the trespasser from the 
building, tent or vessel which is the subject of the trespass, is said 
to commit "lurking house-trespass". 
444. 
Lurking house-trespass by night. 
444. Lurking house-trespass by night.--Whoever commits lurking 
house-trespass after sunset and before sunrise, is said to commit 
"lurking house-trespass by night". 
445. 
House-breaking. 
445. House-breaking.--A person is said to commit "house-breaking" 
who commits house-trespass if he effects his entrance into the house 
or any part of it in any of the six ways hereinafter described; or if, 
being in the house or any part of it for the purpose of committing an 
offence, or having committed an offence therein, he quits the house or 
any part of it in any of it in such six ways, that is to say : -
First.-If he enters or quits through a passage made by himself, 
or by any abettor of the house-trespass, in order to the committing of 
the house-trespass. 
1. Subs. by act. 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation 
for life". 
Secondly.-If he enters or quits through any passage not intended 
by any person, other than himself or an abettor of the offence, for 
human entrance; or through any passage to which he has obtained access 
by scaling or climbing o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 195]
or 
human entrance; or through any passage to which he has obtained access 
by scaling or climbing over any wall or building. 
Thirdly.-If he enters or quits through any passage which he or 
any abettor of the house-trespass has opened, in order to the 
committing of the house-trespass by any means by which that passage 
was not intended by the occupier of the house to be opened. 
Fourthly.-If he enters or quits by opening any lock in order to 
the committing of the house-trespass, or in order to the quitting of 
the house after a house-trespass. 
Fifthly.-If he effects his entrance or departure by using 
criminal force or committing an assault, or by threatening any person 
with assault. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 196]
 
                   
               
           
               
                     
                   
 
                              
 
                 
              
 
 
                   
      
 
                    
    
                   
           
 
                  
                 
    
                         
             
      
 
                   
                
 
 
                        
            
          
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
               
            
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Sixthly.-If he enters or quits by any passage which he knows to 
have been fastened against such entrance or departure, and to have been unfastened by himself or by an abettor of the house-trespass. 
Explanation.-Any out-house or building occupied with a house, and 
between which and such house there is an immediate internal 
communication, is part of the house within the meaning of this 
section. 
Illustrations 
(a) A commits house-trespass by making a hole through the wall of 
Z's house, and putting his hand through the aperture. This is house -
breaking. 
(b) A commits house-trespass by creeping into a ship at a port -
hole between decks. This is house-breaking. 
(c) A commits house-trespass by entering Z's house through a 
window. This is house-breaking. 
(d) A commits house-trespass by entering Z's house through the 
door, having opened a door which was fastened. This is house-breaking. 
(e) A commits house-trespass by entering Z's house through the 
door, having lifted a latch by putting a wire through a hole in the 
door. This is house-breaking. 
(f) A finds the key of Z's house door, which Z had lost, and 
commits house trespass by entering Z's house, having opened the door 
with that key. This is house-breaking. 
(g) Z is standing in his doorway. A forces a passage by knocking 
Z down, and commits house-trespass by entering the house. This is 
house-breaking. 
(h) Z, the door-keeper of Y, is standing in Y's doorway. A 
commits house-trespass by entering 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 196]
ng. 
(h) Z, the door-keeper of Y, is standing in Y's doorway. A 
commits house-trespass by entering the house, having deterred Z from 
opposing him by threatening to beat him. This is house-breaking. 
446. 
House-breaking by night. 
446. House-breaking by night.--Whoever commits house-breaking 
after sunset and before sunrise, is said to commit "house-breaking by 
night". 
447. 
Punishment for criminal trespass. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 197]
 
 
             
          
              
       
  
 
 
 
   
  
                 
          
                
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
  
                 
           
                      
             
           
 
 
 
 
 
         
  
 
 
                 
         
                 
           
            
 
 
 
  
                     
 
                   202 447. Punishment for criminal trespass.--Whoever commits criminal 
trespass shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for 
a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend 
to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
448. 
Punishment for house-trespass. 
448. Punishment for house-trespass.--Whoever commits house-
trespass shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for 
a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to 
one thousand rupees, or with both. 
449. 
House-trespass in order to commit offence punishable with death. 
449. House-trespass in order to commit offence punishable with 
death.--Whoever commits house-trespass in order to the committing of 
any offence punishable with death, shall be punished with 
1*[imprisonment for life], or with rigorous imprisonment for a term 
not exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
450. 
House-trespass in order to commit offence punishable with imprisonment 
for life. 
450. House-trespass in order to commit offence punishable with 
imprisonment for life.--Whoever commits house-trespass in order to the committing of any offence punishable with 1*[imprisonment for 
life], shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term not exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
451. 
House-trespass in order to commit offence punishable with 
imprisonment. 
451. House-trespass in order to commit offence punishable with 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 198]
                
               
            
                   
                       
       
 
 
 
 
 
                
 
 
 
                    
            
                 
             
             
             
            
  
 
  
      
 
 
              
            
            
           
  
 
  
            
   
 
 
               
        
            
           
                
                    
               
  
 
 
 
 
 
          imprisonment.--Whoever commits house-trespass in order to the committing of any offence punishable with imprisonment, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to two years, and shall also be liable to fine; and if the 
offence intended to be committed is theft, the term of the 
imprisonment may be extended to seven years. 
452. 
House-trespass alter preparation for hurt, assault or wrongful 
restraint. 
452. House-trespass alter preparation for hurt, assault or 
wrongful restraint.--Whoever commits house-trespass, having made preparation for causing hurt to any person or for assaulting any 
person, or for wrongfully restraining any person, or for putting and 
person in fear of hurt, or of assault, or of wrongful restraint, shall 
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which 
may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
453. 
Punishment for lurking house-trespass or house-breaking. 
453. Punishment for lurking house-trespass or house-breaking.- -
Whoever commits lurking house-trespass or house-breaking, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to two years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
454. 
Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking in order to commit offence 
punishable with imprisonment. 
454. Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking in order to commit 
offence punishable with imprisonment.--Whoever commits lurking house-trespass or house-breaking, in order to the commit
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 198]
with imprisonment.--Whoever commits lurking house-trespass or house-breaking, in order to the committing of any offence punishable with imprisonment, shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to three years, and 
shall also be liable to fine; and if the offence intended to be 
committed is theft, the term of the imprisonment may be extended to 
ten years. 
455. 
Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking after preparation for hurt, 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 199]
    
 
 
              
             
        
               
               
                     
              
        
 
 
 
 
 
        
  
               
            
                
             
    
 
 
 
 
 
            
    
 
 
                
             
            
            
             
                 
                    
       
 
 
 
 
 
           
      
 
 
                  
        
            
             
             
             
             assault or wrongful restraint. 
455. Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking after preparation 
for hurt, assault or wrongful restraint.--Whoever commits lurking house-trespass, or house-breaking, having made preparation for causing hurt to any person, or for assaulting any person, or for wrongfully 
restraining any person, or for putting any person in fear of hurt or 
of assault or of wrongful restraint, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description or a term which may extend to ten 
years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
456. 
Punishment for lurking house-trespass or house-breaking by night. 
456. Punishment for lurking house-trespass or house-breaking by 
night.--Whoever commits lurking house-trespass by night, or house -
breaking by night, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also 
be liable to fine. 
457. 
Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking by night in order to commit 
offence punishable with imprisonment. 
457. Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking by night in order 
to commit offence punishable with imprisonment.--Whoever commits lurking house-trespass by night, or house-breaking by night in order to the committing of any offence punishable with imprisonment, shall 
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which 
may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine; and, if 
the offence intended to be committed is theft, the term of the 
imprisonment
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 199]
iable to fine; and, if 
the offence intended to be committed is theft, the term of the 
imprisonment may be extended to fourteen years. 
458. 
Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking by night after preparation 
for hurt, assault, or wrongful restraint. 
458. Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking by night after 
preparation for hurt, assault, or wrongful restraint.--Whoever commits 
lurking house-trespass by night, or house-breaking by night, having 
made preparation for causing hurt to any person or for assaulting any 
person, or for wrongfully restraining any person, or for putting any 
person in fear of hurt, or of assault, or of wrongful restraint, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 200]
            
 
                
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
              
 
                      
       
               
                  
             
               
    
 
 
 
  
              
              
   
  
                
          
                
               
                
                  
          
                
             
        
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
              
            
           
                
              
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------
203 may extend to fourteen years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for 
life". 
459. 
Grievous hurt caused whilst committing lurking house-trespass or 
house-breaking. 
459. Grievous hurt caused whilst committing lurking house-
trespass or house-breaking.--Whoever, whilst committing lurking house-trespass or house-breaking, causes grievous hurt to any person or 
attempts to cause death or grievous hurt to any person, shall be 
punished with 1*[imprisonment for life], or imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also 
be liable to fine. 
460. 
All persons jointly concerned in lurking house-trespass or house -
breaking by night punishable where death or grievous hurt caused by 
one of them. 
460. All persons jointly concerned in lurking house-trespass or 
house-breaking by night punishable where death or grievous hurt caused by one of them.--If at the time of the committing of lurking house-trespass by night or house-breaking by night, any person guilty of 
such offence shall voluntarily cause or attempt to cause death or 
grievous hurt to any person, every person jointly concerned in 
committing such lurkking house-trespass by night or house-breaking by 
night, shall be punished with 1*[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of either description for a term whi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 200]
e punished with 1*[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten 
years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
461. 
Dishonestly breaking open receptacle containing property. 
461. Dishonestly breaking open receptacle containing property.- -
Whoever dishonestly or with intent to commit mischief, breaks open or 
unfastens any closed receptacle which contains or which he believes to 
contain property, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 201]
 
 
 
 
 
             
 
 
 
                      
             
              
           
           
            
          
 
 
  
 
 
         
 
 
                              
 
              
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                    
                
                
                    
                     
   
 
 
 
 
 
    
  
                   
 
                  
              
                
               
                  462. 
Punishment for same offence when committed by person entrusted with 
custody. 
462. Punishment for same offence when committed by person 
entrusted with custody.--Whoever, being entrusted with any closed receptacle which contains or which he believes to contain property 
without having authority to open the same, dishonestly, or with intent 
to commit mischief, breaks open or unfastens that receptacle, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
CHAPTER XVIII 
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO DOCUMENTS AND TO PROPERTY MARKS 
CHAPTER XVIII 
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO DOCUMENTS AND TO 2****PROPERTY MARKS 
463. Forgery. 
463. Forgery.--Whoever makes any false document or part of a 
document with intent to cause damage or injury, to the public or to 
any person, or to support any claim or title, or to cause any person 
to part with property, or to enter into any express or implied 
contract, or with intent to commit fraud or that fraud may be 
committed, commits forgery. 
464. 
Making a false document. 
464. Making a false document.--A person is said to make a false 
document -
First.-Who dishonestly or fraudulently makes, signs, seals or 
executes a document or part of a document, or makes any mark denoting 
the execution of a document, with the intention of causing it to be 
believed that such document or part of a document was made, signed, sealed or executed by or by the authority of a person by whom or by 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 201]
executed by or by the authority of a person by whom or by 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 202]
                  
               
    
 
                     
            
               
              
       
 
                 
              
                 
             
         
 
                
      
                   
       
 
 
 
 
                             
 
                   
                
                 
      
 
                      
                    
               
      
 
                         
                 
             
    
                      
               
               
           
           
 
                          
            
               
                 
                 
      
 
                
                   
                ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------
204 whose authority he knows that it was not made, signed, sealed or 
executed, or at a time at which he knows that it was not made, signed, 
sealed or executed; or 
Secondly.-Who, without lawful authority, dishonestly or 
fraudulently, by cancellation or otherwise, alters a document in any 
material part thereof, after it has been made or executed either by 
himself or by any other person, whether such person be living or dead 
at the time of such alteration; or 
Thirdly.-Who dishonestly or fraudulently causes any person to 
sign, seal, execute or alter a document, knowing that such person by 
reason of unsoundness of mind or intoxication cannot, or that by 
reason of deception practised upon him, he does not know the contents 
of the document or the nature of the alteration. 
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for 
life". 
2. The words "Trade or" omitted by Act 43 of 1958, s. 135 and Sch. (w.e.f. 25-11-1959). 
Illustrations 
(a) A has a letter of credit upon B for rupees 10,000, written by 
Z. A, in order to defraud B, adds cipher to the 10,000, and makes the 
sum 1,00,000 intending that it 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 202]
 A, in order to defraud B, adds cipher to the 10,000, and makes the 
sum 1,00,000 intending that it may be believed by B that Z so wrote the letter. A has committed forgery. 
(b) A without Z's authority, affixes Z's seal to a document 
purporting to be a conveyance of an estate from Z to A, with the 
intention of selling the estate to B and thereby of obtaining from B 
the purchase-money. A has committed forgery. 
(c) A picks up a cheque on a banker signed by B, payable to 
bearer, but without any sum having been inserted in the cheque. A 
fraudulently fills up the cheque by inserting the sum of ten thousand 
rupees. A commits forgery. 
(d) A leaves with B, his agent, a cheque on a banker, signed by 
A, without inserting the sum payable and authorizes B to fill up the 
cheque by inserting a sum not exceeding ten thousand rupees for the 
purpose of making certain payments. B fraudulently fills up the cheque 
by inserting the sum of twenty thousand rupees. B commits forgery. 
(e) A draws a bill of exchange on himself in the name of B 
without B's authority, intending to discount it as a genuine bill with 
a banker and intending to take up the bill on its maturity. Here, as A 
draws the bill with intent to deceive the banker by leading him to suppose that he had the security of B, and thereby to discount the 
bill, A is guilty of forgery. 
(f) Z's will contains these words-"I direct that all my remaining 
property be equally divided between A, B and C." A dishonestly 
scratches out B's name, intending that it may be believed that the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 203]
           
 
                 
                  
              
             
       
 
                   
               
                  
                   
          
 
                       
                 
            
     
 
                       
                    
            
              
                
   
 
                    
                  
            
              
        
 
 
 
                   
 
 
                             
 
                   
               
     
 
                   
                  
               
                 
               
     
                          
                  
              
            
                        
                205 whole was left to himself and C. A has committed forgery. 
(g) A endorses a Government promissory note and makes it payable 
to Z< for his order by writing on the bill the words "Pay to Z or his 
order" and signing the endorsement. B dishonestly erases the words 
"Pay to Z or his order", and thereby converts the special endorsement into a blank endorsement. B commits forgery. 
(h) A sells and conveys an estate to Z. A afterwards, in order to 
defraud Z of his estate, executes a conveyance of the same estate to B, dated six months earlier than the date of the conveyance to Z, intending it to be believed that he had conveyed the estate to B 
before he conveyed it to Z. A has committed forgery. 
(i) Z dictates his will to A. A intentionally writes down a 
different legatee named by Z, and by representing to Z that he has 
prepared the will according to his instructions, induces Z to sign the 
will. A has committed forgery. 
(j) A writes a letter and signs it with B's name without B's 
authority, certifying that A is a man of good character and in 
distressed circumstances from unforeseen misfortune, intending by 
means of such letter to obtain alms from Z and other persons. Here, as 
A made a false document in order to induce Z to part with property
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 203]
om Z and other persons. Here, as 
A made a false document in order to induce Z to part with property, A 
has committed forgery. 
(k) A without B's authority writes a letter and signs it in B's 
name certifying to A's character, intending thereby to obtain 
employment under Z. A has committed forgery inasmuch as he intended to 
deceive Z by the forged certificate, and thereby to induce Z to enter 
into an express or implied contract for service. 
Explanation I.-A man's signature of his own name may amount to 
forgery. 
Illustrations 
(a) A signs his own name to a bill of exchange, intending that it 
may be believed that the bill was drawn by another person of the same name. A has committed forgery. 
(b) A writes the word "accepted" on a piece of paper and signs it 
with Z's name, in order that B may afterwards write on the paper a bill of exchange drawn by B upon Z, and negotiate the bills as though it had been accepted by Z. A is guilty of forgery; and if B, knowing 
the fact, draws the bill upon the paper pursuant to A's intention, B 
is also guilty of forgery. 
(c) A picks up a bill of exchange payable to the order of a 
different person of the same name. A endorses the bill in his own 
name, intending to cause it to be believed that it was endorsed by the 
person to whose order it was payable; here A has committed forgery. 
(d) A purchases an estate sold under execution of a decree 
against B. B, after the seizure of the estate, in collusion with Z, 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 204]
                  
                  
               
             
      
 
                  
              
             
                
              
                 
     
 
                    
               
              
                     
     
 
                              
 
                           
              
        
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
                
            
          
 
 
 
 
 
          
  
                    
             
              
                       
              
             
             
          
                
  
 
 
 executes a lease of the estate to Z at a nominal rent and for a long 
period and dates the lease six months prior to the seizure, with 
intent to defraud A, and to cause it to be believed that the lease was 
granted before the seizure. B, though he executes the lease in his own 
name, commits forgery by antedating it. 
(e) A, a trader, in anticipation of insolvency, lodges effects 
with B for A's benefit, and with intent to defraud his creditors; and 
in order to give a colour to the transaction, writes a promissory note 
binding himself to pay to B a sum for value received, and antedates 
the note, intending that it may be believed to have been made before A was on the point of insolvency. A has committed forgery under the 
first head of the definition. 
Explanation 2.-The making of a false document in the name of a 
fictious person, intending it to be believed that the document was 
made by real person, or in the name of a deceased person, intending it 
to be believed that the document was made by the person in his 
lifetime, may amount to forgery. 
Illustration 
A draws a bill of exchange upon a fictious person, and 
fraudulently accepts the bill in the name of such fictitious person 
with intent to negotiate it. A commits forgery. 
465. 
Punishment for forgery. 
465. Punishment for forgery.--Whoever commits forgery shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term whic
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 204]
--Whoever commits forgery shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
466. 
Forgery of record of Court or of public register, etc. 
466. Forgery of record of Court or of public register, etc.- -
Whoever forges a document, purporting to be a record or proceeding of 
or in a Court of Justice, or a register of birth, baptism, marriage or 
burial, or a register kept by a public servant as such, or a 
certificate or document purporting to be made by a public servant in 
his official capacity, or an authority to institute or defend a suit, 
or to take any proceedings therein, or to confess judgment, or a power of attorney, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description 
for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable 
to fine. 
206 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 205]
 
 
 
 
      
  
                
                 
               
               
           
                 
            
             
                        
           
                
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
  
               
                           
                
  
 
 
 
  
      
 
 
              
           
                      
          
                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
                
      
 467. 
Forgery of valuable security, will, etc. 
467. Forgery of valuable security, will, etc.--Whoever forges a 
document which purports to be a valuable security or a will, or an 
authority to adopt a son, or which purports to give authority to any 
person to make or transfer any valuable security, or to receive the principal, interest or dividends thereon, or to receive or deliver any 
money, movable property, or valuable security, or any document 
purporting to be an acquittance or receipt acknowledging the payment 
of money, or an acquittance or receipt for the delivery of any movable 
property or valuable security, shall be punished with 1 *[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of either description 
for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
468. 
Forgery for purpose of cheating. 
468. Forgery for purpose of cheating.--Whoever commits forgery, 
intending that the document forged shall be used for the purpose of 
cheating, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description 
for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable 
to fine. 
469. 
Forgery for purpose of harming reputation. 
469. Forgery for purpose of harming reputation.--Whoever commits 
forgery, intending that the document forged shall harm the reputation 
of any party, or knowing that it is likely to be used for that 
purpose, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for 
a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
470. 
Forged document. 
470. Forged document.--A fals
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 205]
ree years, and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
470. 
Forged document. 
470. Forged document.--A false document made wholly or in part by 
forgery is designated "a forged document". 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 206]
 
 
 
 
      
  
              
             
                  
        
  
 
 
 
              
     
 
 
                
                
                  
              
            
              
             
             
              
      
  
 
 
 
              
   
 
 
                
          
                   
               
                  
                  
            
                
             
    
 
 
 
 
 
           
          
 471. 
Using as genuine a forged document. 
471. Using as genuine a forged document.--Whoever fraudulently or 
dishonestly uses as genuine any document which he knows or has reason 
to believe to be a forged document, shall be punished in the same 
manner as if he had forged such document. 
472. 
Making or possessing counterfeit seal, etc., with intent to commit 
forgery punishable under section 467. 
472. Making or possessing counterfeit seal, etc., with intent to 
commit forgery punishable under section 467.--Whoever makes or counterfeits any seal, plate or other instrument for making an 
impression, intending that the same shall be used for the purpose of 
committing any forgery which would be punishable under section 467 of 
this Code, or, with such intent, has in his possession any such seal, 
plate or other instrument, knowing the same to be counterfeit, shall 
be punishable with 1*[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment 
of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and 
shall also be liable to fine. 
473. 
Making or possessing counterfeit seal, etc., with intent to commit 
forgery punishable otherwise. 
473. Making or possessing counterfeit seal, etc., with intent to 
commit forgery punishable otherwise.--Whoever makes or counterfeits any seal, plate or other instrument for making an impression, 
intending that the same shall be used for the purpose of committing 
any forgery which would be punishable under any section of this 
Chapter other than section 467, or, with su
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 206]
ery which would be punishable under any section of this 
Chapter other than section 467, or, with such intent, has in his 
possession any such seal, plate or other instrument, knowing the same to be counterfeit, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also 
be liable to fine. 
474. 
Having possession of document described in section 466 or 467, knowing 
it to be forged and intending to use it genuine. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 207]
 
                  
            
             
             
            
                
             
                   
               
                
             
 
                
       
 
  
 
  
               
         
 
 
                    
           
              
              
               
                    
            
                 
                
                  
           
                
  
  
 
  
          
           
 
  
                    
              
            
             
              
              
              
              ----------------------------------------------------------------------474. Having possession of document described in section 466 or 
467, knowing it to be forged and intending to use it genuine.--Whoever 
has in his possession any document, knowing the same to be forged, and 
intending that the same shall fraudulently or dishonestly be used as 
genuine, shall, if the document is one of the description mentioned in section 466 of this Code, be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also 
be liable to fine; and if the document is one of the description 
mentioned in section 467, shall be punished with 1*[imprisonment 
for life], or with imprisonment of either description, for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955. s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for 
life". 
207 
475. 
Counterfeiting device or mark used for authenticating documents 
described in section 467, or possessing counterfeit marked material. 
475. Counterfeiting device or mark used for authenticating 
documents described in section 467, or possessing counterfeit marked material.--Whoever counterfeits upon, or in the substance of, any 
material, any device or mark used for the purpose of authenticating 
any document described in section 467 of this Code, intending that 
such device or mark sh
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 207]
ticating 
any document described in section 467 of this Code, intending that 
such device or mark shall be used for the purpose of giving the 
appearance of authenticity to any document then forged or thereafter 
to be forged on such material, or who, with such intent, has in his 
possession any material upon or in the substance of which any such 
device or mark has been counterfeited, shall be punished with 1 *[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of either description 
for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable 
to fine. 
476. 
Counterfeiting device or mark used for authenticating documents other 
than those described in section 467, or possessing counterfeit marked material. 
476. Counterfeiting device or mark used for authenticating 
documents other than those described in section 467, or possessing counterfeit marked material.--Whoever counterfeits upon, or in the 
substance of, any material, any device or mark used for the purpose of 
authenticating any document other than the documents described in 
section 467 of this Code, intending that such device or mark shall be 
used for the purpose of giving the appearance of authenticity to any document then forged or thereafter to be forged on such material, or 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 208]
                
            
             
             
 
 
 
  
             
    
 
 
                    
            
             
              
               
                 
                   
             
                
         
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
                 
              
            
              
                
                      
            
              
               
            
                
        
 
                   
                 
                   
                
         
 
                      
 
 
 
 
 
 who with such intent, has in his possession any material upon or in the substance of which any such device or mark has been counterfeited, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
477. 
Fraudulent cancellation, destruction, etc., of will, authority to 
adopt, or valuable security. 
477. Fraudulent cancellation, destruction, etc., of will, 
authority to adopt, or valuable security.--Whoever fraudulently or dishonestly, or with intent to cause damage or injury to the public or to any person, cancels, destroys or defaces, or attempts to cancel, 
destroy or deface, or secretes or attempts to secrete any document 
which is or purports to be a will, or an authority to adopt a son, or 
any valuable security, or commits mischief in respect of such 
document, shall be punished with 1*[imprisonment for life], or with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
477A. 
Falsification of accounts. 
2*[477A. Falsification of accounts.--Whoever, being a clerk, 
officer or servant, or employed or acting in the capacity of a clerk, 
officer or servant, willfully, and with intent to defraud, destroys, 
alters, mutilates or falsifies any book, paper, writing, valuable 
security or account which belongs to or is in the possession of his employer, or has been 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 208]
valuable 
security or account which belongs to or is in the possession of his employer, or has been received by him for or on behalf of his 
employer, or willfully, and with intent to defraud, makes or abets the 
making of any false entry in, or omits or alters or abets the omission 
or alteration of any material particular from or in. any such book, 
paper, writing, valuable security or account, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
seven years, or with fine, or with both. 
Explanation.-It shall be sufficient in any charge under this 
section to allege a general intent to defraud without naming any 
particular person intended to be defrauded or specifying any 
particular sum of money intended to be the subject of the fraud, or 
any particular day on which the offence was committed.] 
3*[Of 4****property and other marks 
478. 
[Repealed.] 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 209]
 
 
                  
           
 
                
      
           
                   
        
                     
       
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
                   
           
  
 
 
 
 
  
                           
              
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
  
                   
            
                    
           
                 
                
                 
  
 
 
 
 
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------
208 478. [Trade Mark.] Rep. by the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 
1958 (43 of 1958),s. 135 and Sch. (w. e. f. 25-11-1959). 1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for 
life". 
2. Added by Act 3 of 1895, s. 4. 
3. Subs. by Act. 4 of 1889, s. 3, for the original heading and ss. 
478 to 489. 
4. The word "trade," omitted by Act 43 of 1958, s. 135 and Sch. 
(w.e.f. 25-11-1959). 
479. 
Property mark. 
1*479. Property mark.--A mark used for denoting that movable 
property belongs to a particular person is called a property mark. 480. 
[Repealed.] 
480. [Using a false trade mark.] Rep. by the Trade and 
Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 (43 of 1958), s. 135 and Sch. (w.e.f. 25 -
11-1959). 
481. 
Using a false property mark. 
481. Using a false property mark.--Whoever marks any movable 
property or goods or any case, package or other receptacle containing 
movable property or goods, or uses any case, package or other 
receptacle having any mark thereon, in a manner reasonably calculated 
to cause it to be believed that the property or goods so marked, or 
any property or goods contained in any such receptacle so marked, 
belong to a person to whom they do not belong, is said to use a false property mark. 
482. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 210]
       
 
 
                 
                              
               
  
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
                  
            
            
          
  
 
 
 
        
  
                  
              
                     
             
              
              
              
            
           
  
 
  
            
 
                              
                   
                 
            
               
                
              
   
  
 Punishment for using a false property mark. 
482. Punishment for using a false property mark.--Whoever uses 
1***any false property mark shall, unless he proves that he acted without intent to defraud, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or 
with both. 
483. 
Counterfeiting a property mark used by another. 
483. Counterfeiting a property mark used by another.--Whoever 
counterfeits any 3****property mark used by any other person shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
484. Counterfeiting a mark used by a public servant. 
484. Counterfeiting a mark used by a public servant.--Whoever 
counterfeits any property mark used by a public servant, or any mark 
used by a public servant to denote that any property has been 
manufactured by a particular person or at a particular time or place, 
or that the property is of a particular quality or has passed through 
a particular office, or that it is entitled to any exemption, or uses 
as genuine any such mark knowing the same to be counterfeit, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
485. 
Making or possession of any instrument for counterfeiting a property 
mark. 
4*[485. Making or possession of any instrument for 
counterfeiting a property mark.--Whoever makes or has in his possession any die, plate or 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 210]
ment for 
counterfeiting a property mark.--Whoever makes or has in his possession any die, plate or other instrument for the purpose of 
counterfeiting a proper mark, or has in his possession a property mark 
for the purpose of denoting that any goods belong to a person to whom they do not belong, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, 
or with both.] 
486. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 211]
 
 
        
 
 
                  
            
              
                
         
 
                      
      
                 
          
                     
       
                  
      
               
      
 
 
 
 
                     
                 
                   
          
 
                       
                      
                
                 
 
             
           
  
 
 
 
         
 
                 
                     
              
                 
               
              
              
                 
              
              
   ----------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------
209 Selling goods marked with a counterfeit property mark. 
486. Selling goods marked with a counterfeit property mark.- -
5*[Whoever sells, or exposes, or has in possession for sale, any goods 
or things with a counterfeit property mark] affixed to or impressed 
upon the same or to or upon any case, package or other receptacle in 
which such goods are contained, shall, unless he proves -
1. Ss. 147 to 489 were subs. by Act 4 of 1889, for the original 
sections. 
2. The words "any false trade mark or" omitted by Act 43 of 1958, s. 
135 and Sch. (w.e.f. 25-11-1959). 
3. The words "trade mark or" omitted by s. 135 and Sch., ibid. 
(w.e.f. 25-11-1959). 
4. Subs. by s. 135 and Sch., ibid., for the former section (w.e.f 25-11-1959). 
5. Subs. by s. 135 and Sch., ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 25-11 -
1959). 
(a) that, having taken all reasonable precautions against 
committing an offence against this section, he had at the time of 
the commission of the alleged offence no reason to suspect the 
genuineness of the mark, and 
(b) that, on demand made by or on behalf of the prosecutor, 
he gave all the information in his power with respect to the 
persons from whom he obtained such goods or things, or 
(c) that otherwise he had act
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 211]
espect to the 
persons from whom he obtained such goods or things, or 
(c) that otherwise he had acted innocently, 
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which 
may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both. 
487. 
Making a false mark upon any receptacle containing goods. 
487. Making a false mark upon any receptacle containing goods.- -
Whoever makes any false mark upon any case, package or other 
receptacle containing goods, in a manner reasonably calculated to 
cause any public servant or any other person to believe that such 
receptacle contains goods which it does not contain or that it does not contain goods which it does contain, or that the goods contained 
in such receptacle are of a nature or quality different from the real 
nature or quality thereof, shall, unless he proves that he acted 
without intent to defraud, be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 212]
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
                 
               
           
             
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
             
                
              
                    
               
  
                     
  
 
  
    
  
                
                  
         
                     
               
    
 
                  
               
               
             
               
                 
   
  
 
 
 
         488. 
Punishment for making use of any such false mark. 
488. Punishment for making use of any such false mark.--Whoever 
makes use of any such false mark in any manner prohibited by the last 
foregoing section shall, unless he proves that he acted without intent to defraud, be punished as if he had committed an offence against that 
section. 
489. 
Tampering with property mark with intent to cause injury. 
489. Tampering with property mark with intent to cause injury.- -
Whoever removes, destroys, defaces or adds to any property mark, 
intending or knowing it to be likely that he may thereby cause injury 
to any person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or 
with both.] 
1*[Of currency-notes and bank-notes 
489A. 
Counterfeiting currency-notes or bank-notes. 
489A. Counterfeiting currency-notes or bank-notes.--Whoever 
counterfeits, or knowingly performs any part of the process of 
counterfeiting, any currency-note or bank-note, shall be punished with 
2*[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also 
be liable to fine. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section and of sections 
489B, 3*[489C, 489D and 489E], the expression "bank-note" means a 
promissory note or engagement for the payment of money to bearer on 
demand issued by any person carrying on the business of banking in any 
part of the world, or issued by or under the authority of any State or 
Sovereign Power,
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 212]
ing in any 
part of the world, or issued by or under the authority of any State or 
Sovereign Power, and intended to be used as equivalent to, or as a 
substitute for money. 
489B. 
Using as genuine, forged or counterfeit currency-notes or bank-notes. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 213]
 
 
                
              
                
            
             
           
                
 
 
                
 
                
      
 
                  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
  
              
                 
             
                  
                  
                
        
 
 
 
  
                   
     
 
 
                
            
                                  
             
             
                       
           
                
 
 
 
 
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------489B. Using as genuine, forged or counterfeit currency-notes or 
bank-notes.--Whoever sells to, or buys or receives from, any other 
person, or otherwise traffics in or uses as genuine, any forged or 
counterfeit currency-note or bank-note, knowing or having reason to believe the same to be forged or counterfeit, shall be punished with 2 
*[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of either description 
for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
1. Ss. 489A to 489D were ins. by Act 12 of 1899, s. 2 
2. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for 
life". 
3. Subs. by Act 35 of 1950, s. 3 and Sch., II, for "489C and 489D". 
210 
489C. 
Possession of forged or counterfeit currency-notes or bank-note. 
489C. Possession of forged or counterfeit currency-notes or bank-
notes.-Whoever has in his possession any forged or counterfeit 
currency-note or bank-note, knowing or having reason to believe the 
same to be forged or counterfeit and intending to use the same as 
genuine or that it may be used as genuine, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
seven years, or with fine, or with both. 
489D. 
Making or possessing instruments or materials for forging or 
counterfeiting currency notes or bank-notes. 
489D. Making or possessing instruments or materials for forging 
or counterfeiting currency note
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 213]
s. 
489D. Making or possessing instruments or materials for forging 
or counterfeiting currency notes or bank-notes.--Whoever makes, or performs any part of the process of making, or buys of sells or disposes of, or has in his possession, any machinery, instrument of 
material for the purpose of being used, or knowing or having reason to 
believe that it is intended to be used, for forging or counterfeiting 
any currency-note or bank-note, shall be punished with 1 
*[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to 
fine.] 
489E. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 214]
 
        
 
 
                 
              
                 
             
             
          
 
                  
              
             
              
            
 
                       
                             
              
         
  
  
  
        
 
 
                                    
 
                        
  
 
 
 
                  
              
     
 
 
 
 
 
            
  
                 
             
                      
              
               
           
              
            Making or using documents resembling currency-notes or bank-notes. 
2*[489E. Making or using documents resembling currency-notes 
or bank-notes.--(1) Whoever makes, or causes to be made, or uses for 
any purpose whatsoever, or delivers to any person, any document 
purporting to be, or in any way resembling, or so nearly resembling as 
to be calculated to deceive, any currency-note or bank-note shall be 
punished with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees. 
(2) If any person, whose name appears on a document the making of 
which is an offence under sub-section (1), refuses, without lawful 
excuse, to disclose to a police-officer on being so required the name 
and address of the person by whom it was printed or otherwise made, he 
shall be punished with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees. 
(3) Where the name of any person appears on any document in 
respect of which any person is charged with an offence under sub -
section (1) or on any other document used or distributed in connection 
with that document it may, until the contrary is proved, be presumed 
that that person caused the document to be made.] 
CHAPTER XIX 
OF THE CRIMINAL BREACH OF CONTRACTS OF SERVICE 
CHAPTER XIX 
OF THE CRIMINAL BREACH OF CONTRACTS OF SERVICE 
490. 
490. [Preach of contract of service during voyage or journey.] 
Rep. by the Workmen's Breach of Contract (Repealing) Act, 1925 (3 of 
1925), s. 2 and Sch. 
491. 
Breach of contract to att
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 214]
reach of Contract (Repealing) Act, 1925 (3 of 
1925), s. 2 and Sch. 
491. 
Breach of contract to attend on and supply wants of helpless person. 
491. Breach of contract to attend on and supply wants of helpless 
person.--Whoever, being bound by a lawful contract to attend on or to 
supply the wants of any person who, by reason of youth, or of 
unsoundness of mind, or of a disease or bodily weakness, is helpless 
or incapable of providing for his own safety or of supplying his own 
wants, voluntarily omits so to do, shall be punished with imprisonment 
of either description for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, or with both. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 215]
 
 
 
 
 
                      
           
            
 
                
       
              
 
 
  
  
 
 
     
  
                                    
 
                           
 
 
 
 
 
             
 
 
 
                 
              
                          
             
             
 
 
 
 
 
        
  
              
                 
              
                  
             
    
 
                    ----------------------------------------------------------------------
211 492. 
492. [Breach of contract to serve at distant place to which 
servant is conveyed at master's expense.] Rep. by the Workmen's Breach 
of Contract (Repealing) Act, 1925 (3 of 1925), s. 2 and Sch. 
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation for 
life". 
2. S. 489E was ins. by Act 6 of 1943, s. 2. 
CHAPTER XX 
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO MARRIAGE 
CHAPTER XX 
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO MARRIAGE 
493. Cohabitation caused by a man deceitfully inducing a belief of lawful 
marriage. 
493. Cohabitation caused by a man deceitfully inducing a belief 
of lawful marriage.--Every man who by deceit causes any woman who is 
not lawfully married to him to believe that she is lawfully married to 
him and to cohabit or have sexual intercourse with him in that belief, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
494. 
Marrying again during lifetime of husband or wife. 
494. Marrying again during lifetime of husband or wife.--Whoever, 
having a husband or wife living, marries in any case in which such 
marriage is void by reason of its taking place during the life of such 
husband or wife, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also 
be liable to fine. 
Exception.-This section does not extend to any person whose 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 215]
rson whose 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 216]
               
   
 
                    
                 
              
               
                
         
             
                        
 
  
 
  
           
    
 
 
               
             
             
             
            
               
    
 
 
 
  
        
 
                
          
             
                
             
    
  
 
  
 
 
 
               
                      
                 
             
              
              
                marriage with such husband or wife has been declared void by a Court of competent jurisdiction, 
nor to any person who contracts a marriage during the life of a 
former husband or wife, if such husband or wife, at the time of the subsequent marriage, shall have been continually absent from such person for the space of seven years, and shall not have been heard of 
by such person as being alive within that time provided the person 
contracting such subsequent marriage shall, before such marriage takes 
place, inform the person with whom such marriage is contracted of the 
real state of facts so far as the same are within his or her knowledge. 
495. 
Same offence with concealment of former marriage from person with whom 
subsequent marriage is contracted. 
495. Same offence with concealment of former marriage from person 
with whom subsequent marriage is contracted.--Whoever commits the offence defined in the last preceding section having concealed from 
the person with whom the subsequent marriage is contracted, the fact 
of the former marriage, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also 
be liable to fine. 
496. 
Marriage ceremony fraudulently gone through without lawful marriage. 
496. Marriage ceremony fraudulently gone through without lawful 
marriage.--Whoever, dishonestly or with a fraudulent intention, goes 
through the ceremony of being married, knowing that he is not thereby 
lawfully m
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 216]
t intention, goes 
through the ceremony of being married, knowing that he is not thereby 
lawfully married, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
497. 
Adultery. 
497. Adultery.--Whoever has sexual intercourse with a person who 
is and whom he knows or has reason to believe to be the wife of 
another man, without the consent or connivance of that man, such 
sexual intercourse not amounting to the offence of rape, is guilty of 
the offence of adultery, and shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both. In such case the wife shall not be punishable as 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 217]
  
 
 
 
 
 
              
 
 
 
                 
               
                                       
             
                 
           
             
 
 
  
  
        
 
 
                                    
                         
  
 
  
            
  
                 
           
                   
             
    
 
             
 
 
              
 
                            
                                           
          
                       
                      
                   ----------------------------------------------------------------------
212 an abettor. 
498. 
Enticing or taking away or detaining with criminal intent a married 
woman. 
498. Enticing or taking away or detaining with criminal intent a 
married woman.--Whoever takes or entices away any woman who is and whom he knows or has reason to believe to be the wife of any other 
man, from that man, or from any person having the care of her on 
behalf of that man, with intent that she may have illicit intercourse 
with any person, or conceals or detains with that intent any such woman, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
CHAPTER XXA 
OF CRUELTY BY HUSBAND OR RELATIVES OF HUSBAND 
1*[CHAPTER XXA 
OF CRUELTY BY HUSBAND OR RELATIVES OF HUSBAND 
498A. 
Husband or relative of husband of a woman subjecting her to cruelty. 
498A. Husband or relative of husband of a woman subjecting her to 
cruelty.--Whoever, being the husband or the relative of the husband of 
a woman, subjects such woman to cruelty shall be punished with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine. 
1. Chapter XXA inserted by Act 46 of 1983, s. 2. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, "cruelty" means -
(a) any wilful conduct which is of such a nature as is 
likely to drive the woman to commit suicide or to cause grave 
injury or danger to life, li
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 217]
e as is 
likely to drive the woman to commit suicide or to cause grave 
injury or danger to life, limb or health (whether mental or 
physical) of the woman; or 
(b) harassment of the woman where such harassment is with a 
view to coercing her or any person related to her to meet any 
unlawful demand for any property or valuable security or is on 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 218]
                     
       
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
                                     
                                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                
            
            
                    
              
     
                 
            
              
     
 
                
               
 
 
                   
      
 
                        
              
             
              
                   
                        
                              
                         
               
          
 
                     
                
        account of failure by her or any person related to her to meet 
such demand.] 
CHAPTER XXI 
OF DEFAMATION 
CHAPTER XXI 
OF DEFAMATION 
499. Defamation. 
499. Defamation.--Whoever by words either spoken or intended to 
be read, or by signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes 
any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or 
having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the 
reputation of such person, is said, except in the cases hereinafter 
excepted, to defame that person. 
Explanation 1.-It may amount to defamation to impute anything to 
a deceased person, if the imputation would harm the reputation of that person if living, and is intended to be hurtful to the fellings of his 
family or other near relatives. 
Explanation 2.-It may amount to defamation to make an imputation 
concerning a company or an association or collection of persons as 
such. 
Explanation 3.-An imputation in the form of an alternative or 
expressed ironically, may amount to defamation. 
Explanation 4.-No imputation is said to harm a person's 
reputation, unless that imputation directly or indirectly, in the 
estimation of others, lowers the moral or intellectual character of 
that person, or lowers the character of that person in respect of his 
caste or of his calling, or lowers the credit of that person, or 
causes it to be believed that the body of that person is in 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 218]
r lowers the credit of that person, or 
causes it to be believed that the body of that person is in a lothsome state, or in a state generally considered as disgraceful. 
Illustrations 
(a) A says-"Z is an honest man; he never stole B's watch", 
intending to cause it to be believed that Z did steal B's watch. This 
is defamation, unless it fall within one of the exceptions. 
(b) A is asked who stole B's watch. A points to Z, intending to 
cause it to be believed that Z stole B's watch. This is defamation, 
unless it fall within one of the exceptions. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 219]
 
                           
                       
         
                
                 
              
               
        
 
 
                 
             
                    
                 
       
 
                    
              
               
                 
       
 
                              
 
                     
            
            
              
            
           
        
 
                   
            
                 
 
                  
              
         
 
                  
               
               
                
              
               
         
                              
                              
              
             213 (c) A draws a picture of Z running away with B's watch, 
intending it to be believed that Z stole B's watch. This is 
defamation, unless it fall within one of the exceptions. 
First Exception.-Imputation of truth which public good requires 
to be made or published.- It is not defamation to impute anything 
which is true concerning any person, if it be for the public good that 
the imputation should be made or published. Whether or not it is for 
the public good is a question of fact. 
Second Exception.-Public conduct of public servants.-It is not 
defamation to express in good faith any opinion whatever respecting 
the conduct of a public servant in the discharge of his public functions, or respecting his character, so far as his character 
appears in that conduct, and no further. 
Third Exception.-Conduct of any person touching any public 
question. -It is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion 
whatever respecting the conduct of any person touching any public 
question, and respecting his character, so far as his character 
appears in that conduct, and no further. 
Illustration 
It is not defamation in A to express in good faith any opinion 
whatever resepting Z's conduct in petitioning Government on a public 
question, in sign
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 219]
any opinion 
whatever resepting Z's conduct in petitioning Government on a public 
question, in signing a requisition for a meeting on a public question, 
in presiding or attending at such meeting, in forming or joining any 
society which invites the public support, in voting or canvassing for 
a particular candidate for any situation in the efficient discharge of 
the duties of which the public is interested. 
Fourth Exception.-Publication of reports of proceedings of 
courts- It is not defamation to publish a substantially true report of 
the proceedings of a Court of Justice, or of the result of any such 
proceedings. 
Explanation.-A Justice of the Peace or other officer holding an 
enquiry in open Court preliminary to a trial in a Court of Justice, is 
a Court within the meaning of the above section. 
Fifth Exception.-Merits of case decided in Court or conduct of 
witnesses and others concerned. It is not defamation to express in 
good faith any opinion whatever respecting the merits of any case, 
civil or criminal, which has been decided by a Court of Justice, or 
respecting the conduct of any person as a party, witness or agent, in 
any such case, or respecting the character of such person, as far as 
his character appears in that conduct, and no further. 
Illustrations 
(a) A says-"I think Z's evidence on that trial is so 
contradictory that he must be stupid or dishonest." A is within this exception if he says this in good faith, inasmuch as the opinion which 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 220]
              
    
 
                   
               
            
           
                      
            
              
                
        
 
                 
               
        
 
                             
 
                       
    
 
                  
     
                   
         
 
 
 
                    
                 
               
             
         
 
                     
                 
                
         
                
           
             
                  
               
  
 
                              
 
                    
                  
             
                 
             
                214 he expresses respects Z's character as it appears in Z's conduct as a 
witness, and no farther. 
(b) But if A says-"I do not believe what Z asserted at that trial 
because I know him to be a man without veracity"; A is not within this exception, inasmuch as the opinion which expresses of Z's character, is an opinion not founded on Z's conduct as a witness. 
Sixth Exception.-Merits of public performance.-It is not 
defamation to express in good faith any opinion respecting the merits of any performance which its author has submitted to the judgment of the public, or respecting the character of the author so far as his 
character appears in such performance, and no farther. 
Explanation.-A performance may be submitted to the judgment of 
the public expressly or by acts on the part of the author which imply 
such submission to the judgment of the public. 
Illustrations 
(a) A person who publishes a book, submits that book to the 
judgment of the public. 
(b) A person who makes a speech in public, submits that speech to 
the judgment of the public. 
(c) An actor or singer who appears on a public stage, submits his 
acting or singing to the judgment of the public. 
(d) A says of a book published by Z-"Z's book is foolish; Z must 
be a weak man. Z's book is indecent; Z must be a man o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 220]
 published by Z-"Z's book is foolish; Z must 
be a weak man. Z's book is indecent; Z must be a man of impure mind." A is within the exception, if he says this in good faith, inasmuch as 
the opinion which he expresses of Z respects Z's character only so far 
as it appears in Z's book, and no further. 
(e) But if A says-"I am not surprised that Z's book is foolish 
and indecent, for he is a weak man and a libertine." A is not within 
this exception, inasmuch as the opinion which he expresses of Z's 
character is an opinion not founded on Z's book. 
Seventh Exception.-Censure passed in good faith by person having 
lawful authority over another.-It is not defamation in a person having 
over another any authority, either conferred by law or arising out of 
a lawful contract made with that other, to pass in good faith any 
censure on the conduct of that other in matt ers to wh ich such lawful 
authority relates. 
Illustration 
A Judge censuring in good faith the conduct of a witness, or of 
an officer of the Court; a head of a department censuring in good 
faith those who are under his orders; a parent censuring in good faith 
a child in the presence of other children; a schoolmaster, whose 
authority is derived from a parent, censuring in good faith a pupil in the presence of other pupils; a master censuring a servant in good 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 221]
             
               
    
 
                      
               
                    
                
 
 
                              
 
                      
               
               
   
                    
             
           
              
            
 
                             
 
                   
                
                      
             
 
                       
                  
              
  
                    
                    
             
                   
              
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
              
              
       
  
 215 faith for remissness in service; a banker censuring in good faith the 
cashier of his bank for the conduct of such cashier as such cashier-
are within this exception. 
Eighth Exception.-Accusation preferred in good faith to 
authorised person.-It is not defamation to prefer in good faith an 
accusation against any person to any of those who have lawful 
authority over that person with respect to the subject-matter of 
accusation. 
Illustration 
If A in good faith accuses Z before a Magistrate; if A in good 
faith complains of the conduct of Z, a servant, to Z's master;if A in 
good faith complains of the conduct of Z, a child, to Z's father-A is 
within this exception. 
Ninth Exception.-Imputation made in good faith by person for 
protection of his or other's interests.-It is not defamation to make 
an imputation on the character of another provided that the imputation 
be made in good faith for the protection of the interest of the person 
making it, or of any other person, or for the public good. 
Illustrations 
(a) A, a shopkeeper, says to B, who manages his business-"Sell 
nothing to Z unless he pays you ready money, for I have no opinion of 
his honesty." A is within the exception, if he has made this 
imputation on Z in good faith for the protection of his own interests. 
(b) A, a Magistrate, in making a report to his own superior 
officer, casts an imput
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 221]
own interests. 
(b) A, a Magistrate, in making a report to his own superior 
officer, casts an imputation on the character of Z. Here, if the 
imputation is made in good faith, and for the public good, A is within 
the exception. 
Tenth Exception.-Caution intended for good of person to whom 
conveyed or for public good.- It is not defamation to convey a 
caution, in good faith, to one person against another, provided that 
such caution be intended for the good of the person to whom it is 
conveyed, or of some person in whom that person is interested, or for 
the public good. 
500. 
Punishment for defamation. 
500. Punishment for defamation.--Whoever defames another shall be 
punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to two 
years, or with fine, or with both. 
501. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 222]
 
 
        
 
 
                    
             
                 
              
       
  
 
 
 
         
 
 
               
               
          
              
           
 
 
  
  
      
 
 
                                    
 
                    
  
 
  
  
  
              
                 
              
                 
                   
                
       
 
                 
               
 
 
                              
 
                     Printing or engraving matter known to be defamatory. 
501. Printing or engraving matter known to be defamatory.- -
Whoever prints or engraves any matter, knowing or having good reason 
to believe that such matter is defamatory of any person, shall be 
punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to two 
years, or with fine, or with both. 
502. 
Sale of printed or engraved substance containing defamatory matter. 
502. Sale of printed or engraved substance containing defamatory 
matter.--Whoever sells or offers for sale any printed or engraved 
substance containing defamatory matter, knowing that it contains such 
matter, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
CHAPTER XXII 
OF CRIMINAL INTIMIDATION, INSULT AND ANNOYANCE 
CHAPTER XXII 
OF CRIMINAL INTIMIDATION, INSULT AND ANNOYANCE 
503. 
Criminal intimidation. 
503. Criminal intimidation.--Whoever threatens another with any 
injury to his person, reputation or property, or to the person or 
reputation of any one in whom that person is interested, with intent 
to cause alarm to that person, or to cause that person to do any act which he is not legally bound to do, or to omit to do any act which 
that person is legally entitled to do, as the means of avoiding the 
execution of such threat, commits criminal intimidation. 
Explanation.-A threat to injure the reputation of any deceased 
person in whom the person threatened is interested, is within this 
s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 222]
he reputation of any deceased 
person in whom the person threatened is interested, is within this 
section. 
Illustration 
A, for the purpose of inducing B to resist from prosecuting a 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 223]
                  
 
 
 
 
  
          
 
 
                    
         
                     
             
                   
              
  
  
 
  
    
 
 
                     
                
 
 
                        
                    
                   
             
                       
                                      
           
 
               
 
           
 
                 
 
              
 
                   
                      
                   
 
 
 
                      
                  
         
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------civil suit, threatens to burn B's house. A is guilty of criminal 
intimidation. 
504. 
Intentional insult with intent to provoke breach of the peace. 
504. Intentional insult with intent to provoke breach of the 
peace.--Whoever intentionally insults, and thereby gives provocation 
to any person, intending or knowing it to be likely that such 
provocation will cause him to break the public peace, or to commit any 
other offence, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
505. 
Statements conducing public mischief. 
1*[505. Statements conducing public mischief.--2*[(1)] 
Whoever makes, publishes or circulates any statement, rumour or 
report,-
(a) with intent to cause, or which is likely to cause, any 
officer, soldier, 3*[sailor or airman] in the Army, 4*[Navy 
or Air Force] 5*[of India] to mutiny or otherwise disregard or 
fail in his duty as such; or 
(b) with intent to cause, or which is likely to cause, fear 
or alarm to the public, or to any section of the public whereby 
any person may be induced to commit an offence against the State 
or against the public tranquility; or 
1. Subs. by Act 4 of 1898, s. 6, for the original section. 
2. Renumbered by Act 35 of 1969, s. 3. 
3. Subs. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and Such. I, for "or sailor". 
4. Subs. by s. 2 and Sch
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 223]
969, s. 3. 
3. Subs. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and Such. I, for "or sailor". 
4. Subs. by s. 2 and Sch. i. ibid., for "or navy". 
5. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for "of Her Majesty or in the Imperial 
Service Troops". The words "or in the Royal Indian Marine" 
occurring after the word "Majesty" were rep. by Act 35 of 1934. 
(c) with intent to incite, or which is likely to incite, any 
class or community of persons to commit any offence against any 
other class or community, 216 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 224]
             
       
 
                 
             
            
             
                
            
          
            
            
                 
            
                 
              
              
  
 
                 
           
          
             
                    
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
  
              
           
                 
     
  
          
 
 
                    
             
              
              
               
             
           
  
 
 
 
      
 shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to 1*[three 
years], or with fine, or with both. 
2*[(2) Statements creating or promoting enmity, hatred or ill-
will between classes.--Whoever makes, publishes or circulates any statement or report containing rumour or alarming news with intent to create or promote, or which is likely to create or promote, on grounds 
of religion, race, place of birth, residence, language, caste or 
community or any other ground whatsoever, feelings of enmity, hatred 
or ill-will between different religious, racial, language or regional 
groups or castes or communities, shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
(3) Offence under sub-section (2) committed in place of worship, 
etc.--Whoever commits an offence specified in sub-section (2) in any place of worship or in any assembly engaged in the performance of religious worship or religious ceremonies, shall be punished with 
imprisonment which may extend to five years and shall also be liable 
to fine.] 
Exception.-It does not amount to an offence, within the meaning 
of this section, when the person making, publishing or circulating any 
such statement, rumour or report, has reasonable grounds for believing 
that such statement, rumour or report is true and makes, publishes or 
circulates it 2[in good faith and] without any such intent as 
aforesaid.] 
506. 
Punishment for criminal intimidation. 
506. Punishment
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 224]
ithout any such intent as 
aforesaid.] 
506. 
Punishment for criminal intimidation. 
506. Punishment for criminal intimidation.--Whoever commits the 
offence of criminal intimidation shall be punished with imprisonment 
of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or 
with fine, or with both; 
If threat be to cause death or grievous hurt, etc. 
If threat be to cause death or grievous hurt, etc.--and if the 
threat be to cause death or grievous hurt, or to cause the destruction 
of any property by fire, or to cause an offence punishable with death or 3*[imprisonment for life], of with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to seven years, or to impute unchastity to a woman, shall 
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which 
may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both. 
507. 
Criminal intimidation by an anonymous communication. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 225]
 
                  
            
           
                  
             
              
   
 
 
 
 
 
               
     
 
 
                     
            
                  
                
               
               
                 
               
                  
               
            
        
 
              
 
           
 
               
 
 
                              
                        
                    
                 
 
                     
                  
            
         
  
 
 
 
            
 
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
217 507. Criminal intimidation by an anonymous communication.- -
Whoever commits the offence of criminal intimidation by an anonymous 
communication, or having taken precaution to conceal the name or abode 
of the person from whom the threat comes, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, in addition to the punishment provided for the offence by the 
last preceding section. 
508. 
Act caused by inducing person to believe that he will be rendered an 
object of the Divine displeasure. 
508. Act caused by inducing person to believe that he will be 
rendered an object of the Divine displeasure.--Whoever voluntarily 
causes or attempts to cause any person to do anything which that 
person is not legally bound to do, or to omit to do anything which he 
is legally entitled to do, by inducing or attempting to induce that 
person to believe that he or any person in whom he is interested will 
become or will be rendered by some act of the offender an object of 
Divine displeasure if he does not do the thing which it is the object 
of the offender to cause him to do, or if he does the thing which it 
is the object of the offender to cause him to omit, shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
one year, or with fine, or with both. 
1. Subs. by A
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 225]
her description for a term which may extend to 
one year, or with fine, or with both. 
1. Subs. by Act 41 of 1961, s. 4, for "two years". 
2. Ins. by Act 35 of 1969, s. 3. 
3. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation". 
Illustrations 
(a) A sits dhurna at Z's door with the intention of causing 
it to be believed that, by so sitting, he renders Z an object of 
Divine displeasure. A has committed the offence defined in this 
section. 
(b) A threatens Z that, unless Z performs a certain act, A will 
kill one of A's own children, under such circumstances that the 
killing would be believed to render Z an object of Divine displeasure. 
A has committed the offence defined in this section. 
509. 
Word, gesture or act intended to insult the modesty of a woman. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 226]
                     
           
                    
             
               
              
            
  
 
  
       
 
 
                   
               
               
               
              
             
 
 
  
 
 
     
 
 
                                    
 
                             
 
 
 
  
                  
      
                
             
              
               
                    
               
             
             
               
             
             
 
                             
 
                     
               509. Word, gesture or act intended to insult the modesty of a 
woman.--Whoever, intending to insult the modesty of any woman, utters 
any word, makes any sound or gesture, or exhibits any object, 
intending that such word or sound shall be heard, or that such gesture 
or object shall be seen, by such woman, or intrudes upon the privacy 
of such woman, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both. 
510. 
Misconduct in public by a drunken person. 
510. Misconduct in public by a drunken person.--Whoever, in a 
state of intoxication, appears in any public place, or in any place 
which it is a trespass in him to enter, and there conducts himself in 
such a manner as to cause annoyance to any person, shall be punished 
with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to twenty-four 
hours, or with fine which may extend to ten rupees, or with both. 
CHAPTER XXIII 
OF ATTEMPTS TO COMMIT OFFENCES 
CHAPTER XXIII 
OF ATTEMPTS TO COMMIT OFFENCES 
511. Punishment for attempting to commit offences punishable with 
imprisonment for life or other imprisonment. 
511. Punishment for attempting to commit offences punishable with 
imprisonment for life or other imprisonment.--Whoever attempts to commit an offence punishable by this Code with 1*[imprisonment for 
life] or imprisonment, or to cause such an offence to be committed, 
a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 226]
ode with 1*[imprisonment for 
life] or imprisonment, or to cause such an offence to be committed, 
and in such attempt does any act towards the commission of the 
offence, shall, where no express provision is made by this Code for 
the punishment of such attempt, be punished with 2*[imprisonment o f 
any description provided for the offence, for a term which may extend 
to one-half of the imprisonment for life or, as the case may be, one-
half of the longest term of imprisonment provided for that offence], or with such fine as is provided for the offence, or with both. 
Illustrations 
(a) A makes an attempt to steal some jewels by breaking open a 
box, and finds after so opening the box, that there is no jewel in it. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860.pdf - page 227]
               
    
 
                     
                 
           
 
               
             
  
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------He has done an act towards the commission of theft, and therefore is 
guilty under this section. 
(b) A makes an attempt to pick the pocket of Z by thrusting his 
hand into Z's pocket. A fails in the attempt in consequence of Z's having nothing in his pocket. A is guilty under this section. 
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Sch., for "transportation". 
2. Subs. by s. 117 and Sch., ibid., for certain words. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE INDIAN PENAL CODE 
___________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
__________ 
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTION 
PREAMBLE  
SECTIONS 
1. Title and extent of operation of the Code.  
2. Punishment of offences committed within India.  
3. Punishment of offences committed beyond, but which by law may b e tried within, India.  
4. Extension of Code to extra-territorial offences.  
5. Certain laws not to be affected by this Act.  
CHAPTER II 
GENERAL  EXPLANATIONS  
6. Definitions in the Code to be understood subject to  exceptions.  
7. Sense of expression once explained.  
8. Gender.  
9. Number.  
10. “Man ”. “Woman ”. 
11. “Person ”. 
12. “Public ”. 
13. [Omitted. ]. 
14. “Servant of Government ”. 
15. [Repealed. ]. 
16. [Repealed .]. 
17. “Government ”. 
18. “India ”. 
19. “Judge ”. 
20. “Court of Justice ”. 
21. “Public servant ”. 
22. “Moveable property ”. 
23. “Wrongful gain ”. 
“Wrongful loss ”. 
Gaining wrongfully/ Losing wrongfully. 
24. “Dishonestly ”. 
25. “Fraudulently ”. 
26. “Reason to believe ”. 
27. Property in possession of wife, clerk or servant. 
28. “Counterfeit ”. 
29. “Document ”. 
29A. “Electronic record ”. 
30. “Valuable security ”. 
31. “A will ”. 
32. Words referring to acts include illegal omissions. 
33. “Act”. 
“Omission ”. 
34. Acts done by several persons in furtherance of common intention. 
35. When such an act is criminal by reason of its being done with a crimina l knowledge or intention. 
36. Effect caused partly by act and partly by omission. 
37. Co-operation by doing one of several acts constituting an offence. 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 2]
2 
 SECTIONS  
38. Persons concerned in criminal act may be guilty of different offenc es. 
39. “Voluntarily ”. 
40. “Offence ”. 
41. “Special law ”. 
42. “Local law ”. 
43. “Illegal ”. 
“Legally bound to do ”. 
44. “Injury ”. 
45. “Life ”. 
46. “Death ”. 
47. “Animal ”. 
48. “Vessel ”. 
49. “Year ”. 
“Month ”. 
50. “Section ”. 
51. “Oath ”. 
52. “Good faith”. 
52A. “Harbour-“. 
 
CHAPTER III 
OF PUNISHMENTS 
53. Punishments. 
53A. Construction of reference to transportation. 
54. Commutation of sentence of death. 
55. Commutation of sentence of imprisonment for life. 
55A. Definition of "appropriate Government". 
56. [Repealed .]. 
57. Fractions of terms of punishment. 
58. [Repealed. ]. 
59. [Repealed .]. 
60. Sentence may be (in certain cases of imprisonment) wholly or partly rigorous of simple. 
61. [Repealed. ]. 
62. [Repealed .]. 
63. Amount of fine. 
64. Sentence of imprisonment for non-payment of fine. 
65. Limit to imprisonment for non-payment of fine, when  imprisonment and fine awardable. 
66. Description of imprisonment for non-payment of fine . 
67. Imprisonment for non-payment of fine, when offence punishable with fine only. 
68. Imprisonment to terminate on payment of fine. 
69. Termination of imprisonment on payment of proportio nal part of fine. 
70. Fine leviable within six years, or during imprisonment. Death not to discharge property from liability. 
71. Limit of punishment of offence made up of several o ffences. 
72. Punishment of person guilty of one of several offen ces, the judgment stating that it is doubtful of 
which. 
73. Solitary confinement. 
74. Limit of solitary confinement. 
75. Enhanced punishment for certain offences under Chap ter XII or Chapter XVII after previous 
conviction. 
CHAPTER IV 
GENERAL  EXCEPTIONS 
76. Act done by a person bound, or by mistake of fact b elieving himself bound, by law.  
77. Act of Judge when acting judicially.  
78. Act done pursuant to the judgment or order of Court . 
79. Act done by a person justi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 2]
icially.  
78. Act done pursuant to the judgment or order of Court . 
79. Act done by a person justified, or by mistake of fa ct believing himself justified, by law.  
80. Accident in doing a lawful act.  
81. Act likely to cause harm, but done without criminal  intent, and to prevent other harm.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 3]
3 
 SECTIONS  
82. Act of a child under seven years of age.  
83. Act of a child above seven and under twelve of imma ture understanding.  
84. Act of a person of unsound mind.  
85. Act of a person incapable of judgment by reason of intoxication caused against his will.  
86. Offence requiring a particular intent or knowledge committed by one who is intoxicated.  
87. Act not intended and not known to be likely to caus e death or grievous hurt, done by consent.  
88. Act not intended to cause death, done by consent in  good faith for person's benefit.  
89. Act done in good faith for benefit of child or insa ne person, by or by consent of guardian.  
Provisos. 
90. Consent known to be given under fear or misconcepti on. 
Consent of insane person. 
Consent of child. 
91. Exclusion of acts which are offences independently of harm caused. 
92. Act done in good faith for benefit of a person without consen t. 
Provisos. 
93. Communication made in good faith. 
94. Act to which a person is compelled by threats. 
95. Act causing slight harm. 
Of the Right of Private Defence 
96. Things done in private defence.  
97. Right of private defence of the body and of propert y. 
98. Right of private defence against the act of a perso n of unsound mind , etc.  
99. Acts against which there is no right of private defence.  
Extent to which the right may be exercised. 
100. When the right of private defence of the body exten ds to causing death.  
101. When such right extends to causing any harm other t han death.  
102. Commencement and continuance of the right of privat e defence of the body.  
103. When the right of private defence of property exten ds to causing death.  
104. When such right extends to causing any harm other t han death.  
105. Commencement and continuance of the right of privat e defence of property.  
106. Right of private defence against deadly assault whe n there is risk of harm to inno cent person.  
 
CHAPTER V 
OF ABETMENT  
107. Abetment of a thing.  
108
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 3]
re is risk of harm to inno cent person.  
 
CHAPTER V 
OF ABETMENT  
107. Abetment of a thing.  
108. Abettor.  
108A. Abetment in Indian of offences outside India.  
109. Punishment of a abetment if the act abetted is comm itted in consequence and whe re no express 
provision is made for its punishment.  
110. Punishment of abetment if person abetted does act w ith different intention from that of abettor.  
111. Liability of abettor when one act abetted and diffe rent act done.  
112. Abettor when liable to cumulative punishment for ac t abetted and for act done.  
113. Liability of abettor for an effect caused by the ac t abetted different from that intended by the abett or. 
114. Abettor present when offence is committed.  
115. Abetment of offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life. —if offence not committed.  
if act causing harm be done in consequence. 
116. Abetment of offence punishable with imprisonment. —if offence be not committed.  
if abettor or person abetted be a public servant whose duty it is to  prevent offence. 
117. Abetting commission of offence by the public or by more than ten persons.  
118. Concealing design to commit offence punishable with death or im prisonment for life.  
If offence be committed; 
if offence be not committed. 
119. Public servant concealing design to commit offence which  it is his duty to prevent. 
if offence be committed; 
if offence be punishable with death, etc. 
if offence be not committed.  
120. Concealing design to commit offence punishable with impr isonment. 
if offence be committed; 
if offence be not committed.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 4]
4 
 CHAPTER VA 
CRIMINAL CONSPIRACY  
SECTIONS 
120A. Definition of criminal conspiracy. 
120B. Punishment of criminal conspiracy . 
CHAPTER VI 
OF OFFENCES AGAINST THE  STATE 
121. Waging or attempting to wage war or abetting waging of war again st the Government of India. 
121A. Conspiracy to commit offences punishable by section 121. 
122. Collecting arms, etc., with intention of waging war against the Governm ent of India. 
123. Concealing with intent to facilitate design to wage war. 
124. Assaulting President, Governor, etc., with intent to compel or restrain the exercise of any lawful power. 
124A. Sedition. 
125. Waging war against any Asiatic power in alliance with the Government of India. 
126. Committing depredation on territories of power at peace with the Gov ernment of India. 
127. Receiving property taken by war or depredation mentioned in section s 125 and 126. 
128. Public servant voluntarily allowing prisoner of State or war to e scape. 
129. Public servant negligently suffering such prisoner to escape. 
130. Aiding escape of , rescuing or harbouring such prisoner. 
CHAPTER VII 
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO THE  ARMY , NAVYAND AIR FORCE 
131. Abetting mutiny, or attempting to seduce a soldier, sailor or airman fro m his duty. 
132. Abetment of mutiny, if mutiny is committed in consequence th ereof. 
133. Abetment of assault by soldier, sailor or airman on his sup erior officer, when in execution of his office. 
134. Abetment of such assault, if the assault is committed. 
135. Abetment of desertion of soldier, sailor or airman. 
136. Harbouring deserter. 
137. Deserter concealed on board merchant vessel through negligen ce of master. 
138. Abetment of act of insubordination by soldier, sailor or airman. 
138A. [ Repealed. ]. 
139. Persons subject to certain Acts. 
140. Wearing garb or carrying token used by soldier, sailor or airman. 
CHAPTER VIII 
OF OFFENCES AGAINST THE  PUBLIC  TRANQUILLITY 
141. Unlawful assembly. 
142. Being member of unlawful assem
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 4]
NCES AGAINST THE  PUBLIC  TRANQUILLITY 
141. Unlawful assembly. 
142. Being member of unlawful assembly. 
143. Punishment. 
144. Joining unlawful assembly armed with deadly weapon. 
145. Joining or continuing in unlawful assembly, knowing it has been commanded to disperse. 
146. Rioting. 
147. Punishment for rioting. 
148. Rioting, armed with deadly weapon. 
149. Every member of unlawful assembly guilty of offence committed in  prosecution of common object. 
150. Hiring, or conniving at hiring, of persons to join unlawful assembly. 
151. Knowingly joining or continuing in assembly of five or more p ersons after it has been commanded to disperse. 
152. Assaulting or obstructing public servant when suppressing riot, etc. 
153. Want only giving provocation, with intent to cause riot — 
if rioting be committed —if not committed. 
153A. Promoting enmity between different groups on grounds of religion, race, place of birth, residence. 
language, etc., and doing acts prejudicial to maintenance of harmony.  
Offence committed in place of worship, etc. 
153AA. Punishment for knowingly carrying arms in any procession o r organizing, or holding or taking part in 
any mass drill or mass training with arms. 
153B. Imputation assertions prejudicial to national                                                                                                                                            
integration. 
154. Owner or occupier of land on which an unlawful assembly is h eld. 
155. Liability of person for whose benefit riot is committed. 
156. Liablility of agent of owner or occupier for whose benefit riot is committed. 
157. Harbouring persons hired for an unlawful assembly. 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 5]
5 
  SECTIONS 
158. Being hired to take part in an unlawful assembly or riot.  
or to go armed. 
159. Affray. 
160. Punishment for committing affray. 
CHAPTER IX 
OF OFFENCES BY OR RELATING TO  PUBLIC  SERVANTS 
161. [Repealed. ]. 
162. [Repealed. ]. 
163. [Repealed. ]. 
164. [Repealed. ]. 
165. [Repealed. ]. 
165A. [ Repealed. ]. 
166. Public servant disobeying law, with intent to cause injury to any person. 
166A. Public servant disobeying direction under law. 
166B. Punishment for non-treatment of victim. 
167. Public servant framing an incorrect document with i ntent to cau se injury. 
168. Public servant unlawfully engaging in trade. 
169. Public servant unlawfully buying or bidding for pro perty. 
170. Personating a public servant. 
171. Wearing garb or carrying token used by public serva nt with fraudulent intent.  
CHAPTER I XA 
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO ELECTIONS 
171A. “Candidate ”, “Electoral right ” defined. 
171B. Bribery. 
171C. Undue influence at elections. 
171D.Personation at elections. 
171E. Punishment for bribery. 
171F. Punishment for undue influence or personation  at an election. 
171G.False statement in connection with an election . 
171H. Illegal payments in connection with an electi on. 
171-I. Failure to keep election accounts. 
 
CHAPTER X 
OF CONTEMPTS OF THE  LAWFUL  AUTHORITY OF  PUBLIC  SERVANTS 
172. Absconding to avoid service or summons of other pro ceeding.  
173. Preventing service of summons or other proceeding, or preventing publication thereof.  
174. Non-attendance in obedience to an order from public  servant.  
174A. Non-appearance in response to a proclamation u nder section 82 of Act 2 of 1974. 
175. Omission to produce document to public servant by p erson legally bound to produce it.  
176. Omission to give notice or information to public se rvant by person legally bound to give it.  
177. Furnishing false information.  
178. Refusing oath or affirmation when duly required by public servant to make it.  
179. Refusing to 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 5]
8. Refusing oath or affirmation when duly required by public servant to make it.  
179. Refusing to answer public servant authorised to que stion.  
180. Refusing to sign statement.  
181. False statement on oath or affirmation to public se rvant or person authorised to administer an oath or  
affirmation.  
182. False information, with intent to cause public servant to use his lawf ul power to the injury of another person.  
183. Resistance to the taking of property by the lawful authority of a public servant.  
184. Obstructing sale of property offered for sale by au thority of public servant.  
185. Illegal purchase or bid for property offered for sa le by authority of public servant.  
186. Obstructing public servant in discharge of public f unctions.  
187. Omission to assist public servant when bound by law  to give assistance.  
188. Disobedience to order duly promulgated by public se rvant.  
189. Threat of injury to public servant.  
190. Threat of injury to induce person to refrain from applying for protection to public servant.  
CHAPTER XI 
OF FALSE EVIDENCE AND  OFFENCES AGAINST  PUBLIC  JUSTICE 
191. Giving false evidence. 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 6]
6 
 SECTIONS  
192. Fabricating false evidence. 
193. Punishment for false evidence. 
194. Giving or fabricating false evidence with intent to procure conv iction of capital offence. 
if innocent person be thereby convicted and executed. 
195. Giving or fabricating false evidence with intent to procure conv iction of offence punishable with imprisonment for life 
or imprisonment. 
195A. Threatening any person to give false evidence. 
196. Using evidence known to be false.  
197. Issuing or signing false certificate.  
198. Using as true a certificate known to be false.  
199. False statement made in declaration which is by law receivable as evidence.  
200. Using as true such declaration knowing it to be false.  
201. Causing disappearance of evidence of offence, or giving false information, to  screen offender — 
if a capital offence; 
if punishable with imprisonment for life; 
if punishable with less than ten years' imprisonment.  
202. Intentional omission to give information of offence by person bound to i nform.  
203. Giving false information respecting an offence committed.  
204. Destruction of document to prevent its production as evidence.  
205. False personation for purpose of act or proceeding in suit or prosecution.  
206. Fraudulent removal or concealment of property to prevent its seizure as forfeited  or in execution.  
207. Fraudulent claim to property to prevent its seizure as forfeited or in execution.  
208. Fraudulently suffering decree for sum not due.  
209. Dishonestly making false claim in Court.  
210. Fraudulently obtaining decree for sum not due.  
211. False charge of offence made with intent to injure.  
212. Harbouring offender .— 
if a capital offence; 
if punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment.  
213. Taking gift, etc., to screen an offender from punishment. — 
if a capital offence; 
if punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment. 
214. Offering gift or restoration of property in conside ration o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 6]
t for life, or with imprisonment. 
214. Offering gift or restoration of property in conside ration of screening offender- 
if a capital offence; 
if punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonme nt. 
215. Taking gift to help to recover stolen property, etc . 
216. Harbouring offender who has escaped from custody or  whose apprehension has been ordered- 
if a capital offence; 
if punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonme nt. 
216A. Penalty for harbouring robbers or dacoits. 
216B. [ Repealed. ] 
217. Public servant disobeying direction of law with intent to save person from p unishment or property from forfeiture. 
218. Public servant framing incorrect record or writing with intent to save person  from punishment or property from 
forfeiture. 
219. Public servant in judicial proceeding corruptly mak ing report, etc., contrary to la w. 
220. Commitment for trial or confinement by person having authority who  knows that he is acting contrary to law. 
221. Intentional omission to apprehend on the part of pub lic servant bound to apprehend. 
222. Intentional omission to apprehend on the part of public servant bound  to apprehend person under sentence or lawfully 
committed. 
223. Escape from confinement or custody negligently suff ered by public servant. 
224. Resistance or obstruction by a person to his lawful  apprehension. 
225. Resistance or obstruction to lawful apprehension of  another person. 
225A. Omission to apprehend, or sufferance of escape, on part of public servant, in cases not otherwise , provided for. 
225B. Resistance or obstruction to lawful apprehension, or escape o r rescue in cases not otherwise provided for. 
226. [Repealed. ] 
227. Violation of condition of remission of punishment. 
228. Intentional insult or interruption to public servant sitting in judicia l proceeding. 
228A. Disclosure of identity of the victim of certain of fences, etc. 
229. Personation of a juror or assessor. 
229A. Failure by person released on 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 6]
tain of fences, etc. 
229. Personation of a juror or assessor. 
229A. Failure by person released on bail or bond to  appear in Court. 
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 7]
7 
 CHAPTER XII 
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO COIN AND  GOVERNMENT  STAMPS 
SECTIONS 
230. “Coin ” defined. 
Indian coin. 
231. Counterfeiting coin. 
232. Counterfeiting Indian coin. 
233. Making or selling instrument for counterfeiting coi n. 
234. Making or selling instrument for counterfeiting Indian coin. 
235. Possession of instrument or material for the purpose of using the same f or counterfeiting coin:  
if Indian coin. 
236. Abetting in India the counterfeiting out of India o f coin. 
237. Import or export of counterfeit coin. 
238. Import or export of counterfeits of the Indian coin . 
239. Delivery of coin, possessed with knowledge that it is counterfeit. 
240. Delivery of Indian coin, possessed with knowledge t hat it is counterfeit. 
241. Delivery of coin as genuine, which, when first poss essed, the deliverer did not know to be counterfeit . 
242. Possession of counterfeit coin by person who knew it to be coun terfeit when he became possesse d thereof. 
243. Possession of Indian coin by person who knew it to be cou nterfeit when he became possessed thereof. 
244. Person employed in mint causing coin to be of diffe rent weight or composition from that fixed by law.  
245. Unlawfully taking coining instrument from mint. 
246. Fraudulently or dishonestly diminishing weight or a ltering composition of coin. 
247. Fraudulently or dishonestly diminishing weight or a ltering composition of Indian coin. 
248. Altering appearance of coin with intent that it sha ll pass as coin of different description. 
249. Altering appearance of Indian coin with intent that  it shall pass as coin of different description. 
250. Delivery of coin, possessed with knowledge that it is altered. 
251. Delivery of Indian coin, possessed with knowledge t hat it is altered. 
252. Possession of coin by person who knew it to be alte red when he became possessed thereof.  
253. Possession of Indian coin by person who knew it to be altered when he became possessed thereof. 
254. Delivery of co
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 7]
dian coin by person who knew it to be altered when he became possessed thereof. 
254. Delivery of coin as genuine, which, when first poss essed, the deliverer did not know to be altered. 
255. Counterfeiting Government stamp. 
256. Having possession of instrument or material for coun terfeiting Government stamp. 
257. Making or selling instrument for counterfeiting Gov ernment stamp. 
258. Sale of counterfeit Government stamp. 
259. Having possession of counterfeit Government stamp. 
260. Using as genuine a Government stamp known to be cou nterfeit. 
261. Effacing writing from substance bearing Government stamp, or removing from document a stamp used for i t, 
with intent to cause loss to Government. 
262. Using Government stamp known to have been before us ed. 
263. Erasure of mark denoting that stamp has been used. 
263A. Prohibition of fictitious stamps. 
CHAPTER XIII 
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO  WEIGHTS AND  MEASURES 
264. Fraudulent use of false instrument for weighing.  
265. Fraudulent use of false weight or measure.  
266. Being in possession of false weight or measure.  
267. Making or selling false weight or measure.  
CHAPTER XIV 
OF OFFENCES  AFFECTING THE  PUBLIC  HEALTH , SAFETY , CONVENIENCE,  
DECENCY AND  MORALS  
268. Public nuisance.  
269. Negligent act likely to spread infection of disease  dangerous to life.  
270. Malignant act likely to spread infection of disease  dangerous to life.  
271. Disobedience to quarantine rule.  
272. Adulteration of food or drink intended for sale.  
273. Sale of noxious food or drink.  
274. Adulteration of drugs.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 8]
8 
 SECTIONS  
275. Sale of adulterated drugs.  
276. Sale of drug as a different drug or preparation.  
277. Fouling water of public spring or reservoir.  
278. Making atmosphere noxious to health.  
279. Rash driving or riding on a public way.  
280. Rash navigation of vessel.  
281. Exhibition of false light, mark or buoy.  
282. Conveying person by water for hire in unsafe or ove rloaded vessel.  
283. Danger or obstruction in public way or line of navi gation.  
284. Negligent conduct with respect to poisonous substan ce. 
285. Negligent conduct with respect to fire or combustib le matter.  
286. Negligent conduct with respect to explosive substan ce. 
287. Negligent conduct with respect to machinery.  
288. Negligent conduct with respect to pulling down or r epairing buildings.  
289. Negligent conduct with respect to animal.  
290. Punishment for public nuisance in cases not otherwi se provided for.  
291. Continuance of nuisance after injunction to discont inue. 
292. Sale, etc., of obscene books, etc.  
293. Sale, etc., of obscene objects to young person.  
294. Obscene acts and songs.  
294A. Keeping lottery office. 
CHAPTER XV 
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO  RELIGION 
295. Injuring or defiling place of worship, with intent to insult the religion of any class. 
295A. Deliberate and malicious acts, intended to outrage religious feeling s of any class by insulting its 
religion or religious beliefs. 
296. Disturbing religious assembly. 
297. Trespassing on burial places, etc. 
298. Uttering words, etc., with deliberate intent to wound the religious feelings.  
CHAPTER XVI 
OF OFFENCES AFFECTING THE  HUMAN  BODY  
 
Of offences affecting life 
299. Culpable homicide. 
300. Murder. 
When culpable homicide is not murder. 
301. Culpable homicide by causing death of person other than person whose  death was intended. 
302. Punishment for murder. 
303. Punishment for murder by life-convict. 
304. Punishment for culpable homicide not amounting to murder. 
304A. Causing d
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 8]
er by life-convict. 
304. Punishment for culpable homicide not amounting to murder. 
304A. Causing death by negligence. 
304B. Dowry death. 
305. Abetment of suicide of child or insane person. 
306. Abetment of suicide. 
307. Attempt to murder. 
Attempts by life-convicts. 
308. Attempt to commit culpable homicide. 
309. Attempt to commit suicide. 
310. Thug. 
311. Punishment. 
Of the causing of Miscarriage, of Injuries to unborn C hildren, of the Exposure of Infants,  
and of the concealment of Births 
312. Causing miscarriage. 
313. Causing miscarriage without woman's consent. 
314. Death caused by act done with intent to cause miscarriage. 
if act done without woman's consent. 
315. Act done with intent to prevent child being born alive or to ca use it to die after birth. 
316. Causing death of quick unborn child by act amounting to culpable homicide. 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 9]
9 
 SECTIONS  
317. Exposure and abandonment of child under twelve years, by p arent or person having care of it. 
318. Concealment of birth by secret disposal of dead body. 
Of Hurt 
319. Hurt.  
320. Grievous hurt.  
321. Voluntarily causing hurt.  
322. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt.  
323. Punishment for voluntarily causing hurt.  
324. Voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous weapons or me ans. 
325. Punishment for voluntarily causing grievous hurt.  
326. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt by dangerous weap ons or means. 
326A. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt by use of acid, etc. 
326B. Voluntarily throwing or attempting to throw acid.  
327. Voluntarily causing hurt to extort property, or to constrain to an illegal to an act.  
328. Causing hurt by means of poison, etc., with intent to  commit an offence.  
329. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt to extort property, or to constrain to an illegal act.  
330. Voluntarily causing hurt to extort confession, or to compel restoration o f property.  
331. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt to extort confess ion, or to compel restoration of property.  
332. Voluntarily causing hurt to deter public servant from his duty.  
333. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt to deter public s ervant from his duty.  
334. Voluntarily causing hurt on provocation.  
335. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt on provocation.  
336. Act endangering life or personal safety of others.  
337. Causing hurt by act endangering life or personal sa fety of others.  
338. Causing grievous hurt by act endangering life or personal safety of o thers.  
Of wrongful restraint and wrongful confinement 
339. Wrongful restraint.  
340. Wrongful confinement.  
341. Punishment for wrongful restraint.  
342. Punishment for wrongful confinement.  
343. Wrongful confinement for three or more days.  
344. Wrongful confinement for ten or more days.  
345. Wrongful confinement of person for whose liberation writ has been issued.  
346. Wrongful confinement in secre
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 9]
onfinement of person for whose liberation writ has been issued.  
346. Wrongful confinement in secret.  
347. Wrongful confinement to extort property, or constrain to illegal act.  
348. Wrongful confinement to extort confession, or compel restoration of property.  
Of Criminal Force and Assault 
349. Force.  
350. Criminal force.  
351. Assault.  
352. Punishment for assault or criminal force otherwise than on grave provocation.  
353. Assault or criminal force to deter public servant fro m discharge of his duty.  
354. Assault of criminal force to woman with intent to o utrage her modesty. 
354A. Sexual harassment and punishment for sexual harassment. 
354B. Assault or use of criminal force to woman with intent to disrob e. 
354C. Voyeurism. 
354D. Stalking . 
355. Assault or criminal force with intent to dishonour person, otherwise than on grave provocation.  
356. Assault or criminal force in attempt to commit theft  of property carried by a person.  
357. Assault or criminal force in attempt wrongfully to confin e a person.  
358. Assault or criminal force on grave provocation.  
Of  Kidnapping, abduction, slavery and forced labour 
359. Kidnapping.  
360. Kidnapping from India.  
361. Kidnapping from lawful guardianship.  
362. Abduction.  
363. Punishment for kidnapping.  
363A . Kidnapping or maiming a minor for purposes of beggi ng. 
364. Kidnapping or abducting in order to murder.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 10]
10 
 SECTIONS 
364A. Kidnapping for ransom , etc. 
365. Kidnapping or abducting with intent secretly and wro ngfully to confine person.  
366. Kidnapping, abducting or inducing woman to compel h er marriage, etc.  
366A. Procuration of minor girl. 
366B. Importation of girl from foreign country. 
367. Kidnapping or abducting in order to subject person to grievous hurt, slavery, etc. 
368. Wrongfully concealing or keeping in confinement, kid napped or abducted person. 
369. Kidnapping or abducting child under ten years with i ntent to steal from its person. 
370. Trafficking of person. 
370A. Exploitation of a trafficked person. 
371. Habitual dealing in slaves. 
372. Selling minor for purposes of prostitution, etc. 
373. Buying minor for purposes of prostitution, etc. 
374. Unlawful compulsory labour. 
Sexual offences  
375. Rape.  
376. Punishment for rape.  
376A. Punishment for causing death or resulting in p ersistent vegetative state of victim.  
376AB. Punishment for rape on woman under twelve years of age.  
376B. Sexual intercourse by husband upon his wife du ring separation. 
376C. Sexual intercourse by a person in authority. 
376D. Gang rape. 
376DA.Punishment for gang rape on woman under sixteen years of age . 
376DB.Punishment for gang rape on woman under twelve years of age. 
376E. Punishment for repeat offenders. 
Of Unnatural offences 
377. Unnatural offences.  
CHAPTER XVII 
OF OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY  
Of theft 
378. Theft.  
379. Punishment for theft.  
380. Theft in dwelling house, etc.  
381. Theft by clerk or servant of property in possession of master.  
382. Theft after preparation made for causing death, hurt or restraint in  order to the committing of the theft.  
Of extortion 
383. Extortion. 
384. Punishment for extortion. 
385. Putting person in fear of injury in order to commit exto rtion. 
386. Extortion by putting a person in fear of death on gr ievous hurt. 
387. Putting person in fear of death or of grievous hurt, in o rder to comm
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 10]
eath on gr ievous hurt. 
387. Putting person in fear of death or of grievous hurt, in o rder to commit extortion. 
388. Extortion by threat of accusation of an offence punisha ble with death or imprisonment for life, etc. 
389. Putting person in fear of accusation of offence, in order to c ommit extortion. 
Of robbery and dacoity 
390. Robbery. 
When theft is robbery. 
When extortion is robbery. 
391. Dacoity. 
392. Punishment for robbery. 
393. Attempt to commit robbery. 
394. Voluntarily causing hurt in committing robbery. 
395. Punishment for dacoity. 
396. Dacoity with murder. 
397. Robbery, or dacoity, with attempt to cause death or gri evous hurt. 
398. Attempt to commit robbery or dacoity when armed with deadly  weapon. 
399. Making preparation to commit dacoity. 
400. Punishment for belonging to gang of dacoits. 
401. Punishment for belonging to gang of thieves. 
402. Assembling for purpose of committing dacoity. 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 11]
11 
 Of criminal misappropriation of property 
SECTIONS 
403. Dishonest misappropriation of property. 
404. Dishonest misappropriation of property possessed by deceased person at the  time of his death. 
Of criminal breach of trust 
405. Criminal breach of trust. 
406. Punishment for criminal breach of trust. 
407. Criminal breach of trust by carrier, etc. 
408. Criminal breach of trust by clerk or servant. 
409. Criminal breach of trust by public, servant. or by ban ker, merchant or agent. 
Of the receiving of stolen property 
410. Stolen property. 
411. Dishonestly receiving stolen property. 
412. Dishonestly receiving property stolen in the commission of a dacoity. 
413. Habitually dealing in stolen property. 
414. Assisting in concealment of stolen property. 
Of Cheating 
415. Cheating. 
416. Cheating by personation. 
417. Punishment for cheating. 
418. Cheating with knowledge that wrongful loss may ensue to p erson whose interest offender is bound to protect. 
419. Punishment for cheating by personation. 
420. Cheating and dishonestly inducing delivery of property. 
Of Fraudulent Deeds and Dispositions of Property 
421. Dishonest or fraudulent removal or concealment of property to prevent d istribution among creditor. 
422. Dishonestly or fraudulently preventing debt being available for creditors. 
423. Dishonest or fraudulent execution of deed of transfer contain ing false statement of consideration. 
424. Dishonest or fraudulent removal or concealment of property. 
Of mischief 
425. Mischief. 
426. Punishment for mischief. 
427. Mischief causing damage to the amount of fifty rupees. 
428. Mischief by killing or maiming animal of the value of ten rupees. 
429. Mischief by killing or maiming cattle, etc., of any value or any ani mal of the value of fifty rupees. 
430. Mischief by injury to works of irrigation or by wrongfully diverting  water. 
431. Mischief by injury to public road, bridge, river or channel. 
432. Mischief by causing inundation or obstruction 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 11]
njury to public road, bridge, river or channel. 
432. Mischief by causing inundation or obstruction to public drainage attended with damage. 
433. Mischief by destroying, moving or rendering less useful a light-house or sea-mark. 
434. Mischief by destroying or moving, etc., a land-mark fixed by public a uthority. 
435. Mischief by fire or explosive substance with intent to cause  damage to amount of one hundred or (in case of agricul tural 
produce) ten rupees. 
436. Mischief by fire or explosive substance with intent to destroy house, etc. 
437. Mischief with intent to destroy or make unsafe a decked vessel or one of twenty tons burden. 
438. Punishment for the mischief described in section 437 committed by fire or explosive substance. 
439. Punishment for intentionally running vessel agroun, or ashore with in tent to commit theft, etc. 
440. Mischief committed after preparation made for causing death or hurt. 
Of criminal trespass 
441. Criminal trespass. 
442. House-trespass. 
443. Lurking house-trespass. 
444. Lurking house-trespass by night. 
445. House-breaking. 
446. House-breaking by night. 
447. Punishment for criminal trespass. 
448. Punishment for house-trespass. 
449. House-trespass in order to commit offence punishabl e with death. 
450. House-trespass in order to commit offence punishabl e with imprisonment for life. 
451. House-trespass in order to commit offence punishabl e with imprisonment. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 12]
12 
 SECTIONS  
452. House-trespass after preparation for hurt, assault or wrongful restraint. 
453. Punishment for lurking house-trespass or house-brea king. 
454. Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking in order t o commit offence punishable with imprisonment. 
455. Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking after prep aration for hurt, assault or wrongful restraint. 
456. Punishment for lurking house-trespass or house-brea king by night. 
457. Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking by night in order to commit  offence punishable with imprisonment. 
458. Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking by night after preparation for hurt, assault, or wrongful restraint. 
459. Grievous hurt caused whilst committing lurking hous e-trespass or house-breaking. 
460. All persons jointly concerned in lurking house-trespass or house-bre aking by night punishable where death or grievous 
hurt caused by one of them. 
461. Dishonestly breaking open receptacle containing pro perty. 
462. Punishment for same offence when committed by perso n entrusted with custody. 
 
CHAPTER XVIII 
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO  DOCUMENTS AND TO  PROPERTY  MARKS  
463. Forgery. 
464. Making a false document. 
465. Punishment for forgery. 
466. Forgery of record of Court or of public register, e tc. 
467. Forgery of valuable security, will, etc. 
468. Forgery for purpose of cheating. 
469. Forgery for purpose of harming reputation. 
470. Forged document. 
471. Using as genuine a forged document or electronic re cord. 
472. Making or possessing counterfeit seal, etc., with inte nt to commit forgery punishable under section 467. 
473. Making or possessing counterfeit seal, etc., with i ntent to commit forgery punishable otherwise. 
474. Having possession of document described in sections 466 or 467, knowing it to be forged and intending to use it 
genuine. 
475. Counterfeiting device or mark used for authenticating documents described  in section 467, or possessing counterfe it 
marked material. 
476. Count
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 12]
cating documents described  in section 467, or possessing counterfe it 
marked material. 
476. Counterfeiting device or mark used for authenticating documents other tha n those described in section 467, or 
possessing counterfeit marked material. 
477. Fraudulent cancellation, destruction, etc., of will, autho rity to adopt, or valuable security. 
477A. Falsification of accounts. 
Of property and other marks 
478. [Repealed .]. 
479. Property mark. 
480. [Repealed .]. 
481. Using a false property mark. 
482. Punishment for using a false property mark. 
483. Counterfeiting a property mark used by another. 
484. Counterfeiting a mark used by a public servant. 
485. Making or possession of any instrument for counterfeiting a propert y mark. 
486. Selling goods marked with a counterfeit property mark. 
487. Making a false mark upon any receptacle containing goo ds. 
488. Punishment for making use of any such false mark. 
489. Tampering with property mark with intent to cause injury. 
Of currency-notes and bank-notes 
489A.Counterfeiting currency-notes or bank-notes. 
489B. Using as genuine, forged or counterfeit currency-notes or ba nk-notes. 
489C. Possession of forged or counterfeit currency notes or bank- notes. 
489D. Making or possessing instruments or materials for forging or coun terfeiting currency-notes or bank-notes. 
489E. Making or using documents resembling currency-notes or bank -notes. 
CHAPTER XIX 
OF THE  CRIMINAL  BREACH OF CONTRACTS OF  SERVICE  
490. [Repealed .]. 
491. Breach of contract to attend on and supply wants of helpless person. 
492. [Repealed .]. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 13]
13 
 CHAPTER XX 
OF OFFENCES  RELATING TO MARRIAGE 
SECTIONS 
493. Cohabitation caused by a man deceitfully inducing a be lief of lawful marriage. 
494. Marrying again during life-time of husband or wife. 
495. Same offence with concealment of former marriage from perso n with whom subsequent marriage is contracted. 
496. Marriage ceremony fraudulently gone through without lawful marriage. 
497. Adultery. 
498. Enticing or taking away or detaining with criminal intent a married woman. 
 CHAPTER XXA 
OF CRUELTY BY HUSBAND OR  RELATIVES OF  HUSBAND 
498A. Husband or relative of husband of a woman subjecting her to  cruelty. 
CHAPTER XXI 
OF DEFAMATION 
499. Defamation. 
Imputation of truth which public good requires to be made or published. 
Public conduct of public servants. 
Conduct of any person touching any public question. 
Publication of reports of proceedings of Courts. 
Merits of case decided in Court or conduct of witness es and others concerned. 
Merits of public performance. 
Censure passed in good faith by person having lawful  authority over another. 
Accusation preferred in good faith to authorised pe rson. 
Imputation made in good faith by person for protect ion of his or other's interests. 
Caution intended for good of person to whom conveyed o r for public good. 
500. Punishment for defamation. 
501. Printing or engraving matter known to be defamatory. 
502. Sale of printed or engraved substance containing def amatory matter. 
 
CHAPTER XXII 
OR CRIMINAL  INTIMIDATION , INSULT AND  ANNOYANCE 
503. Criminal intimidation. 
504. Intentional insult with intent to provoke breach of t he peace. 
505. Statements conducing to public mischief. 
Statements creating or promoting enmity, hatred or ill-will between classe s. 
Offence under sub-section ( 2) committed in place of worship, etc. 
506. Punishment for criminal intimidation. 
If threat be to cause death or grievous hurt, etc. 
507. Criminal intimidation by an anonymous communication . 
508. Act caused by
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 13]
 grievous hurt, etc. 
507. Criminal intimidation by an anonymous communication . 
508. Act caused by inducing person to believe that he wi ll be rendered an object of the Divine displeasure. 
509. Word, gesture or act intended to insult the modesty of a woman. 
510. Misconduct in public by a drunken person. 
CHAPTER XXIII 
OF ATTEMPTS TO  COMMIT  OFFENCES 
511. Punishment for attempting to commit offences punishab le with imprisonment for life or other 
imprisonment.  
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 14]
14 
 THE INDIAN PENAL CODE 
ACT NO. 45 OF 18601 
[6th October , 1860.] 
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTION  
Preamble .—WHEREAS  it is expedient to provide a general Penal Code for 2[India]; It is 
enacted as follows: — 
1. Title and extent of operation of the Code .—This Act shall be called the Indian Penal Code, and 
shall 3[extend to the whole of India 4***]. 
2. Punishment of offences committed within India .—Every person shall be liable to punishment 
under this Code and not otherwise for every act or omission contrary to the provi sions thereof, of which 
he shall be guilty within 5[India] 6***.  
3. Punishment of offences committed beyond, but which by law may be tried within, India .—
Any person liable, by any 7[Indian law], to be tried for an offence committed beyond 8[India] shall be 
dealt with according to the provisions of this Code for any act commit ted beyond 8[India] in the same 
manner as if such act had been committed within 5[India]. 
9[4. Extension of Code to extra-territorial offences .—The provisions of this Code apply also to any 
offence committed by — 
10[(1) any citizen of India in any place without and beyond India; 
(2) any person on any ship or aircraft registered in India wherever it may be.] 
11[(3) any person in any place without and beyond India committing offence targeting a computer  
resource located in India.] 
12[Explanation .—In this section — 
(a) the word “offence ” includes every act committed outside India which, if committed in 
India, would be punishable under this Code; 
                                                           
1. The Indian Penal Code has been extended to Berar by the Berar L aws Act, 1941 (4 of 1941) and has been declared in force 
in— 
Sonthal Parganas, by the Sonthal Parganas Settlement Regulation 18 72 (3 of 1872) s. 2; 
Panth Piploda, by the Panth Piploda Laws Regulation, 1929 (1 of 1929), s. 2 and the Sch.; 
Khondmals District, by the Khondmals Laws Regulation, 1936 (4 of 1936), s. 3 and the Sch; and 
Ang
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 14]
 
Khondmals District, by the Khondmals Laws Regulation, 1936 (4 of 1936), s. 3 and the Sch; and 
Angul District, by the Angul Laws Regulation, 1936 (5 of 1936), s. 3 an d the Sch. 
It has been declared under s. 3 ( a) of the Scheduled Districts Act, 1874 (14 of 1874), to be in forc e in the following 
Scheduled Districts, namely: the United Provinces Tarai Districts, see Gazette of India, 1876, Pt. I, p. 505; the Districts of 
Hazaribagh, Lohardaga [now called the Ranchi District, see Calcu tta Gazette, 1899, Pt. I, p. 44] and Manbhum and  
Pargana Dhalbhum and the Kolhan in the District of Singhbum —see Gazette of India, 1881, Pt. I, p. 504. 
It has been extended under s. 5 of the same Act to the Lushai Hills —see Gazette of India, 1898, Pt. II, p. 345. 
The Act has been extended to Goa, Daman and Diu by Reg. 12 of  1962, s. 3 and Sch; to Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 
1963, s. 2 and Sch. I.; to Pondicherry by Reg. 7 of 1963, s. 3 and Sch. I and to Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands  by 
Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 and Sch. 
It has been extended to the State of Sikkim w.e.f. 13-9-1994 vide Notification No. S.O. 516(E), dated 9th July, 1994.  
2. The words “British India” have successively been subs. by the A. O. 1948, th e A.O. 1950 and Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., 
(w.e.f. 1-4-1951) to read as above. 
3. The Original words have successively been amended by Act 1 2 of 1891, s. 2 and Sch. I, the A.O. 1937, the A.O. 1948 an d the 
A.O. 1950 to read as above. 
4. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 34 of  2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule                         
(w.e.f. 31- 10- 2019).  
5. The original words “the said territories” have successively been am ended by the A.O. 1937, the A.O. 1948, the A.O . 1950 and 
Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., (w.e.f. 3-4-1951) to read as above. 
6. The words and figures “on or after the said first day of May, 18 61” rep. by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and the First Sch.  (w.e.f. 21-3-
1891). 
7. S
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 14]
first day of May, 18 61” rep. by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and the First Sch.  (w.e.f. 21-3-
1891). 
7. Subs. by the A.O. 1937 for “law passed by the Governor Gene ral of India in Council” . 
8. The Original words “the limits of the said territories” have successivel y been amended by the A.O. 1937,  the A.O.1948,  
the A.O. 1950 and Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., to rea d as above. 
9. Subs. by Act 4 of 1898, s. 2, for section 4 (w.e.f. 18-2-1898). 
10. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for cls. ( 1) to ( 4). 
11. Ins. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 51 (w.e.f. 27- 10-2009 ). 
12. Subs. by s. 51, ibid., for the Explanation  (w.e.f. 27- 10-2009 ). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 15]
15 
 (b) the expression “computer resource ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( k) of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000).] 
1[Illustration ] 
2***A, 3[who is 4[a citizen of India]], commits a murder in Uganda. He can be tried and convicted of murder in any place in 
5[India] in which he may be found . 
6*    *    *  *  *  
7[5. Certain laws not to be affected by this Act .—Nothing in this Act shall affect the provisions of 
any Act for punishing mutiny and desertion of officers, soldiers, sailors or airmen in the service of the 
Government of India or the provisions of any special or local law.] 
CHAPTER II 
GENERAL  EXPLANATIONS  
6. Definitions in the Code to be understood subject to exceptions .—Throughout this Code every 
definition of an offence, every penal provision, and every illustration  of every such definition or penal 
provision, shall be understood subject to the exceptions contained in the Chapter entit led “General 
Exceptions ”, though those exceptions are not repeated in such definition, penal provision, or illustration . 
Illustrations 
(a) The sections, in this Code, which contain definitions of offences, do  not express that a child under seven years of age 
cannot commit such offences; but the definitions are to be u nderstood subject to the general exception which provides that 
nothing shall be an offence which is done by a child under seven years of age. 
(b) A, a police-officer, without warrant, apprehends Z , who has committed murder. Here A is not guilty of the offence of 
wrongful confinement; for he was bound by law to apprehend Z, and therefore the case falls within the general exception which 
provides that “nothing is an offence which is done by a person who is bound by law to do it ”. 
7. Sense of expression once explained .—Every expression which is explained in any part of this 
Code, is used in every part of this Code in conformity with the explanation. 
8. Gender .—
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 15]
 of this 
Code, is used in every part of this Code in conformity with the explanation. 
8. Gender .—The pronoun “he” and its derivatives are used of any person, whether male or female. 
9. Number .—Unless the contrary appears from the context, words importing the singular number 
include the plural number, and words importing the plural number include the singular number. 
10. “Man ”.“Woman ”.—The word “man” denotes a male human being of any age; the word 
“woman ” denotes a female human being of any age. 
11. “Person ”.—The word “person ” includes any Company or Association or body of persons, 
whether incorporated or not. 
12. “Public ”.—The word “public ” includes any class of the public or any community. 
13. [Definition of “Queen ”.] Omitted by the A. O.  1950. 
8[14. “Servant of Government ”.—The words “servant of Government ” denote any officer or servant 
continued, appointed or employed in India by or under the authority of Government.] 
15. [Definition of “British India ”.] Rep. by the A. O. 1937. 
16. [Definition of “Government of India ”.] Rep., ibid. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1957, s. 3 and Schedule II, for “ lllustrations ” (w.e.f. 17-9-1957). 
2. The brackets and letter “( a)” omitted by s. 3 and the Second Sch., ibid. (w.e.f. 17-9-1951). 
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1948, for “a coolie, who is a Native Ind ian subject” . 
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “a British subject of Indian domicile” . 
5. The words “British India” have been successively amended by the A.O. 1948, the A.O. 1950 and Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and  
the Sch., (w.e.f. 1-4-1951) to read as above. 
6. Illustrations  (b), (c) and ( d) omitted by the A.O. 1950. 
7. Subs., ibid., for section 5. 
8. Subs., ibid., for section 14.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 16]
16 
 1[17 “Government ”.—The word “Government ” denotes the Central Government or the Government 
of a 2***State.] 
3[18. “India ”.—“India ” means the territory of India excluding the State of Jammu and Kashmir.] 
19. “Judge ”.—The word “Judge ” denotes not only every person who is officially designated as a 
Judge, but also every person. 
who is empowered by law to give, in any legal proceeding, civil or criminal, a definiti ve judgment, or 
a judgment which, if not appealed against, would be definitive, or a judgment which, if confirmed by 
some other authority, would be definitive, or 
who is one of a body or persons, which body of persons is empowered by law to give such a 
judgment. 
Illustrations 
(a) A Collector exercising jurisdiction in a suit under Act 10 of 1859  is a Judge. 
(b) A Magistrate exercising jurisdiction in respect of a charge on which he ha s power to sentence to fine or imprisonment, 
with or without appear, is a Judge. 
(c) A member of a panchayat which has power, under 4Regulation VII, 1816, of the Madras Code, to try and determine suits , 
is a Judge. 
(d) A Magistrate exercising jurisdiction in respect of a charge on which he has power only to commit for trial to another 
Court, is not a Judge. 
20. “Court of Justice ”.—The words “Court of Justice ” denote a Judge who is empowered by law to 
act judicially alone, or a body of Judges which is empowered by law to act judiciall y as a body, when 
such Judge or body of Judges is acting judicially. 
Illustration 
A  Panchayat acting under 4Regulation VII, 1816, of the Madras Code, having power to try and de termine suits, is a Court of 
Justice. 
21. “Public servant ”.—The words “public servant ” denote a person falling under any of the 
descriptions hereinafter following, namely: — 
5*    *    *   *    * 
Second .—Every Commissioned Officer in the Military, 6[Naval or Air] Forces 7[8*** of India]; 
9[Third .—Every Judge including any person empowered by law to discharge, whether by himself o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 16]
ia]; 
9[Third .—Every Judge including any person empowered by law to discharge, whether by himself or 
as a member of any body of persons, any adjudicatory functions;] 
Fourth .—Every officer of a Court of Justice 10[(including a liquidator, receiver or commissioner)] 
whose duty it is, as such officer, to investigate or report on any matter of law  or fact, or to make, 
authenticate, or keep any document, or to take charge or dispose of any property, or to execute any 
judicial process, or to administer any oath, or to interpret, or to preserv e order in the Court, and every 
person specially authorised by a Court of Justice to perform any of such duties; 
Fifth .—Every juryman, assessor, or member of a panchayat assisting a Court of Justice or  public 
servant; 
Sixth .—Every arbitrator or other person to whom any cause or matter has been referred f or decision 
or report by any Court of Justice, or by any other competent public authority; 
                                                           
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for section 17. 
2. The word and letter “Part A” omitted by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch. (w.e.f. 1-4-1951). 
3. Subs. by s. 3 and the Sch., ibid., for s. 18 which was ins. by the A.O. 1950. The Original s. 18 was rep. b y the A.O. 1937. 
4. Rep. by the Madras Civil Courts Act, 1873 (3 of 1873). 
5. Cl. First  omitted by the A.O. 1950. 
6. Subs. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and the First Sch., for “o r Naval”.  
7. The original words “of the Queen while serving under the Gove rnment of India , or any Government” have successively been 
amended by the A.O. 1937, the A.O. 1948 and the A.O. 1950 t o read as above. 
8. The words “of the Dominion” omitted by the A.O. 1950. 
9. Subs. by Act 40 of 1964, s. 2, for cl. Third (w.e.f. 18- 12-1964). 
10. Ins. by s. 2, ibid.                                                                                                                                                                                          
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 16]
                                                                                                                   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 17]
17 
 Seventh .—Every person who holds any office by virtue of which he is empowered to place or kee p 
any person in confinement; 
Eighth .—Every officer of 1[the Government] whose duty it is, as such officer, to prevent offences, to 
give information of offences, to bring offenders to justice, or to protect  the public health, safety or 
convenience; 
Ninth .—Every officer whose duty it is as such officer, to take, receive, keep o r expend any property 
on behalf of 1[the Government], or to make any survey, assessment or contract on behalf of 1[the 
Government], or to execute any revenue-process, or to investigate, or to report, on any matter affecting 
the pecuniary interests of 1[the Government], or to make, authenticate or keep any document relating to 
the pecuniary interests of 1[the Government], or to prevent the infraction of any law for the protection of 
the pecuniary interests of 1[the Government] 2***; 
Tenth .—Every officer whose duty it is, as such officer, to take, receive, keep or expend any property, 
to make any survey or assessment or to levy any rate or tax for any secular common purpose of any 
village, town or district, or to make, authenticate or keep any document for the a scertaining of the rights 
of the people of any village, town or district; 
3[Eleventh .—Every person who holds any office in virtue of which he is empowered to prepare, 
publish, maintain or revise an electoral roll or to conduct an election or part of an election;] 
4[Twelfth .—Every person — 
(a) in the service or pay of the Government or remunerated by fees or commission for the 
performance of any public duty by the Government; 
(b) in the service or pay of a local authority, a corporation established by or under a Central, 
Provincial or State Act or a Government company as defined in section 617 of the Compani es  
Act, 1956 (1 of 1956).] 
Illustration 
A Municipal Commissioner is a public servant. 
Explanation 1 .—Persons falling under any of the above descriptions 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 17]
missioner is a public servant. 
Explanation 1 .—Persons falling under any of the above descriptions are public servants, whether 
appointed by the Government or not. 
Explanation 2 .—Wherever the words “public servant ” occur, they shall be understood of every 
person who is in actual possession of the situation of a public servant, whatever l egal defect there may be 
in his right to hold that situation. 
3[Explanation 3 .—The word “election ” denotes an election for the purpose of selecting members of 
any legislative, municipal or other public authority, of whatever character, the m ethod of selection to 
which is by, or under, any law prescribed as by election.] 
5*    *    *    *    * 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Rajasthan  
Amendment of Section 21, Central Act 45 of 1860. —In section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (Central 
Act 45 of 1860), in its application to the State of Rajasthan, after clause Twelfth , the following new clause shall be 
added, namely:- 
"Thirteenth .—Every person employed or engaged by any public body in the con duct and supervision of any 
examination recognised or approved under any law. 
Explanation .—The expression "Public Body" includes. — 
                                                           
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “the Crown” which had been sub s. by the A.O. 1937, for “Government”.  
2. Certain words omitted by Act 40 of 1964, s. 2 (w.e.f. 18- 12-1964). 
3. Ins. by Act 39 of 1920, s. 2. 
4. Subs. by Act 40 of 1964, s. 2, for Cl. Twelfth (w.e.f. 18- 12-1964). 
5. Explanation  4 omitted by Act 39 of 1920, s. 2 Earlier Explanation  Four was ins. By Act 2 of 1958, s. 2 (w.e.f. 12-2-1958). 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 18]
18 
 (a) a University, Board of Education or other body, either established by or under a Central or State Act 
or under the provisions of the Constitution of India or constituted b y the Government: and 
(b) a local authority.". 
[Vide Rajasthan Act 4 of 1993, s. 2 (w.e.f. 11-2- 1993) ] 
22. “Movable property ”.—The words “movable property ” are intended to include corporeal property of every 
description, except land and things attached to the earth or permanently fastened  to anything which is attached to the 
earth. 
23. “Wrongful gain ”.—“Wrongful gain ” is gain by unlawful means of property to which the person gain ing is 
not legally entitled. 
“Wrongful loss ”.—“Wrongful loss ” is the loss by unlawful means of property to which the person  losing it is 
legally entitled. 
Gaining wrongfully/Losing wrongfully. —A person is said to gain wrongfully when such person retains 
wrongfully, as well as when such person acquires wrongfully. A pers on is said to lose wrongfully when such person 
is wrongfully kept out of any property, as well as when such person is wrongfully deprived of property. 
24. “Dishonestly ”.—Whoever does anything with the intention of causing wrongful gain to  one person or 
wrongful loss to another person, is said to do that thing “dishonestly ”. 
25. “Fraudulently ”.—A person is said to do a thing fraudulently if he does that thing with  intent to defraud but 
not otherwise. 
26. “Reason to believe ”.—A person is said to have “reason to believe ” a thing if he has sufficient cause to 
believe that thing but not otherwise. 
27. “Property in possession of wife, clerk or servant ”.—When property is in the possession of a person's 
wife, clerk or servant, on account of that person, it is in that person's pos session within the meaning of this Code. 
Explanation .—A person employed temporarily or on a particular occasion in th e capacity of a clerk, or servant, 
is a clerk or servant within the meaning of this sectio n. 
28. “Counterfeit ”.—A pe
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 18]
k, or servant, 
is a clerk or servant within the meaning of this sectio n. 
28. “Counterfeit ”.—A person is said to “counterfeit ” who causes one thing to resemble another thing, 
intending by means of that resemblance to practise deception, or k nowing it to be likely that deception will thereby 
be practised. 
1[Explanation 1.—It is not essential to counterfeiting that the imitation should be exact. 
Explanation 2.—When a person causes one thing to resemble another thing, and the rese mblance is such that a 
person might be deceived thereby, it shall be presumed, until the contrary is proved, that the person so causing the 
one thing to resemble the other thing intended by means of that resemblan ce to practise deception or knew it to be 
likely that deception would thereby be practised.] 
29. “Document ”.—The word “document ” denotes any matter expressed or described upon any substance by 
means of letters, figures or marks, or by more than one of those means, intended to be used, or which may be used, 
as evidence of that matter. 
Explanation 1 .—It is immaterial by what means or upon what substance the letters, figures or marks are formed, 
or whether the evidence is intended for, or may be used in, a Cou rt of Justice, or not.  
Illustrations 
A writing expressing the terms of a contract, which may be used as eviden ce of the contract, is a document. 
A cheque upon a banker is a document. 
A power- of-attorney is a document. 
A map or plan which is intended to be used or which may be used a s evidence, is a document. 
A writing containing directions or instructions is a document. 
Explanation 2 .—Whatever is expressed by means of letters, figures or marks as explained by mercantile or other usage, 
shall be deemed to be expressed by such letters, figures or marks with in the meaning of this section, although the same may not 
be actually expressed .  
Illustration 
A writes his name on the back of a bill of exchange payable to his order. The meaning of the end
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 18]
on 
A writes his name on the back of a bill of exchange payable to his order. The meaning of the endorsement, as explained by 
mercantile usage, is that the bill is to be paid to the holder. The  endorsement is a document, and must be construe d in the same 
manner as if the words “pay to the holder ” or words to that effect had been written over the signature. 
2[29A. “Electronic record ”.—The words “electronic record ” shall have the meaning assigned to them in   
clause ( t) of sub-section ( 1) of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2 000).] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 1889, s. 9, for the Explanation . 
2. Ins. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 91 and the First Sch. (w.e.f. 17 -10-2000).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 19]
19 
 30. “Valuable security ”.—The words “valuable security ” denote a document which is, or purports to 
be, a document whereby any legal right is created, extended, transferred, restricted, extingui shed or 
released, or whereby any person acknowledges that he lies under legal liability, or  has not a certain legal 
right. 
Illustration 
A writes his name on the back of a bill of exchange. As the effec t of this endorsement is to transfer the right to the bill to any 
person who may become the unlawful holder of it, the endorsement is a “valuable security ”.  
31. “A will ”.—The words “a will ” denote any testamentary document. 
32. Words referring to acts include illegal omissions .—In every part of this Code, except where a 
contrary intention appears from the context, words which refer to acts done ex tend also to illegal 
omissions. 
33. “Act”. “Omission ”.—The word “act” denotes as well as series of acts as a single act: the word 
“omission ” denotes as well a series of omissions as a single omission.  
1[34. Acts done by several persons in furtherance of common intention .—When a criminal act is 
done by several persons in furtherance of the common intention of all, each of such persons i s liable for 
that act in the same manner as if it were done by him alone.] 
35. When such an act is criminal by reason of its being done with a cr iminal knowledge or 
intention. —Whenever an act, which is criminal only by reason of its being done with a cri minal 
knowledge or intention, is done by several persons, each of such persons who joins in the act wi th such 
knowledge or intention is liable for the act in the same manner as if the act w ere done by him alone with 
that knowledge or intention. 
36. Effect caused partly by act and partly by omission .—Wherever the causing of a certain effect, 
or an attempt to cause that effect, by an act or by an omission, is an offence, it is t o be understood that the 
causing of that effect partly by an act and partly by an om
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 19]
fence, it is t o be understood that the 
causing of that effect partly by an act and partly by an omission is the same offence. 
Illustration 
A intentionally causes Z's death, partly by illegally omitting to give Z food, and party by beating Z. A has committed 
murder. 
37. Co-operation by doing one of several acts constituting an offence .—When an offence is 
committed by means of several acts, whoever intentionally co-operates in the com mission of that offence 
by doing any one of those acts, either singly or jointly with any other person, commits that offence. 
Illustrations 
(a) A and B agree to murder Z by severally and at different times g iving him small doses of poison. A and B administer the 
poison according to the agreement with intent to murder Z. Z dies from th e effects the several doses of poison so administered to 
him. Here A and B intentionally co-operate in the commission of murd er and as each of them does an act by which the death is 
caused, they are both guilty of the offence though their acts are  separate. 
(b) A and B are joint jailors, and as such have the charge of Z, a prisoner, alternatively for six hours at a time. A and B, 
intending to cause Z's death, knowingly co-operate in causing that e ffect by illegally omitting, each during the time of his 
attendance, to furnish Z with food supplied to them for that purpo se. Z dies of hunger. Both A and B, are guilty of the murder of  
Z. 
(c) A, a jailor, has the charge of Z, a prisoner. A, intending to cause Z' s death, illegally omits to supply Z with food; in 
consequence of which Z is much reduced in strength, but the starv ation is not sufficient to cause his death. A is dismissed from 
his office, and B succeeds him. B, without collusion or co-operati on with A, illegally omits to supply Z with food, knowing that 
he is likely thereby to cause Z's death. Z dies of hunger. B is guil ty of murder, but, as A did not co-operate with B. A is guilty 
only of an attempt to commit murder. 

<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 19]
 of murder, but, as A did not co-operate with B. A is guilty 
only of an attempt to commit murder. 
38. Persons concerned in criminal act may be guilty of different offences .—Where several 
persons are engaged or concerned in the commission of a criminal act, they may be guilt y of different 
offences by means of that ac t. 
Illustration 
A attacks Z under such circumstances of grave provocation that his killi ng of Z would be only culpable homicide not 
amounting to murder. B, having ill-will towards Z and intending to kill him, and not having been subject to the provocation, 
assists A in killing Z. Here, though A and B are both engaged in causing Z's death, B is guilty of murder, and A is guilty only of 
culpable homicide. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 1870, s. 1, for section 34. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 20]
20 
 39. “Voluntarily ”.—A person is said to cause an effect “voluntarily ” when he causes it by means 
whereby he intended to cause it, or by means which, at the time of employing those  means, he knew or 
had reason to believe to be likely to cause it. 
Illustration 
A sets fire, by night, to an inhabited house in a large town, for the purpose of facilitating a robbery and thus causes the death 
of a person. Here, A may not have intended to cause death, and  may even be sorry that death has been caused by his act; yet, if he 
knew that he was likely to cause death, he has caused death vo luntarily. 
1[40. “Offence ”.—Except in the 2[Chapters] and sections mentioned in clauses 2 and 3 of this section, 
the word “offence ” denotes a thing made punishable by this Code. 
In Chapter IV, 3[Chapter VA] and in the following sections, namely, sections 4[64, 65, 66, 5[67], 71], 
109, 110, 112, 114, 115, 116, 117,6[118, 119 and 120] 187, 194, 195, 203, 211, 213, 214, 221, 222, 223, 
224, 225, 327, 328, 329, 330, 331, 347, 348, 388, 389 and 445, the word “offence ” denotes a thing 
punishable under this Code, or under any special or local law as hereinafter defined. 
And in sections 141, 176, 177, 201, 202, 212, 216 and 441, the word “offence ” has the same meaning 
when the thing punishable under the special or local law is punishable under such law with imprisonment 
for a term of six months or upwards, whether with or without fine.]  
41. “Special law ”.—A “special law ” is a law applicable to a particular subject. 
42. “Local law ”.—A “local law ” is a law applicable only to a particular part of 7[8***9[India]]. 
43. “Illegal ”. “Legally bound to do ”.—The word “illegal ” is applicable to everything which is an 
offence or which is prohibited by law, or which furnishes ground for a civil acti on; and a person is said to 
be “legally bound to do ” whatever it is illegal in him to omit. 
44. “Injury ”.—The word “injury ” denotes any harm whatever illegally caused to any per
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 20]
im to omit. 
44. “Injury ”.—The word “injury ” denotes any harm whatever illegally caused to any person, in 
body, mind, reputation or property. 
45. “Life”.—The word “life” denotes the life of a human being, unless the contrary appears from the 
context. 
46. “Death ”.—The word “death ” denotes the death of a human being unless the contrary appears 
from the context. 
47. “Animal ”.—The word “animal ” denotes any living creature, other than a human being. 
48. “Vessel ”.—The word “vessel ” denotes anything made for the conveyance by water of human 
beings or of property. 
49. “Year ”. “Month ”.—Wherever the word “year” or the word “month ” is used, it is to be 
understood that the year or the month is to be reckoned according to the British calendar. 
50. “Section ”.—The word “section ” denotes one of those portions of a Chapter of this Code which 
are distinguished by prefixed numeral figures. 
51. “Oath ”.—The word “oath” includes a solemn affirmation substituted by law for an oath, and any 
declaration required or authorised by law to be made before a public servant or t o be used for the purpose 
of proof, whether in a Court of Justice or not. 
52. “Good faith ”.—Nothing is said to be done or believed in “good faith ” which is done or believed 
without due care and attention. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 1870, s. 2, for section 40. 
2. Subs. by Act 8 of 1930, s. 2 and the First Sch., for “Chapter” . 
3. Ins. by Act 8 of 1913, s. 2. 
4. Ins. by Act 8 of 1882, s. 1. 
5. Ins. by Act 10 of 1886, s. 21 ( 1). 
6. Ins. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 51 (w.e.f. 27- 10-2009 ). 
7. Subs. by the A.O. 1948, for “British India”.  
8. The words “the territories comprised in” omitted by Act 48 of 1952, s. 3 and the Second Sch. 
9. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., for “the States” which had been subs . by the A.O. 1950, for “the Provinces”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 20]
“the Provinces”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 21]
21 
 1[52A. “Harbour ”.—Except in section 157, and in section 130 in the case in which the harbour is 
given by the wife or husband of the person harboured, the word “harbour ” includes the supplying a person 
with shelter, food, drink, money, clothes, arms, ammunition or means of conveyance, or  the assisting a 
person by any means, whether of the same kind as those enumerated in this section or  not, to evade 
apprehension.] 
CHAPTER III 
OF PUNISHMENTS  
53. Punishments .—The punishments to which offenders are liable under the provisions of this Code 
are— 
First, —Death; 
2[Secondly .—Imprisonment for life;] 
3*    *    *    *    * 
Fourthly .—Imprisonment, which is of two descriptions, namely: — 
(1) Rigorous, that is, with hard labour; 
(2) Simple; 
Fifthly .—Forfeiture of property; 
Sixthly .—Fine. 
4[53A. Construction of reference to transportation .—(1) Subject to the provisions of  
sub-section ( 2) and sub-section ( 3), any reference to “transportation for life ” in any other law for the time 
being in force or in any instrument or order having effect by virtue of any such law or of any enactment 
repealed shall be construed as a reference to “imprisonment for life ”. 
(2) In every case in which a sentence of transportation for a term has been passed before the 
commencement of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 5[1955] (26 of 1955), the offender 
shall be dealt with in the same manner as if sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for the same te rm. 
(3) Any reference to transportation for a term or to transportation for any short er term (by whatever 
name called) in any other law for the time being in force shall be deemed to have been omitted. 
(4) Any reference to “transportation ” in any other law for the time being in force shall, — 
(a) if the expression means transportation for life, be construed as a reference to imprisonment for 
life; 
(b) if the expression means transportation for any shorter term, be deemed to have been omitted.] 
54
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 21]
b) if the expression means transportation for any shorter term, be deemed to have been omitted.] 
54. Commutation of sentence of death .—In every case in which sentence of death shall have been 
passed, 6[the appropriate Government] may, without the consent of the offender, commute the punishment 
for any other punishment provided by this Code. 
55. Commutation of sentence of imprisonment for life .—In every case in which sentence of 
7[imprisonment] for life shall have been passed, 8[the appropriate Government] may, without the consent 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 8 of 1942, s. 2 (w.e.f. 14-2-1942). 
2. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “ Secondly .—Transportation” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1956). 
3. The words “ Thirdly,--Penal servitude;" omitted by Act 17 of 1949, s. 2 (w.e. f. 6-4-1949). 
4. Ins. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch. (w.e.f. 1- 1-1956). 
5. Subs. by Act 36 of 1957, s. 3 and the Second Sch., f or “1954”  (w.e.f. 17-9-1957). 
6. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “the  Central Government or the Provincial Government of the Province  within which the offender 
shall have been sentenced”. The words in italics were subs. by the A .O. 1937, for “the Government of India or the Government 
of the place”.  
7. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1956). 
8. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “ the Provincial Government of the Province  within which the offender shall have been sentenced”. 
The words in italics were subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “the Government of India or the Government of the place”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 22]
22 
 of the offender, commute the punishment for imprisonment of either description f or a term not exceeding 
fourteen years. 
1[55A. Definition of “appropriate Government ”.—In sections fifty-four and fifty-five the 
expression “appropriate Government ” means, — 
(a) in cases where the sentence is a sentence of death or is for an offence agains t any law relating 
to a matter to which the executive power of the Union extends, the Central Government; and 
(b) in cases where the sentence (whether of death or not) is for an offence against any law relating 
to a matter to which the executive power of the State extends, the Government of the State w ithin 
which the offender is sentenced.] 
56. [Sentence of Europeans and Americans to penal servitude. Proviso as to sentence for term 
exceeding ten years but not for life .] Rep. by the Criminal Law (Removal of Racial Discriminations) Act , 
1949 (17 of 1949) ( w. e. f.  6-4-1949). 
57. Fractions of terms of punishment .—In calculating fractions of terms of punishment, 
2[imprisonment] for life shall be reckoned as equivalent to 2[imprisonment] for twenty years. 
58. [Offenders sentenced to transportation how dealt with until transported .] Rep. by the Code of 
Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act,  1955 (26 of 1955), s. 117 and the Sch. (w.e.f. 1-1-1956 ). 
59. [Transportation instead of imprisonment .] Rep. by s. 117 and the Sch., ibid . (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
60. Sentence may be (in certain cases of imprisonment) wholly or partly rigorous or sim ple.—In 
every case in which an offender is punishable with imprisonment which may be of eit her description, it 
shall be competent to the Court which sentences such offender to direct in the sentence that such 
imprisonment shall be wholly rigorous, or that such imprisonment shall be wholly si mple, or that any part 
of such imprisonment shall be rigorous and the rest simple. 
61. [Sentence of forfeiture of property .] Rep. by the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act , 1921  
(16 of
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 22]
[Sentence of forfeiture of property .] Rep. by the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act , 1921  
(16 of 1921), s. 4. 
62. [Forfeiture of property, in respect of offenders punishable with death, transportati on or 
imprisonment. ] Rep. by s. 4, ibid. 
63. Amount of fine .—Where no sum is expressed to which a fine may extend, the amount of fine to 
which the offender is liable is unlimited, but shall not be excessive. 
64. Sentence of imprisonment for non-payment of fine .—3[In every case of an offence punishable 
with imprisonment as well as fine, in which the offender is sentenced to a fine, w hether with or without 
imprisonment, 
and in every case of an offence punishable 4[with imprisonment or fine, or] with fine only, in which 
the offender is sentenced to a fine.] 
it shall be competent to the Court which sentences such offender to direct by the sen tence that, in 
default of payment of the fine, the offender shall suffer imprisonment for a certain term, which 
imprisonment shall be in excess of any other imprisonment to which he may hav e been sentenced or to 
which he may be liable under a commutation of a sentence.  
65. Limit to imprisonment for non-payment of fine, when imprisonment and fine awardable .—
The term for which the Court directs the offender to be imprisoned in defau lt of payment of a fine shall 
not exceed one-fourth of the term of imprisonment which is the maximum fixed for  the offence, if the 
offence be punishable with imprisonment as well as fine. 
66. Description of imprisonment for non-payment of fine .—The imprisonment which the Court 
imposes in default of payment of a fine may be of any description to which the offender mi ght have been 
sentenced for the offence. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by the A. O 1950. Earlier ins. by the A. O. 1937. 
2. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1956). 
3. Subs. by Act 8 of 1882, s. 2, for “ in every case in which an
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 22]
ransportation” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1956). 
3. Subs. by Act 8 of 1882, s. 2, for “ in every case in which an offender is sentenced to a fine”.  
4. Ins. by Act 10 of 1886, s. 21 ( 2). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 23]
23 
 67. Imprisonment for non-payment of fine, when offence punishable with fine on ly.—If the 
offence be punishable with fine only, 1[the imprisonment which the Court imposes in default of payment 
of the fine shall be simple, and] the term for which the Court directs the offender t o be imprisoned, in 
default of payment of fine, shall not exceed the following scale, that is to say, f or any term not exceeding 
two months when the amount of the fine shall not exceed fifty rupees, and for any ter m not exceeding 
four months when the amount shall not exceed one hundred rupees, and for any term not exceeding six  
months in any other case. 
68. Imprisonment to terminate on payment of fine .—The imprisonment which is imposed in 
default of payment of a fine shall terminate whenever that fine is either paid or levied by process of  law. 
69. Termination of imprisonment on payment of proportional part of fine .—If, before the 
expiration of the term of imprisonment fixed in default of payment, such a proportion of the fine be paid 
or levied that the term of imprisonment suffered in default of payment is not le ss than proportional to the 
part of the fine still unpaid, the imprisonment shall terminate. 
Illustration 
A is sentenced to a fine of one hundred rupees and to four mon ths' imprisonment in default of payment. Here, if seventy-five 
rupees of the fine be paid or levied before the expiration of one month of the imprisonment, A will be discharged as soon as the 
first month has expired. If seventy-five rupees be paid or levied at the time of the expiration of the first month, or at any later 
time while A continues in imprisonment, A will be immediately discha rged. If fifty rupees of the fine be paid or levied before the 
expiration of two months of the imprisonment. A will be discharged as so on as the two months are completed. If fifty rupees be 
paid or levied at the time of the expiration of those two months, or at an y later time while A continues in imp
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 23]
ed at the time of the expiration of those two months, or at an y later time while A continues in imprisonment, A will be 
immediately discharged. 
70. Fine leviable within six years, or during imprisonment. Death not to discharge  property 
from liability .—The fine, or any part thereof which remains unpaid, may be levied at any time within s ix 
years after the passing of the sentence, and if, under the sentence, the offender be l iable to imprisonment 
for a longer period than six years, then at any time previous to the expirati on of that period; and the death 
of the offender does not discharge from the liability any property which woul d, after his death, be legally 
liable for his debts. 
71. Limit of punishment of offence made up of several offences .—Where anything which is an 
offence is made up of parts, any of which parts is itself an offence, the offender shall not be punished with 
the punishment of more than one of such his offences, unless it be so expressly provided. 
2[Where anything is an offence falling within two or more separate definiti ons of any law in force for 
the time being by which offences are defined or punished, or 
where several acts, of which one or more than one would by itself or themselv es constitute an 
offence, constitute, when combined, a different offence, 
the offender shall not be punished with a more severe punishment than the Court which tri es him 
could award for any one of such offences]. 
Illustrations 
(a) A gives Z fifty strokes with a stick. Here A may have committed the  offence of voluntarily causing hurt to Z by the 
whole beating, and also by each of the blows which make up th e whole beating. If A were liable to punishment for every blow, 
he might be imprisoned for fifty years, one for each blow. But he  is liable only to one punishment for the whole beating. 
(b) But, if, while A is beating Z, Y interferes, and A intentionally strikes Y, h ere, as the blow given to Y is no part of the act 
whereby A volunta
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 23]
nd A intentionally strikes Y, h ere, as the blow given to Y is no part of the act 
whereby A voluntarily causes hurt to Z, A is liable to one punishment fo r voluntarily causing hurt to Z, and to another for the 
blow given to Y. 
72. Punishment of person guilty of one of several offences, the judgment stating th at it is 
doubtful of which .—In all cases in which judgment is given that a person is guilty of one of several  
offences specified in the judgment, but that it is doubtful of which of these offen ces he is guilty, the 
offender shall be punished for the offence for which the lowest punishment is pr ovided if the same 
punishment is not provided for all. 
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 8 of 1882, s. 3. 
2. Added by s. 4 , ibid. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 24]
24 
 73. Solitary confinement .—Whenever any person is convicted of an offence for which under this 
Code the Court has power to sentence him to rigorous imprisonment, the Court may, by its sentence, 
order that the offender shall be kept in solitary confinement for any portion or porti ons of the 
imprisonment to which he is sentenced, not exceeding three months in the whole, accordi ng to the 
following scale, that is to say — 
a time not exceeding one month if the term of imprisonment shall not exceed six months; 
a time not exceeding two months if the term of imprisonment shall exceed six months and 1[shall not 
exceed one] year; 
a time not exceeding three months if the term of imprisonment shall exceed one year. 
74. Limit of solitary confinement .—In executing a sentence of solitary confinement, such 
confinement shall in no case exceed fourteen days at a time, with intervals between t he periods of solitary 
confinement of not less duration than such periods, and when the imprisonment awarded shall exceed  
three months, the solitary confinement shall not exceed seven days in any one month of the whol e 
imprisonment awarded, with intervals between the periods of solitary confinement of not  less duration 
than such periods. 
2[75. Enhanced punishment for certain offences under Chapter XII or Chapter XVII a fter 
previous conviction .—Whoever, having been convicted, — 
(a) by a Court in 3[India], of an offence punishable under Chapter XII or Chapter XVII of this 
Code with imprisonment of either description for a term of three years or upwards, 4*** 
5*    *    *    *    * 
shall be guilty of any offence punishable under either of those Chapters wi th like imprisonment for the 
like term, shall be subject for every such subsequent offence to 6[imprisonment for life], or to 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years.] 
CHAPTER IV 
GENERAL  EXCEPTIONS  
76. Act done by a person bound, or by mistake of fact believing himself bo
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 24]
IV 
GENERAL  EXCEPTIONS  
76. Act done by a person bound, or by mistake of fact believing himself bound, by law .—
Nothing is an offence which is done by a person who is, or who by reason of a mistak e of fact and not by 
reason of a mistake of law in good faith believes himself to be, bound by law to do it.  
Illustrations 
(a) A, a soldier, fires on a mob by the order of his superior officer, in  conformity with the commands of the law. A has 
committed no offence. 
(b) A, an officer of a Court of Justice, being ordered by that Court to arrest Y and, after due enquiry, believing Z to be Y, 
arrests Z. A has committed no offence. 
77. Act of Judge when acting judicially .—Nothing is an offence which is done by a Judge when 
acting judicially in the exercise of any power which is, or which in good fait h he believes to be, given to 
him by law. 
78. Act done pursuant to the judgment or order of Court .—Nothing which is done in pursuance 
of, or which is warranted by the judgment or order of, a Court of Justice, if  done whilst such judgment or 
order remains in force, is an offence, notwithstanding the Court may have had no jurisdicti on to pass such 
judgment or order, provided the person doing the act in good faith believes that the Court  had such 
jurisdiction. 
79. Act done by a person justified, or by mistake of fact believing himself justified, by la w.—
Nothing is an offence which is done by any person who is justified by law, or who by reason of a mistake 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 8 of 1862, s. 5, for “be less than a” . 
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1910, s. 2, for section 75. 
3. The words “British India” have successively been subs. by the A. O. 1948, the A. O. 1950 and Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., 
(w.e.f. 1-4-1951) to read as above. 
4. The word “or” omitted by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch (w.e.f. 1-4-1951). 
5. Cl. ( b) omitted by s. 3 and the Sch., ibid. (w.e.f. 1-4-1951). 
6. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955,
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 24]
1). 
5. Cl. ( b) omitted by s. 3 and the Sch., ibid. (w.e.f. 1-4-1951). 
6. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1956).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 25]
25 
 of fact and not by reason of a mistake of law in good faith, believes himself to be justified by law, in 
doing it. 
Illustration 
A sees Z commit what appears to A to be a murder. A, in the exe rcise, to the best of his judgment exerted in good faith, of 
the power which the law gives to all persons of apprehending murderers i n the fact, seizes Z, in order to bring Z before the proper 
authorities. A has committed no offence, though it may turn out th at Z was acting in self-defence. 
80. Accident in doing a lawful act .—Nothing is an offence which is done by accident or misfortune, 
and without any criminal intention or knowledge in the doing of a lawful act in a lawful  manner by lawful 
means and with proper care and caution. 
Illustration 
A is at work with a hatchet; the head flies off and kills a man wh o is standing by. Here, if there was no want of proper 
caution on the part of A, his act is excusable and not an offence.  
81. Act likely to cause harm, but done without criminal intent, and to prevent other harm .—
Nothing is an offence merely by reason of its being done with the knowledge t hat it is likely to cause 
harm, if it be done without any criminal intention to cause harm, and in good f aith for the purpose of 
preventing or avoiding other harm to person or property. 
Explanation. —It is a question of fact in such a case whether the harm to be prevented or avoided was 
of such a nature and so imminent as to justify or excuse the risk of doing the ac t with the knowledge that 
it was likely to cause harm. 
Illustrations 
(a) A, the captain of a steam vessel, suddenly and without any f ault or negligence on his part, finds himself in such a 
position that, before he can stop his vessel, he must inevitably run down a boat B, with twenty or thirty passengers on board , 
unless he changes the course of his vessel, and that, by changing  his course, he must incur risk of running down a boat C with 
only two passengers on board, which he may possib
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 25]
 he must incur risk of running down a boat C with 
only two passengers on board, which he may possibly clear. Here, if A alters his course without any intention to run down the 
boat C and in good faith for the purpose of avoiding the danger to the passengers in the boat B, he is not guilty of an offence, 
though he may run down the boat C by doing an act which he knew was likely to cause that effect, if it be found as a matte r of 
fact that the danger which he intended to avoid was such as to excuse  him in incurring the risk of running down C. 
(b) A, in a great fire, pulls down houses in order to prevent the conf lagration from spreading. He does this with the intention 
in good faith of saving human life or property. Here, if it be f ound that the harm to be prevented was of such a nature and so 
imminent as to excuse A's act, A is not guilty of the offence. 
82. Act of a child under seven years of age .—Nothing is an offence which is done by a child under 
seven years of age.  
83. Act of a child above seven and under twelve of immature understanding .—Nothing is an 
offence which is done by a child above seven years of age and under twelve, who has not attain ed 
sufficient maturity of understanding to judge of the nature and consequences of his conduct on that 
occasion. 
84. Act of a person of unsound mind .—Nothing is an offence which is done by a person who, at the 
time of doing it, by reason of unsoundness of mind, is incapable of knowing the nat ure of the act, or that 
he is doing what is either wrong or contrary to law. 
85. Act of a person incapable of judgment by reason of intoxication caused against his will .—
Nothing is an offence which is done by a person who, at the time of doing it, is, by rea son of intoxication, 
incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that he is doing what is either w rong, or contrary to  
law; provided that the thing which intoxicated him was administered to him w ithout his knowledge or 
against his will. 
86. Of
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 25]
g which intoxicated him was administered to him w ithout his knowledge or 
against his will. 
86. Offence requiring a particular intent or knowledge committed by one who is intoxicat ed.—
In cases where an act done is not an offence unless done with a particular knowledge or intent, a person 
who does the act in a state of intoxication shall be liable to be dealt with a s if he had the same knowledge 
as he would have had if he had not been intoxicated, unless the thing which intoxicat ed him was 
administered to him without his knowledge or against his will. 
87. Act not intended and not known to be likely to cause death or grievous hurt, done by 
consent .—Nothing which is not intended to cause death, or grievous hurt, and which is not known by  the 
doer to be likely to cause death or grievous hurt, is an offence by reason of any harm which it may cause, 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 26]
26 
 or be intended by the doer to cause, to any person, above eighteen years of age, who has given consent, 
whether express or implied, to suffer that harm; or by reason of any harm which it may be known by the 
doer to be likely to cause to any such person who has consented to take the risk of that harm. 
Illustration 
A and Z agree to fence with each other for amusement. This agreem ent implies the consent of each to suffer any harm which 
in the course of such fencing, may be caused without foul play ; and if A, while playing fairly, hurts Z, A commits no offence. 
88. Act not intended to cause death, done by consent in good faith for person's benefit .—
Nothing, which is not intented to cause death, is an offence by reason of any harm whi ch it may cause, or 
be intended by the doer to cause, or be known by the doer to be likely to cause, to any per son for whose 
benefit it is done in good faith, and who has given a consent, whether express or implied, to suffer that 
harm, or to take the risk of that harm. 
Illustration 
A, a surgeon, knowing that a particular operation is likely to cause th e death of Z, who suffers under the painful complaint, 
but not intending to cause Z's death, and intending, in good faith , Z's benefit, performs that operation on Z, with Z's consent. A 
has committed no offence. 
89. Act done in good faith for benefit of child or insane person, by or by consent of guardian .—
Nothing which is done in good faith for the benefit of a person under twelve years of age, or of unsound 
mind, by or by consent, either express or implied, of the guardian or other person havin g lawful charge of 
that person, is an offence by reason of any harm which it may cause, or be intended by the doer to cause 
or be known by the doer to be likely to cause to that person: Provided — 
Provisos. First .—That this exception shall not extend to the intentional causing of death, or to the 
attempting to cause death; 
Secondly .—That this exception shall not ex
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 26]
causing of death, or to the 
attempting to cause death; 
Secondly .—That this exception shall not extend to the doing of anything which the person doing 
it knows to be likely to cause death, for any purpose other than the preven ting of death or grievous 
hurt, or the curing of any grievous disease or infirmity; 
Thirdly .—That this exception shall not extend to the voluntary causing of grievous hurt, or t o the 
attempting to cause grievous hurt, unless it be for the purpose of preventing death or grievous hurt; or 
the curing of any grievous disease or infirmity; 
Fourthly .—That this exception shall not extend to the abetment of any offence, to the committi ng 
of which offence it would not extend. 
Illustration 
A, in good faith, for his child's benefit without his child's con sent, has his child cut for the stone by a surgeon knowing it to 
be likely that the operation will cause the child's death, but no t intending to cause the child's death. A is within the exception,   
inasmuch as his object was the cure of the child. 
90. Consent known to be given under fear or misconception .—A consent is not such a consent as 
is intended by any section of this Code, if the consent is given by a person under fear of inj ury, or under a 
misconception of fact, and if the person doing the act knows, or has reason to bel ieve, that the consent 
was given in consequence of such fear or misconception; or 
Consent of insane person .—if the consent is given by a person who, from unsoundness of mind, or 
intoxication, is unable to understand the nature and consequence of that to which he gives his consent; or 
Consent of child .—unless the contrary appears from the context, if the consent is given by a person 
who is under twelve years of age. 
91. Exclusion of acts which are offences independently of harm cause .—The exceptions in 
sections 87, 88 and 89 do not extend to acts which are offences independently of any harm which t hey 
may cause, or be intended to cause, or be k
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 26]
hich are offences independently of any harm which t hey 
may cause, or be intended to cause, or be known to be likely to cause, to the person giv ing the consent, or 
on whose behalf the consent is given. 
Illustration 
Causing miscarriage (unless caused in good faith for the purpose of sa ving the life of the woman) is an offence 
independ ently of any harm which it may cause or be intended to cause to the woman. Therefore, it is not an offence “by reason of 
such harm ”; and the consent of the woman or of her guardian to the causin g of such miscarriage does not justify the act. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 27]
27 
 92. Act done in good faith for benefit of a person without consent .—Nothing is an offence by 
reason of any harm which it may cause to a person for whose benefit it is done in good faith, even without 
that person's consent, if the circumstances are such that it is impossible for tha t person to signify consent, 
or if that person is incapable of giving consent, and has no guardian or other person i n lawful charge of 
him from whom it is possible to obtain consent in time for the thing to be done with benefit: Provi ded— 
Provisos . First .—That this exception shall not extend to the intentional causing of death, or the 
attempting to cause death; 
Secondly .—That this exception shall not extend to the doing of anything which the person doing it 
knows to be likely to cause death, for any purpose other than the preventing of death or grievous hurt, or 
the curing of any grievous disease or infirmity; 
Thirdly .—That this exception shall not extend to the voluntary causing of hurt, or to the attempt ing to 
cause hurt, for any purpose other than the preventing of death or hurt; 
Fourthly .—That this exception shall not extend to the abetment of any offence, to the comm itting of 
which offence it would not extend. 
Illustrations 
(a) Z is thrown from his horse, and is insensible. A, a surgeon, finds that Z requires to be trepanned. A, not intending Z's 
death, but in good faith, for Z's benefit, performs the trepan be fore Z recovers his power of judging for himself. A has committed 
no offence. 
(b) Z is carried off by a tiger. A fires at the tiger knowing it to be like ly that the shot may kill Z, but not intending to kill Z, 
and in good faith intending Z's benefit. A's ball gives Z a mortal wou nd. A has committed no offence. 
(c) A, a surgeon, sees a child suffer an accident which is likely to pro ve fatal unless an operation be immediately performed. 
There is no time to apply to the child's guardian. A performs the o peration in spite of the entreaties 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 27]
e is no time to apply to the child's guardian. A performs the o peration in spite of the entreaties of the child, intending, in 
good faith, the child's benefit. A has committed no offence. 
(d) A is in a house which is on fire, with Z, a child. People below ho ld out a blanket. A drops the child from the house stop, 
knowing it to be likely that the fall may kill the child, but not intending to kill the child, and intending, in good faith, the  child's 
benefit. Here, even if the child is killed by the fall, A has committed no offence.  
Explanation .—Mere pecuniary benefit is not benefit within the meaning of sections 88, 89 and 92. 
93. Communication made in good faith .—No communication made in good faith is an offence by 
reason of any harm to the person to whom it is made, if it is made for the benefit of that person. 
Illustration 
A, a surgeon, in good faith, communicates to a patient his opinion that he cannot live. The patient dies in consequence of th e 
shock. A has committed no offence, though he knew it to be li kely that the communication might cause the patient's death. 
94. Act to which a person is compelled by threats .—Except murder, and offences against the State 
punishable with death, nothing is an offence which is done by a person who is compelled to do it  by 
threats, which, at the time of doing it, reasonably cause the apprehension tha t instant death to that person 
will otherwise be the consequence: Provided the person doing the act did not of his own accor d, or from a 
reasonable apprehension of harm to himself short of instant death, place himsel f in the situation by which 
he became subject to such constraint. 
Explanation 1 .—A person who, of his own accord, or by reason of a threat of being beaten, joins a 
gang of dacoits, knowing their character, is not entitled to the benefit of this exception, on the ground of 
his having been compelled by his associates to do anything that is an offence by law. 
Explanation 2 .—A person seized
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 27]
mpelled by his associates to do anything that is an offence by law. 
Explanation 2 .—A person seized by a gang of dacoits, and forced, by threat of instant death, t o do a 
thing which is an offence by law; for example, a smith compelled to take his tools and to force the door of 
a house for the dacoits to enter and plunder it, is entitled to the benefit of this exception. 
95. Act causing slight harm .—Nothing is an offence by reason that it causes, or that it is intended to  
cause, or that it is known to be likely to cause, any harm, if that harm is so s light that no person of 
ordinary sense and temper would complain of such harm. 
 
Of the Right of Private Defen ce 
96. Things done in private defence .—Nothing is an offence which is done in the exercise of the 
right of private defence. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 28]
28 
 97. Right of private defence of the body and of property .—Every person has a right, subject to the 
restrictions contained in section 99, to defend — 
First .—His own body, and the body of any other person, against any offence affecting the human 
body; 
Secondly .—The property, whether movable or immovable, of himself or of any other person, against 
any act which is an offence falling under the definition of theft, robber y, mischief or criminal trespass, or 
which is an attempt to commit theft, robbery, mischief or criminal trespass. 
98. Right of private defence against the act of a person of unsound mind, etc .—When an act, 
which would otherwise be a certain offence, is not that offence, by reason of the youth, the want of 
maturity of understanding, the unsoundness of mind or the intoxication of the person doing  that act, or by 
reason of any misconception on the part of that person, every person has the same right  of private defence 
against that act which he would have if the act were that offence. 
Illustrations 
(a) Z, under the influence of madness, attempts to kill A; Z is guilty o f no offence. But A has the same right of private 
defence which he would have if Z were sane. 
(b) A enters by night a house which he is legally entitled to enter. Z, in g ood faith, taking A for a house-breaker, attacks A. 
Here Z, by attacking A under this misconception, commits no offe nce. But A has the same right of private defence against Z, 
which he would have if Z were not acting under that misconception . 
99. Acts against which there is no right of private defence .—There is no right of private defence 
against an act which does not reasonably cause the apprehension of death or of gri evous hurt, if done, or 
attempted to be done by a public servant acting in good faith under colour of his off ice, though that act 
may not be strictly justifiable by law. 
There is no right of private defence against an act which does not reasonably cau se the apprehension 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 28]
ere is no right of private defence against an act which does not reasonably cau se the apprehension 
of death or of grievous hurt, if done, or attempted to be done, by the direction of a public servant acting in 
good faith under colour of his office though that direction may not be strictly justifiable by law. 
There is no right of private defence in cases in which there is time to have recou rse to protection of 
the public authorities. 
Extent to which the right may be exercised .—The right of private defence in no case extends to the 
inflicting of more harm than it is necessary to inflict for the purpose ofdefence. 
Explanation 1 .—A person is not deprived of the right of private defence against an act done, or 
attempted to be done, by a public servant, as such, unless he knows or has reason to believe, t hat the 
person doing the act is such public servant. 
Explanation 2 .—A person is not deprived of the right of private defence against an act done, or 
attempted to be done, by the direction of a public servant, unless he knows, or has r eason to believe, that 
the person doing the act is acting by such direction, or unless such person states the author ity under which 
he acts, or if he has authority in writing, unless he produces such authority, if demanded. 
100. When the right of private defence of the body extends to causing death .—The right of 
private defence of the body extends, under the restrictions mentioned in the last preceding se ction, to the 
voluntary causing of death or of any other harm to the assailant, if the of fence which occasions the 
exercise of the right be of any of the descriptions hereinafter enumerated, namely: — 
First .—Such an assault as may reasonably cause the apprehension that death will otherwise be t he 
consequence of such assault; 
Secondly .—Such an assault as may reasonably cause the apprehension that grievous hurt will  
otherwise be the consequence of such assault; 
Thirdly .—An assault with the intention of comm
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 28]
ill  
otherwise be the consequence of such assault; 
Thirdly .—An assault with the intention of committing rape; 
Fourthly .—An assault with the intention of gratifying unnatural lust; 
Fifthly .—An assault with the intention of kidnapping or abducting; 
Sixthly .—An assault with the intention of wrongfully confining a person, under circumstances w hich 
may reasonably cause him to apprehend that he will be unable to have recourse to the public authorities 
for his release. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 29]
29 
 1[Seventhly .—An act of throwing or administering acid or an attempt to throw or adm inister acid 
which may reasonably cause the apprehension that grievous hurt will otherwise be the consequence of 
such act.] 
101. When such right extends to causing any harm other than death .—If the offence be not of 
any of the descriptions enumerated in the last preceding section, the right of private defence of the body 
does not extend to the voluntary causing of death to the assailant, but does extend, under the restrictions 
mentioned in section 99 to the voluntary causing to the assailant of any harm other than death. 
102. Commencement and continuance of the right of private defence of the body .—The right of 
private defence of the body commences as soon as a reasonable apprehension of danger to the body ari ses 
from an attempt or threat to commit the offence though the offence may not have been committed; and it 
continues as long as such apprehension of danger to the body continues. 
103. When the right of private defence of property extends to causing death .—The right of 
private defence of property extends, under the restrictions mentioned in section 99, to t he voluntary 
causing of death or of any other harm to the wrong-doer, if the offence, the commit ting of which, or the 
attempting to commit which, occasions the exercise of the right, be an offence of  any of the descriptions 
hereinafter enumerated, namely: — 
First .—Robbery; 
Secondly .—House-breaking by night; 
Thirdly .—Mischief by fire committed on any building, tent or vessel, which building, t ent or vessel is 
used as a human dwelling or as a place for the custody of property; 
Fourthly .—Theft, mischief or house-trespass, under such circumstances as may reasonably cause 
apprehension that death or grievous hurt will be the consequence, if such right of pri vate defence is not 
exercised. 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Karnataka 
(1) In section 103, in clause Thirdly , — 
 ( i) after the words “mischief by
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 29]
AMENDMENTS 
Karnataka 
(1) In section 103, in clause Thirdly , — 
 ( i) after the words “mischief by fire ”, the words “or any explosive substance ” Shall be inserted; 
 ( ii) after the words “as a human dwelling, or ” the words “as a place of worship, or ” shall be inserted. 
(2) After clause Fourthly , the following clause shall be inserted namely: — 
“Fifthly .— Mischief by fire or any explosive substance committed on any property  used or intended to be used for 
the purpose of Government or any local authority, statutory body or company owned or controlled by Government or 
railway or any vehicle used or adapted to be used for the carriage o f passengers for hire or reward ”. 
[Vide Karnataka Act 8 of 1972, sec. 2, (w.e.f. 7- 10-1972) ]. 
104. When such right extends to causing any harm other than death .—If the offence, the 
committing of which, or the attempting to commit which occasions the exercise o f the right of private 
defence, be theft, mischief, or criminal trespass, not of any of the descriptions enum erated in the last 
preceding section, that right does not extend to the voluntary causing of death, but does extend, subject to 
the restrictions mentioned in section 99, to the voluntary causing to the wr ong-doer of any harm other 
than death. 
105. Commencement and continuance of the right of private defence of property .—The right of 
private defence of property commences when a reasonable apprehension of danger to the property 
commences. 
The right of private defence of property against theft continues till the offender has eff ected his retreat 
with the property or either the assistance of the public authoritie s is obtained, or the property has been 
recovered. 
The right of private defence of property against robbery continues as long as the  offender causes or 
attempts to cause to any person death or hurt or wrongful restraint or as long as the fear of instant deat h or 
of instant hurt or of instant personal restraint continues. 
        
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 29]
the fear of instant deat h or 
of instant hurt or of instant personal restraint continues. 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 2 (w.e.f. 3-2-2013). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 30]
30 
 The right of private defence of property against criminal trespass or mischi ef continues as long as the 
offender continues in the commission of criminal trespass or mischief. 
The right of private defence of property against house-breaking by night con tinues as long as the 
house-trespass which has been begun by such house-breaking continues. 
106. Right of private defence against deadly assault when there is risk of harm t o innocent 
person .—If in the exercise of the right of private defence against an assault whi ch reasonably causes the 
apprehension of death, the defender be so situated that he cannot effectually exercise that right without 
risk of harm to an innocent person, his right of private defence extends to the running of that risk.  
Illustration 
A is attacked by a mob who attempt to murder him. He cannot effec tually exercise his right of private defence without firing 
on the mob, and he cannot fire without risk of harming young ch ildren who are mingled with the mob. A commits no offence if 
by so firing he harms any of the children.  
CHAPTER V 
OF ABETMENT  
107. Abetment of a thing .—A person abets the doing of a thing, who — 
First .—Instigates any person to do that thing; or 
Secondly .—Engages with one or more other person or persons in any conspiracy for the doing of th at 
thing, if an act or illegal omission takes place in pursuance of that conspiracy, and i n order to the doing of 
that thing; or 
Thirdly .—Intentionally aids, by any act or illegal omission, the doing of that thing. 
Explanation 1 .—A person who, by wilful misrepresentation, or by wilful concealment of a  material 
fact which he is bound to disclose, voluntarily causes or procures, or attempts to cause or procure, a thing 
to be done, is said to instigate the doing of that thing. 
Illustration 
A, a public officer, is authorised by a warrant from a Court of Just ice to apprehend Z. B, knowing that fact and also that C is 
not Z, wilfully represents to A that C i
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 30]
ce to apprehend Z. B, knowing that fact and also that C is 
not Z, wilfully represents to A that C is Z, and thereby intentionally c auses A to apprehend C. Here B abets by instigation the 
apprehension of C. 
Explanation 2 .—Whoever, either prior to or at the time of the commission of an act, does anything in 
order to facilitate the commission of that act, and thereby facilitates t he commission thereof, is said to aid 
the doing of that act. 
108. Abettor .—A person abets an offence, who abets either the commission of an offence, or the 
commission of an act which would be an offence, if committed by a person capable by law of committing 
an offence with the same intention or knowledge as that of the abettor. 
Explanation 1 .—The abetment of the illegal omission of an act may amount to an offence alth ough 
the abettor may not himself be bound to do that act. 
Explanation 2 .—To constitute the offence of abetment it is not necessary that the act abett ed should 
be committed, or that the effect requisite to constitute the offence should be caused. 
Illustrations 
(a) A instigates B to murder C. B refuses to do so. A is guilty of abetting B to commit murder. 
(b) A instigates B to murder D. B in pursuance of the instigation stabs D. D recov ers from the wound. A is guilty of 
instigating B to commit murder. 
Explanation 3 .—It is not necessary that the person abetted should be capable by law of committing an 
offence, or that he should have the same guilty intention or knowledge as that of t he abettor or any guilty 
intention or knowledge. 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 31]
31 
 Illustrations 
(a) A, with a guilty intention, abets a child or a lunatic to commit an act which would be an offence, if committed by a 
person capable by law of committing an offence, and having th e same intention as A. Here A, whether the act be committed or 
not, is guilty of abetting an offence. 
(b) A, with the intention of murdering Z, instigates B, a child under se ven years of age, to do an act which causes Z's death. 
B, in consequence of the abetment, does the act in the absence o f A and thereby causes Z's death. Here, though B was not capable 
by law of committing an offence, A is liable to be punished in the  same manner as if B had been capable by law of committing an 
offence, and had committed murder, and he is therefore subject to  the punishment of death. 
(c) A instigates B to set fire to a dwelling-house. B, in consequence of th e unsoundness of his mind, being incapable of 
knowing the nature of the act, or that he is doing what is wrong o r contrary to law, sets fire to the house in consequence of A's 
instigation. B has committed no offence, but A is guilty of abetting  the offence of setting fire to a dwelling-house, and is liable to 
the punishment provided for that offence. 
(d) A, intending to cause a theft to be committed, instigates B to take p roperty belonging to Z out of Z's possession. A 
induces B to believe that the property belongs to A. B takes the prope rty out of Z's possession, in good faith, believing it to be A's 
property. B, acting under this misconception, does not take dishon estly, and therefore does not commit theft. But A is guilty of 
abetting theft, and is liable to the same punishment as if B had committed theft. 
Explanation 4 .—The abetment of an offence being an offence, the abetment of such an abetment is 
also an offence. 
Illustration 
A instigates B to instigate C to murder Z. B accordingly instigates C to murder Z, and  C commits that offence in 
consequence of B's instigation. B is liable to be punis
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 31]
to murder Z, and  C commits that offence in 
consequence of B's instigation. B is liable to be punished for his off ence with the punishment for murder; and, as A instigated B 
to commit the offence, A is also liable to the same punishment. 
Explanation 5 .—It is not necessary to the commission of the offence of abetment by conspira cy that 
the abettor should concert the offence with the person who commits it. It is sufficien t if he engages in the 
conspiracy in pursuance of which the offence is committed. 
Illustration 
A concerts with B a plan for poisoning Z. It is agreed that A shall a dminister the poison. B then explains the plan to C 
mentioning that a third person is to administer the poison, but without mentioning A's name. C agrees to procure the poison, and 
procures and delivers it to B for the purpose of its being used in the manner explained. A administers the poison; Z dies in 
consequence. Here, though A and C have not conspired together, yet C has been engaged in the conspiracy in pursuance of which 
Z has been murdered. C has therefore committed the offence define d in this section and is liable to the punishment for murder. 
1[108A. Abetment in India of offences outside India .—A person abets an offence within the 
meaning of this Code who, in 2[India], abets the commission of any act without and beyond 2[India] 
which would constitute an offence if committed in 2[India]. 
Illustration 
A, in 2[India], instigates B, a foreigner in Goa, to commit a murder in Goa , A is guilty of abetting murder.] 
109. Punishment of abetment if the act abetted is committed in consequence and where no 
express provision is made for its punishment .—Whoever abets any offence shall, if the act abetted is 
committed in consequence of the abetment, and no express provision is made by this Code for th e 
punishment of such abetment, be punished with the punishment provided for the offence. 
Explanation .—An act or offence is said to be committed in consequence of abetm
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 31]
ed for the offence. 
Explanation .—An act or offence is said to be committed in consequence of abetment, when it is 
committed in consequence of the instigation, or in pursuance of the conspiracy, or w ith the aid which 
constitutes the abetment. 
Illustrations 
(a) A offers a bribe to B, a public servant, as a reward for showing A some favour in the exercise of B's official functions. B 
accepts the bribe. A has abetted the offence defined in section  161. 
                                                           
1. Added by Act 4 of 1898, s. 3. 
2. The words “British India” have successively been subs. by the A.O. 1 948, the A.O. 1950 and Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and  the Sch., 
to read as above. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 32]
32 
 (b) A instigates B to give false evidence. B, in consequence of the in stigation, commits that offence. A is guilty of abetting 
that offence, and is liable to the same punishment as B. 
(c) A and B conspire to poison Z. A, in pursuance of the conspiracy, procures the poison and delivers it to B in order that he 
may administer it to Z. B, in pursuance of the conspiracy, administers the  poison to Z in A ’s absence and thereby causes Z ’s 
death. Here B is guilty of murder. A is guilty of abetting that offence  by conspiracy, and is liable to the punishment for murder. 
110. Punishment of abetment if person abetted does act with different intentio n from that of 
abettor .—Whoever abets the commission of an offence shall, if the person abetted does the act with a  
different intention or knowledge from that of the abettor, be punished with the punishment provided for 
the offence which would have been committed if the act had been done with the intention or knowledge 
of the abettor and with no other. 
111. Liability of abettor when one act abetted and different act done .—When an act is abetted 
and a different act is done, the abettor is liable for the act done, in the same manner and to the same extent 
as if he had directly abetted it: 
Provided the act done was a probable consequence of the abetment, and was committed under the  
influence of the instigation, or with the aid or in pursuance of the conspiracy which constituted the 
abetment. 
Illustrations 
(a) A instigates a child to put poison into the food of Z, and gives him poison for that purpose. The child, in consequence of 
the instigation, by mistake puts the poison into the food of Y, which  is by the side of that of Z. Here if the child was acting under 
the influence of A's instigation, and the act done was under the c ircumstances a probable consequence of the abetment, A is liable 
in the same manner and to the same extent as if he had instigated t he child to put the poison into the food of 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 32]
manner and to the same extent as if he had instigated t he child to put the poison into the food of Y. 
(b) A instigates B to burn Z ’s house B sets fire to the house and at the same time commits theft of  property there. A, though 
guilty of abetting the burning of the house, is not guilty of ab etting the theft; for the theft was a distinct act, and not a probabl e 
consequence of the burning. 
(c) A instigates B and C to break into an inhabited house at midnight fo r the purpose of robbery, and provides them with 
arms for that purpose. B and C break into the house, and being resisted by Z, one of the inmates, murder Z. Here, if that murder 
was the probable consequence of the abetment, A is liable to the punishme nt provided for murder. 
112. Abettor when liable to cumulative punishment for act abetted and for act done .—If the act 
for which the abettor is liable under the last preceding section is commit ted in addition to the act abetted, 
and constitute a distinct offence, the abettor is liable to punishment for each of the offences. 
Illustration 
A instigates B to resist by force a distress made by a public servant. B, in consequence resists that distress. In offering the 
resistance, B voluntarily causes grievous hurt to the officer executing the d istress. As B has committed both the offence of 
resisting the distress, and the offence of voluntarily causing grievous hurt, B is liable to punishment for both these offences; and, 
if A knew that B was likely voluntarily to cause grievous hurt in resisting the distress A will also be liable to punishment for each 
of the offences. 
113. Liability of abettor for an effect caused by the act abetted different fro m that intended by 
the abettor. —When an act is abetted with the intention on the part of the abettor of causing a particular 
effect, and an act for which the abettor is liable in consequence of the abetment, causes a different effect 
from that intended by the abettor, the abettor is liable for the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 32]
etment, causes a different effect 
from that intended by the abettor, the abettor is liable for the effect cause d, in the same manner and to the 
same extent as if he had abetted the act with the intention of causing that effect, provided he knew that the 
act abetted was likely to cause that effect.  
Illustration 
A instigates B to cause grievous hurt to Z. B, in consequence of the instig ation, causes grievous hurt to Z. Z dies in 
consequence. Here, if A knew that the grievous hurt abetted was likely to cause death, A is liable to be punished with the 
punishment provided for murder. 
114. Abettor present when offence is committed .—Whenever any person who is absent would be 
liable to be punished as an abettor, is present when the act or offence for which he would be punishable in 
consequence of the abetment is committed, he shall be deemed to have committed such act or offence. 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 33]
33 
 115. Abetment of offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life —if offence not 
committed .—Whoever abets the commission of an offence punishable with death or 1[imprisonment for 
life], shall, if that offence be not committed in consequence of the abetment, an d no express provision is 
made by this Code for the punishment of such abetment, be punished with imprisonment of eith er 
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine; 
if act causing harm be done in consequence .—and if any act for which the abettor is liable in 
consequence of the abetment, and which causes hurt to any person, is done, the abettor shall be liable t o 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to fourteen y ears, and shall also be liable 
to fine. 
Illustration 
A instigates B to murder Z. The offence is not committed. If B had mu rdered Z, he would have been subject to the 
punishment of death or 1[imprisonment for life]. Therefore A is liable to imprisonment for a ter m which may extend to seven 
years and also to a fine, and if any hurt be done to Z in co nsequence of the abetment, he will be liable to imprisonment for a ter m 
which may extend to fourteen years, and to fine. 
116. Abetment of offence punishable with imprisonment —if offence be not committed. —
Whoever abets an offence punishable with imprisonment shall, if that offence be not committed in 
consequence of the abetment, and no express provision is made by this Code for the pun ishment of such 
abetment, be punished with imprisonment of any description provided for that offence for a term which 
may extend to one-fourth part of the longest term provided for that offence; or w ith such fine as is 
provided for that offence, or with both; 
if abettor or person abetted be a public servant whose duty it is to prevent offence .—and if the 
abettor or the person abetted is a public servant, whose duty it is to prevent the commi ssion of such 
offence
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 33]
the person abetted is a public servant, whose duty it is to prevent the commi ssion of such 
offence, the abettor shall be punished with imprisonment of any description provided f or that offence, for 
a term which may extend to one-half of the longest term provided for that offence, or with such fine as is 
provided for the offence, or with both.  
Illustrations 
(a) A offers a bribe to B, a public servant, as a reward for showing A  some favour in the exercise of B ’s official functions. B 
refuses to accept the bribe. A is punishable under this section. 
(b) A instigates B to give false evidence. Here, if B does not give fa lse evidence, A has nevertheless committed the offence 
defined in this section, and is punishable accordingly. 
(c) A, a police-officer, whose duty it is to prevent robbery, abets the  commission of robbery. Here, though the robbery be not 
committed, A is liable to one-half of the longest term of imprisonment p rovided for that offence, and also to fine. 
(d) B abets the commission of a robbery by A, a police-officer, whose d uty it is to prevent that offence. Here , though the 
robbery be not committed, B is liable to one-half of the longest term of  imprisonment provided for the offence of robbery, and 
also to fine. 
117. Abetting commission of offence by the public or by more than ten persons .—Whoever abets 
the commission of an offence by the public generally or by any number or class of person s exceeding ten, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may  extend to three years, or 
with fine, or with both. 
Illustration 
A affixes in a public place a placard instigating a sect consisting of m ore than ten members to meet at a certain time and 
place, for the purpose of attacking the members of an adverse se ct, while engaged in a procession. A has committed the offenc e 
defined in this section. 
118. Concealing design to commit offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life.—
Whoever intendi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 33]
Concealing design to commit offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life.—
Whoever intending to facilitate or knowing it to be likely that he wi ll thereby facilitate the commission of 
an offence punishable with death or 1[imprisonment for life], 
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1956). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 34]
34 
 1[voluntarily conceals by any act or omission or by the use of encryption or any ot her information 
hiding tool, the existence of a design] to commit such offence or makes any represent ation which he 
knows to be false respecting such design; 
if offence be committed; if offence be not committed .—shall, if that offence be committed, be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven y ears, or, if the 
offence be not committed, with imprisonment of either description, for a term w hich may extend to three 
years; and in either case shall also be liable to fine.  
Illustration 
A, knowing that dacoity is about to be committed at B, falsely info rms the Magistrate that a dacoity is about to be committed 
at C, a place in an opposite direction, and thereby misleads the Magistrate w ith intent to facilitate the commission of the offence. 
The dacoity is committed at B in pursuance of the design. A is punish able under this section. 
119. Public servant concealing design to commit offence which it is his duty to prevent .—
Whoever, being a public servant intending to facilitate or knowing it to be li kely that he will thereby 
facilitate the commission of an offence which it is his duty as such public servant to prevent, 
1[voluntarily conceals, by any act or illegal omission or by the use of encrypti on or any other 
information hiding tool, the existence of a design] to commit such offence or ma kes any representation 
which he knows to be false respecting such design, 
if offence be committed .—shall, if the offence be committed, be punished with imprisonment of any 
description provided for the offence, for a term which may extend to one-half of  the longest term of such 
imprisonment, or with such fine as is provided for that offence, or with both; 
if offence be punishable with death, etc .—or, if the offence be punishable with death or 
2[imprisonment for life], with imprisonment of either description for a term which
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 34]
le with death or 
2[imprisonment for life], with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten 
years; 
if offence be not committed .—or, if the offence be not committed, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of any description provided for the offence for a term which may extend to one-fourth part 
of the longest term of such imprisonment or with such fine as is provided for the offence, or w ith both.  
Illustration 
A, an officer of police, being legally bound to give informa tion of all designs to commit robbery which may come to his 
knowledge, and knowing that B designs to commit robbery, omits to g ive such information, with intent to facilitate the 
commission of that offence. Here A has by an illegal omission co ncealed the existence of B ’s design, and is liable to punishment 
according to the provision of this section. 
120. Concealing design to commit offence punishable with imprisonment .—Whoever, intending 
to facilitate or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby facilitate the commission of an offence 
punishable with imprisonment, 
voluntarily conceals, by any act or illegal omission, the existence of a desig n to commit such offence, 
or makes any representation which he knows to be false respecting such design, 
if offence be committed ; if offence be not committed .—shall, if the offence be committed, be 
punished with imprisonment of the description provided for the offence, for a t erm which may extend to 
one-fourth, and, if the offence be not committed, to one-eight of the longest term of such imprisonment, 
or with such fine as is provided for the offence, or with both. 
3[CHAPTER VA 
CRIMINAL  CONSPIRACY  
120A. Definition of criminal conspiracy .—When two or more persons agree to do, or cause to be 
done, — 
(1) an illegal act, or 
(2) an act which is not illegal by illegal means, such an agreement is designated a cr iminal 
conspiracy: 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 34]
cr iminal 
conspiracy: 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s . 51, for “voluntarily conceals, by any act or illegal omission, the existen ce of a design”  
(w.e.f. 27- 10-2009). 
2. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transp ortation for life” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1956). 
3. Ins. by Act 8 of 1913, s. 3. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 35]
35 
 Provided that no agreement except an agreement to commit an offence shall amount to a cri minal 
conspiracy unless some act besides the agreement is done by one or more parties to such agr eement in 
pursuance thereof. 
Explanation .—It is immaterial whether the illegal act is the ultimate object of such agreement, or is 
merely incidental to that object. 
120B. Punishment of criminal conspiracy .—(1) Whoever is a party to a criminal conspiracy to 
commit an offence punishable with death, 1[imprisonment for life] or rigorous imprisonment for a term of 
two years or upwards, shall, where no express provision is made in this Code for the punishment of such a 
conspiracy, be punished in the same manner as if he had abetted such offence. 
(2) Whoever is a party to a criminal conspiracy other than a criminal conspiracy to commit an offence 
punishable as aforesaid shall be punished with imprisonment of either descriptio n for a term not 
exceeding six months, or with fine or with both.] 
CHAPTER VI 
OF OFFENCES  AGAINST THE  STATE  
121. Waging or attempting to wage war or abetting waging of war against the Government of  
India. —Whoever wages war against the 2[Government of India], or attempts to wage such war, or abets 
the waging of such war, shall be punished with death, or 1[imprisonment for life] 3[and shall also be liable 
to fine]. 
4[Illustration ] 
5***A joins an insurrection against the 2[Government of India]. A has committed the offence defined in t his section. 
6*    *   *    *    *  
7[121A. Conspiracy to commit offences punishable by section 121 .—Whoever within or without 
8[India] conspires to commit any of the offences punishable by section 121, 9*** or conspires to overawe, 
by means of criminal force or the show of criminal force, 10[the Central Government or any 11[State] 
Government 12***], shall be punished with 13[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of either 
description which may extend to ten years, 14[and shall also be liable t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 35]
ith imprisonment of either 
description which may extend to ten years, 14[and shall also be liable to fine]. 
Explanation .—To constitute a conspiracy under this section, it is not necessary that any ac t or illegal 
omission shall take place in pursuance thereof.] 
122. Collecting arms, etc., with intention of waging war against the Government of India .—
Whoever collects men, arms or ammunition or otherwise prepares to wage war with the intention of either 
waging or being prepared to wage war against the 2[Government of India], shall be punished with 
1[imprisonment for life] or imprisonment of either description for a ter m not exceeding ten years, 15[and 
shall also be liable to fine]. 
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1956). 
2. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “Queen”.  
3. Subs. by Act 16 of 1921, s. 2, for “and shall forfeit all his property” . 
4. Subs. by Act 36 of 1957, s. 3 and the Second Sch., for “ Illustrations ” 
5. The brackets and letter “( a)” omitted by s. 3 and the Second Sch.,  ibid. 
6. Illustration  (b) omitted, by the A. O. 1950. 
7. Ins. by Act 27 of 1870, s. 4. 
8. The words “British India” have successively been subs. by the A. O. 19 48, the A. O. 1950 and Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., 
to read as above. 
9. The words “or to deprive the Queen of the sovereignty of the P rovinces or of any part thereof” omitted by the A. O. 1950.  
10. Subs. by the A. O. 1937, for “the G. of I, or any L. G”. 
11. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “Provincial”.  
12. The words “or the Government of Burma” omitted by the A. O. 194 8. 
13. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life or any shorter term” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1956). 
14. Ins. by Act 16 of 1921, s. 3. 
15. Subs. by Act 16 of 1921, s. 2, for “and shall forfeit all his p roperty”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 35]
p roperty”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 36]
36 
 123. Concealing with intent to facilitate design to wage war .—Whoever, by any act, or by any 
illegal omission, conceals the existence of a design to wage war against the 1[Government of India], 
intending by such concealment to facilitate, or knowing it to be likely that suc h concealment will 
facilitate, the waging of such war, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
124. Assaulting President, Governor, etc., with intent to compel or restrain the exercise of  any 
lawful power .—Whoever, with the intention of inducing or compelling the 2[President] of India, or 
3[Governor 4***] of any 5[State], 6*** 7*** 8*** to exercise or refrain from exercising in any manner any 
of the lawful powers of such 9[President or 3[Governor 6***]],  
assaults or wrongfully restrains, or attempts wrongfully to restrain, or overawes, by means of criminal 
force or the show of criminal force, or attempts so to overawe, such 11[President or 3[Governor 6***]], 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may ext end to seven 
years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
10[124A. Sedition .—Whoever by words, either spoken or written, or by signs, or by visible 
representation, or otherwise, brings or attempts to bring into hatred or contempt, or excites or attempts t o 
excite disaffection towards, 11***the Government established by law in 12[India], 13***shall be punished 
with 14[imprisonment for life], to which fine may be added, or with imprisonment which ma y extend to 
three years, to which fine may be added, or with fine. 
Explanation 1 .—The expression “disaffection ” includes disloyalty and all feelings of enmity. 
Explanation 2 .—Comments expressing disapprobation of the measures of the Government with a 
view to obtain their alteration by lawful means, without exciting or attempting to excite hatred, contempt 
or disaffection, do not constitute an of
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 36]
 without exciting or attempting to excite hatred, contempt 
or disaffection, do not constitute an offence under this section. 
Explanation 3 .—Comments expressing disapprobation of the administrative or other action of the 
Government without exciting or attempting to excite hatred, contempt or disaffection, do no t constitute an 
offence under this section.] 
125. Waging war against any Asiatic Power in alliance with the Government of India .—
Whoever wages war against the Government of any Asiatic Power in alliance or a t peace with the 
1[Government of India] or attempts to wage such war, or abets the waging of such war, shall be punished 
with 14[imprisonment for life], to which fine may be added, or with imprisonment of either descr iption for 
a term which may extend to seven years, to which fine may be added, or with fine. 
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by the A. O 1950, for “Queen”.  
2. Subs. by the ibid., for “Governor General”.  
3. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., for “Governor”.  
4. The word s “or Rajpramukh” omitted by the A. O. 1956.  
5. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “Province” which had been subs.  by the A. O. 1937, for “Presidency”.  
6. The words “or a Lieutenant -Governor” omitted by the A. O. 1937.  
7. The words “or a Member of the Council of  the Governor General of India” omitted by the A.O. 1948.  
8. The words “or of the Council of any Presidency” omitted by the A. O. 1937.  
9. The words “Governor General, Governor, Lieutenant -Governor or Member of Council” have successively been amend ed by 
the A.O. 1937, the A. O. 1948 and the A. O. 1950 to read as abo ve. 
10. Ins. by Act 27 of 1870, s. 5 and subs. by Act 4 of 1898, s. 4, for s. 124A. 
11. The words “Her Majesty or” omitted by the A.O. 1950. The words “ or the Crown Representative” ins. after t he word 
“Majesty” by the A. O. 1937 were omitted by the A. O. 1948.  
12. The words “British India” have successively been subs. by the A. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 36]
e omitted by the A. O. 1948.  
12. The words “British India” have successively been subs. by the A. O. 1948, the A. O. 1950 and Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and  
the Sch., to read as above. 
13. The words “or British Burma” ins. by the A. O. 1937 and omitted by the A. O 1948. 
14. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life or any shorter term” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1956). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 37]
37 
  
126. Committing depredation on territories of Power at peace with the Government o f India. —
Whoever commits depredation, or makes preparations to commit depredation, on the te rritories of any 
Power in alliance or at peace with the 1[Government of India], shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liabl e to fine and to 
forfeiture of any property used or intended to be used in committing such depredation, or  acquired by 
such depredation. 
127. Receiving property taken by war or depredation mentioned in sections 125 and 126 .—
Whoever receives any property knowing the same to have been taken in the commission of  any of the 
offences mentioned in sections 125 and 126, shall be punished with imprisonment of either descriptio n 
for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine and to for feiture of the 
property so received. 
128. Public servant voluntarily allowing prisoner of State or war to escape .—Whoever, being a 
public servant and having the custody of any State prisoner or prisoner of war, volunt arily allows such 
prisoner to escape from any place in which such prisoner is confined, shall be punished wi th 
2[imprisonment for life], or imprisonment of either description for a ter m which may extend to ten years, 
and shall also be liable to fine. 
129. Public servant negligently suffering such prisoner to escape .—Whoever, being a public 
servant and having the custody of any State prisoner or prisoner of war, negligently suf fers such prisoner 
to escape from any place of confinement in which such prisoner is confined, shall be punished  with 
simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
130. Aiding escape of, rescuing or harbouring such prisoner .—Whoever knowingly aids or assists 
any State prisoner or prisoner of war in escaping from lawful custody, or rescues or attempts to rescue 
an
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 37]
te prisoner or prisoner of war in escaping from lawful custody, or rescues or attempts to rescue 
any such prisoner, or harbours or conceals any such prisoner who has escaped from lawful custody, or 
offers or attempts to offer any resistance to the recapture of such prisoner  shall be punished with 
2[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of either description for a t erm which may extend to ten 
years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
Explanation .—A State prisoner or prisoner of war, who is permitted to be at large on h is parole 
within certain limits in 3[India], is said to escape from lawful custody if he goes beyond the limits wi thin 
which he is allowed to be at large. 
CHAPTER VII 
OF OFFENCES  RELATINGTO THE  ARMY, 4[NAVY AND  AIR FORCE ] 
131. Abetting mutiny, or attempting to seduce a soldier, sailor or airman from hi s duty .—
Whoever abets the committing of mutiny by an officer, soldier, 5[sailor or airman], in the Army, 6[Navy 
or Air Force] of the 1[Government of India] or attempts to seduce any such officer, soldier, 5[sailor or 
airman] from his allegiance or his duty, shall be punished with 2[imprisonment for life], or with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
7[Explanation .—In this section the words “officer ”, 8[“soldier ”, 9[“sailor ”] and “airman ”] include any  
                                                           
1. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “Queen”.  
2. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1956). 
3. The words “British India” have successively been subs. by the A. O. 1 948, the A. O. 1950 and Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., 
to read as above. 
4. Subs. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and the First Sch., for “a nd Navy”.  
5. Subs. by s. 2 and the First Sch., ibid., for “or sailor”.  
6. Subs. by s. 2 and the First Sch., ibid., for “or Navy”.  
7. Ins. by Act 27 of 1870, s. 6. 
8. Subs. by Act 10 of
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 37]
 and the First Sch., ibid., for “or Navy”.  
7. Ins. by Act 27 of 1870, s. 6. 
8. Subs. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and the First Sch., for “a nd soldier”  
9. Ins. by Act 35 of 1934, s. 2 and Sch.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 38]
38 
 person subject to the 1[Army Act, 2[the Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950)], 3[the Naval Discipline Act,4***the 
5Indian Navy (Discipline) Act,1934 (34 of 1934)] 6[the Air Force Act or 7[the Air Force Act, 1950 (45 of 
1950)]], as the case may be].] 
132. Abetment of mutiny, if mutiny is committed in consequence thereof .—Whoever abets the 
committing of mutiny by an officer, soldier, 8[sailor or airman], in the Army, 9[Navy or Air Force] of the 
10[Government of India], shall, if mutiny be committed in consequence of that abetment, be punished with 
death or with 11[imprisonment for life], or imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
133. Abetment of assault by soldier, sailor or airman on his superior officer, when in execution 
of his office .—Whoever abets an assault by an officer, soldier, 8[sailor or airman], in the Army, 9[Navy or 
Air Force] of the 10[Government of India], on any superior officer being in the execution of his  office, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, an d 
shall also be liable to fine. 
134. Abetment of such assault, if the assault is committed .—Whoever abets an assault by an 
officer, soldier, 8[sailor or airman], in the Army, 9[Navy or Air Force] of the 10[Government of India], on 
any superior officer being in the execution of his office, shall, if such ass ault be committed in 
consequence of that abetment be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
135. Abetment of desertion of soldier, sailor or airman .—Whoever abets the desertion of any 
officer, soldier, 8[sailor or airman], in the Army, 9[Navy or Air Force] of the 10[Government of India], 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or 
with fine, or with both. 
136. Harbouring deserter .—Whoever, excep
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 38]
ich may extend to two years, or 
with fine, or with both. 
136. Harbouring deserter .—Whoever, except as hereinafter excepted, knowing or having reason to 
believe that an officer, soldier, 8[sailor or airman], in the Army, 9[Navy or Air Force] of the 
10[Government of India], has deserted, harbours such officer, soldier, 8[sailor or airman], shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine 
or with both. 
Exception .—This provision does not extend to the case in which the harbour is given by a wi fe to her 
husband. 
137. Deserter concealed on board merchant vessel through negligence of master .—The master or 
person in charge of a merchant vessel, on board of which any deserter from the Arm y, 9[Navy or Air 
Force] of the 10[Government of India] is concealed, shall, though ignorant of such concealment, be li able 
to a penalty not exceeding five hundred rupees, if he might have known of such concealment but for some 
neglect of his duty as such master or person in charge, or but for some want of di scipline on board of the 
vessel. 
138. Abetment of act of insubordination by soldier, sailor or airman .—Whoever abets what he 
knows to be an act of insubordination by an officer, soldier, 8[sailor or airman], in the Army, 9[Navy or air 
Force], of the 10[Government of India], shall, if such act of insubordination be committed in consequence 
of that abetment, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six 
months, or with fine, or with both. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and the First Sch., for “Articles of War for the better government of Her Majesty’s Army, or to 
the Articles of War contained in Act No. 5 of 1869”.  
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., for “the  Indian Army Act, 1911”.  
3. Ins. by Act 35 of 1934, s. 2 and the Sch.  
4. The words “or that Act as modified by” omitted by th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 38]
 Ins. by Act 35 of 1934, s. 2 and the Sch.  
4. The words “or that Act as modified by” omitted by the A. O. 1950.  
5. Now see the Navy Act, 1957 (62 of 1957). 
6. Subs. by Act 14 of 1932, s. 130 and the Sch., for “or the Air Force Act”.  
7. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., for “the Indian Air Force Act, 1932”.  
8. Subs. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and the First Sch., for “o r sailor”.  
9. Subs. by s. 2 and the First Sch., ibid., for “or Navy”.  
10. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “Queen”.  
11. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transpo rtation for life” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1956).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 39]
39 
 138A . [Application of foregoing sections to the Indian Marine Service. ] Rep. by the Amending Act, 
1934  (35 of 1934) , s. 2 and Sch . 
139. Persons subject to certain Acts .—No person subject to 1[the Army Act, 2[the Army Act, 1950 
(46 of 1950)], the Naval Discipline Act, 3[4*** 5[the Indian Navy (Discipline) Act, 1934 (34 of 1934)], 
6[the Air Force Act or 7[the Air Force Act, 1950 (45 of 1950)]]], is subject to punishment under this Code 
for any of the offences defined in this Chapter. 
140. Wearing garb or carrying token used by soldier, sailor or airman .—Whoever, not being a 
soldier, 8[sailor or airman] in the Military, 9[Naval or Air] service of the 10[Government of India], wears 
any garb or carries any token resembling any garb or token used by such a soldier, 8[sailor or airman] with 
the intention that it may be believed that he is such a soldier, 8[sailor or airman], shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may 
extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
CHAPTER VIII 
OF OFFENCES AGAINST THE  PUBLIC  TRANQUILLITY  
141. Unlawful assembly .—An assembly of five or more persons is designated an “unlawful 
assembly ”, if the common object of the persons composing that assembly is — 
First .—To overawe by criminal force, or show of criminal force, 11[the Central or any State 
Government or Parliament or the Legislature of any State], or any public servant in the exercise of the 
lawful power of such public servant; or 
Second .—To resist the execution of any law, or of any legal process; or 
Third .—To commit any mischief or criminal trespass, or other offence; or 
Fourth .—By means of criminal force, or show of criminal force, to any person, to take or obtai n 
possession of any property, or to deprive any person of the enjoyment of a right of  way, or of the use of 
water or other incorporeal right of which he is in possession or enjoyment , or to enforce any righ
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 39]

water or other incorporeal right of which he is in possession or enjoyment , or to enforce any right or 
supposed right; or 
Fifth .—By means of criminal force, or show of criminal force, to compel any person to do what he is 
not legally bound to do, or to omit to do what he is legally entitled to do. 
Explanation .—An assembly which was not unlawful when it assembled, may subsequently become 
an unlawful assembly. 
142. Being member of unlawful assembly .—Whoever, being aware of facts which render any 
assembly an unlawful assembly, intentionally joins that assembly, or continues in it, is said to be a 
member of an unlawful assembly. 
143. Punishment .—Whoever is a member of an unlawful assembly, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with  both. 
144. Joining unlawful assembly armed with deadly weapon .—Whoever, being armed with any 
deadly weapon, or with anything which, used as a weapon of offence, is likely to cause deat h, is a 
member of an unlawful assembly, shall be punished with imprisonment of either desc ription for a term 
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and the First Sch., for “any A rticles of War for the Army of Navy of the Queen, or for any pa rt of 
such Army or Navy”.  
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., for “the Indian Army Act, 1911”.  
3. Ins. by Act 35 of 1934, s. 2 and the Sch. 
4. The words “or that Act as modified by” omitted by the A. O. 1950.  
5. Now see the Navy Act, 1957 (62 of 1957). 
6. Subs. by Act 14 of 1932, s. 130 and Sch., for “or the Air Force Act”.  
7. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., for “the Indian Air Force Act, 1932”.  
8. Subs. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and the First Sch., for “or sailor”.  
9. Subs. by s. 2 and the First Sch., ibid., for “or Naval”.  
10. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “Queen”.  
11. Su
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 39]
s. 2 and the First Sch., ibid., for “or Naval”.  
10. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “Queen”.  
11. Subs., ibid., for “the Central or any Provincial Government or Legislature”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 40]
40 
 145. Joining or continuing in unlawful assembly, knowing it has been commanded to 
disperse .—Whoever joins or continues in an unlawful assembly, knowing that such unlawful assem bly 
has been commanded in the manner prescribed by law to disperse, shall be punished with i mprisonment 
of either description for a term which may extent to two years, or with fine, or with both.  
146. Rioting .—Whenever force or violence is used by an unlawful assembly, or by any member 
thereof, in prosecution of the common object of such assembly, every member of such as sembly is guilty 
of the offence of rioting. 
147. Punishment for rioting .—Whoever is guilty of rioting, shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
148. Rioting, armed with deadly weapon .—Whoever is guilty of rioting, being armed with a deadly 
weapon or with anything which, used as a weapon of offence, is likely to cause death, shal l be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with 
both. 
149. Every member of unlawful assembly guilty of offence committed in prosecution of common 
object .—If an offence is committed by any member of an unlawful assembly in prosecution of the 
common object of that assembly, or such as the members of that assembly knew to be  likely to be 
committed in prosecution of that object, every person who, at the time of the co mmitting of that offence, 
is a member of the same assembly, is guilty of that offence. 
150. Hiring, or conniving at hiring, of persons to join unlawful assembly .—Whoever hires or 
engages, or employs, or promotes, or connives at the hiring, engagement or employment of any person to 
join or become a member of any unlawful assembly, shall be punishable as a member of such unlawful 
assembly, and for any offence which may be committed by any such person as a member of suc h 
unlawful assembly in pursuance 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 40]
ence which may be committed by any such person as a member of suc h 
unlawful assembly in pursuance of such hiring, engagement or employment, in the same manner as if he 
had been a member of such unlawful assembly, or himself had committed such offence. 
151. Knowingly joining or continuing in assembly of five or more persons after i t has been 
commanded to disperse .—Whoever knowingly joins or continues in any assembly of five or more 
persons likely to cause a disturbance of the public peace, after such assembly has been lawfully 
commanded to disperse, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for  a term which may 
extend to six months, or with fine, or with both. 
Explanation .—If the assembly is an unlawful assembly within the meaning of section 141, the 
offender will be punishable under section 145. 
152. Assaulting or obstructing public servant when suppressing riot, etc .—Whoever assaults or 
threatens to assault, or obstructs or attempts to obstruct, any public servant in th e discharge of his duty as 
such public servant, in endeavouring to disperse an unlawful assembly, or to suppress a  riot or affray, or 
uses, or threatens, or attempts to use criminal force to such public servant, shal l be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or w ith both.  
153. Wantonly giving provocation with intent to cause riot —if rioting be committed —if not 
committed. —Whoever malignantly, or wantonly, by doing anything which is illegal, gives provocati on 
to any person intending or knowing it to be likely that such provocation will caus e the offence of rioting 
to be committed, shall, if the offence of rioting be committed in consequence of such provocation, be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, 
or with both; and if the offence of rioting be not committed, with impri sonment of either description for a 
term whic
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 40]
f the offence of rioting be not committed, with impri sonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both. 
1[153A. Promoting enmity between different groups on grounds of religion, race, place of  birth, 
residence, language, etc., and doing acts prejudicial to maintenance of harmony .—(1) Whoever — 
(a) by words, either spoken or written, or by signs or by visible representat ions or otherwise, 
promotes or attempts to promote, on grounds of religion, race, place of birth, resi dence, language, 
caste or community or any other ground whatsoever, disharmony or feelings of enmity, hatred or          
ill-will between different religious, racial, language or regional groups or castes  or communities, or 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 35 of 1969, s. 2, for section 153A (w.e.f. 4-9-1969). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 41]
41 
 (b) commits any act which is prejudicial to the maintenance of harmony between different 
religious, racial, language or regional groups or castes or communities, and which dist urbs or is likely 
to disturb the public tranquill ity, 1[or] 
1[(c) organizes any exercise, movement, drill or other similar activity intending that the 
participants in such activity shall use or be trained to use criminal fo rce or violence or knowing it to 
be likely that the participants in such activity will use or be trained to use  criminal force or violence, 
or participates in such activity intending to use or be trained to use crimina l force or violence or 
knowing it to be likely that the participants in such activity will use or b e trained to use criminal force 
or violence, against any religious, racial, language or regional group or caste or community and such 
activity for any reason whatsoever causes or is likely to cause fear or a larm or a feeling of insecurity 
amongst members of such religious, racial, language or regional group or caste or community,] 
shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
(2) Offence committed in place of worship, etc .—Whoever commits an offence specified in  
sub-section ( 1) in any place of worship or in any assembly engaged in the performance of rel igious 
worship or religious ceremonies, shall be punished with imprisonment which may ext end to five years 
and shall also be liable to fine.] 
2[153AA. Punishment for knowingly carrying arms in any procession or organising, or holding 
or taking part in any mass drill or mass training with arms .—Whoever knowingly carries arms in any 
procession or organizes or holds or takes part in any mass drill or mass training  with arms in any public 
place in contravention of any public notice or order issued or made under section 144A of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 41]
e of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to six months and with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees. 
Explanation .—“Arms ” means articles of any description designed or adapted as weapons for offence 
or defence and includes firearms, sharp edged weapons, lathis , dandas  and sticks.] 
1[153B. Imputations, assertions prejudicial to national integration .—(1) Whoever, by words 
either spoken or written or by signs or by visible representations or otherwise, — 
(a) makes or publishes any imputation that any class of persons cannot, by reaso n of their being 
members of any religious, racial, language or regional group or caste or communit y, bear true faith 
and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established or uphold the soverei gnty and 
integrity of India, or 
(b) asserts, counsels, advises, propagates or publishes that any class of persons shall, by rea son of 
their being members of any religious, racial, language or regional group or caste or community, be 
denied, or deprived of their rights as citizens of India, or 
(c) makes or publishes any assertion, counsel, plea or appeal concerning the obligation of any 
class of persons, by reason of their being members of any religious, racial, language or regional group 
or caste or community, and such assertion, counsel, plea or appeal causes or is likely  to cause 
disharmony or feelings of enmity or hatred or ill-will between such members and other persons,  
shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
(2) Whoever commits an offence specified in sub- section ( 1), in any place of worship or in any 
assembly engaged in the performance of religious worship or religious ceremonies, shall be punished with 
imprisonment which may extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine.] 
154. Owner or occupier of land on which an unlawful assembly is held .—Whenever any unlawful
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 41]
fine.] 
154. Owner or occupier of land on which an unlawful assembly is held .—Whenever any unlawful 
assembly or riot takes place, the owner or occupier of the land upon which such unlawful assembly is 
held, or such riot is committed, and any person having or claiming an interest i n such land, shall be 
punishable with fine not exceeding one thousand rupees, if he or his agent or manager , knowing that such 
offence is being or has been committed, or having reason to believe it is likely to be committed, do not 
give the earliest notice thereof in his or their power to the principal officer at the   nearest    police-station,  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 31 of 1972, s. 2 (w.e.f. 14-6-1972). 
2. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 44 (w.e.f. 23-6-2005). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 42]
42 
 and do not, in the case of his or their having reason to believe that it was about to be committed, use all 
lawful means in his or their power to prevent it and, in the event of its taking place, do not use all lawful 
means in his or their power to disperse or suppress the riot or unlawful assembly. 
155. Liability of person for whose benefit riot is committed .—Whenever a riot is committed for 
the benefit or on behalf of any person who is the owner or occupier of any land respecting which such riot 
takes place or who claims any interest in such land, or in the subject of any dispute which gave rise to the 
riot, or who has accepted or derived any benefit therefrom, such person shall be punishabl e with fine, if 
he or his agent or manager, having reason to believe that such riot was likely t o be committed or that the 
unlawful assembly by which such riot was committed was likely to be held, shall not respectively use all 
lawful means in his or their power to prevent such assembly or riot from taki ng place, and for suppressing 
and dispersing the same. 
156. Liability of agent of owner or occupier for whose benefit riot is committed .—Whenever a 
riot is committed for the benefit or on behalf of any person who is the owner o r occupier of any land 
respecting which such riot takes place, or who claims any interest in such land, or  in the subject of any 
dispute which gave rise to the riot, or who has accepted or derived any benefit therefro m, 
the agent or manager of such person shall be punishable with fine, if such agent or manager, having 
reason to believe that such riot was likely to be committed, or that the unlawf ul assembly by which such 
riot was committed was likely to be held, shall not use all lawful means in his power to prevent such riot 
or assembly from taking place and for suppressing and dispersing the same. 
157. Harbouring persons hired for an unlawful assembly .—Whoever harbours, receives or 
assembles, in any house or premises in
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 42]
red for an unlawful assembly .—Whoever harbours, receives or 
assembles, in any house or premises in his occupation or charge, or under his con trol any persons 
knowing that such persons have been hired, engaged or employed, or are about to be hired, engaged o r 
employed, to join or become members of an unlawful assembly, shall be punished with im prisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both. 
158. Being hired to take part in an unlawful assembly or riot .—Whoever is engaged, or hired, or 
offers or attempts to be hired or engaged, to do or assist in doing any of the acts specified in section 141, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or 
with fine, or with both, 
or to go armed .—and whoever, being so engaged or hired as aforesaid, goes armed, or engages or 
offers to go armed, with any deadly weapon or with anything which used as a we apon of offence is likely 
to cause death, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
two years, or with fine, or with both. 
159. Affray .—When two or more persons, by fighting in a public place, disturb the public peace, they 
are said to “commit an affray ”. 
160. Punishment for committing affray .—Whoever commits an affray, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may 
extend to one hundred rupees, or with both. 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Uttar Pradesh 
Abatement of certain trials. —  Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in force, — 
(1) the trial of an accused for — 
 ( a) an offence punishable under — 
“(i) the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988; or ”  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 43]
43 
 (ii) the Public Gambling Act, 1867, not being an offence punishable under section 3 of that Act 
or an offence in respect of wagering punishable under section 13 of that Act; or  
(iii) section 34 of the Police Act, 1861; or 
(iv) section 160 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860; or 
  ( b) any other offence punishable with fine only, or 
(2) a procedure, under section 107 or section 109 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, pending  
before a Magistrate on the date of commencement of this Act from before “December 31, 2015 ” shall 
abate. 
[Vide the Uttar Pradesh Act 35 of 1979, s. 9, and amended by Uttar Pradesh Act 29 of 2016 and 9 of 
2018].  
CHAPTER IX 
OF OFFENCES BY OR RELATING TO  PUBLIC  SERVANTS  
161. [ Public servant taking gratification other than legal remuneration in respect o f an official act .] 
Rep. by the Prevention of Corruption Act , 1988 (49 of 1988), s. 31. 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Kerala. — 
Amendment of section 161, Central Act 45 of 1860 .—In section 161 of the Indian Penal Code 
(Central Act 45 of 1860), after the explanation relating to “A motive or reward for doing ”, the 
following explanation shall be inserted, namely: — 
“‘Public Servant ’.— For purposes of this section and sections 162, 163, 164, 165 and 165A, the 
words ‘public servant ’ shall denote, besides those who are public servants under section 21 or who 
are deemed to be ‘public servants ’ within the meaning of that section under any law for the time 
being in force, persons falling under any of the descriptions here inafter following, namely: — 
(i) Every officer in the service or pay of the Travancore Devaswom Board or the Cochin 
Devaswom Board or the Cochin Devaswom Board; 
(ii) Every officer in the service or pay and every member of the Wakfs B oard constituted 
under the Wakfs Act, 1954 (Central Act 29 of 1954); 
(iii) The President and every member of a Village Court or Village Panchayat Court; 
(iv) Every member of the Board of Directors or of the executive or managing
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 43]
illage Panchayat Court; 
(iv) Every member of the Board of Directors or of the executive or managing  committee and 
every officer or servant of a co-operative society registered or deemed to be registered under the 
law relating to co-operative societies for the time being in force. 
(v) Every member of the governing body and every officer or servant in the servi ce or pay of 
a society registered under the Travancore-Cochin Literary, Scientific and Charitable Societies 
Registration Act, 1955 or the Societies Registration Act, 1860, and receiving aid or grant from t he 
Government; 
(vi) Every teacher or other officer or servant of the University of Kerala; 
(vii) Every examiner of a University Examination or a Government Examination; 
(viii) Every Manager, or teacher or servant of an educational institution which receiv es or has 
received aid or grant from the Government or the University of kerala. ”. 
[Vide Kerala Act 27 of 1962, sec. 2]. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 44]
44 
 162. [Taking  gratification, in order, by corrupt or illegal means, to influence public servant .] Rep. by 
the Prevention of Corruption Act , 1988 (49 of 1988), s. 31. 
163. [Taking gratification, for the exercise personal influence with public servant .] Rep. by s.  31, ibid. 
164. [Punishment for abetment by public servant of offences defined in sections 162 or 163.] Rep. by 
s. 31, ibid. 
165. [Public servant obtaining valuable thing, without consideration, from person concerned in 
proceeding or business transacted by such public servant .] Rep. by s.  31, ibid. 
165A .[Punishment for abetment of offences defined in section  161 or section  165.] Rep. by s.  31, ibid.  
166. Public servant disobeying law, with intent to cause injury to any person .—Whoever, being a 
public servant, knowingly disobeys any direction of the law as to the way in which he is to conduct 
himself as such public servant, intending to cause, or knowing it to be likely that he will, by such 
disobedience, cause injury to any person, shall be punished with simple imprisonment  for a term which 
may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both. 
  IIIustration 
A, being an officer directed by law to take property in execution, in order to sat isfy a decree 
pronounced in Z's favour by a Court of Justice, knowingly disobeys that direction of l aw, with the 
knowledge that he is likely thereby to cause injury to Z. A has committed the offence defined in this 
section. 
1[166A. Public servant disobeying direction under law .—Whoever, being a public servant, — 
(a) knowingly disobeys any direction of the law which prohibits him from requi ring the 
attendance at any place of any person for the purpose of investigation into an of fence or any other 
matter, or 
(b) knowingly disobeys, to the prejudice of any person, any other direction of the law regulating 
the manner in which he shall conduct such investigation, or 
(c) fails to record any information given to him under sub-section ( 1
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 44]
nduct such investigation, or 
(c) fails to record any information given to him under sub-section ( 1) of section 154 of the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), in relation to cognizable offence punishable under  section 
326A, section 326B, section 354, section 354B, section 370, section 370A, section 376, section 376A, 
2[section 376AB, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D, section 376DA, section 376DB], secti on 
376E or section 509, 
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but 
which may extend to two years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Arunachal Pradesh 
Amendment of section 166A. —In section 166A of the principal Act, in clause (c), for the words, 
figures and letters “section 326A, section 326B, section 354, section 354A, section 370, section 370A, 
section 376, section 376A, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D, section 376E or section 509 ” the 
words, figures and letters “section 326A, section 326B, section 354, sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 
354A, section 354B, section 354C, sub-sections (2) of section 354D, section 370, section 370A , section 
376, section 376A, section 376AA, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D, section 376DA, secti on 
376E or section 509 ” shall be substituted. 
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh Act 3 of 2019, s. 3] 
166B. Punishment for non-treatment of victim .—Whoever, being in charge of a hospital, public or 
private, whether run by the Central Government, the State Government, local bodies or any other person, 
contravenes the provisions of section 357C of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), shall be 
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine or with both.] 
167. Public servant framing an incorrect document with intent to cause injury. —Whoever, being 
a public servant, and being, as 3[such public servant, charged with the preparation or translation of any 
document or electronic re
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 44]
3[such public servant, charged with the preparation or translation of any 
document or electronic record , frames, prepares or translates that document or electronic record] in a 
manner which he knows or believes to be incorrect, intending thereby to cause o r knowing it to be likely 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 3 (w.e.f. 03- 02-2013). 
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 2, for “ section 3 76B, section 376C, section 376D” (w.e.f. 21 -4-2018). 
3. Subs. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 91 and the First Sch., for ce rtain words (w.e.f. 17- 10-2000). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 45]
45 
 that he may thereby cause injury to any person, shall be punished with imprisonm ent of either description 
for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
168. Public servant unlawfully engaging in trade .—Whoever, being a public servant, and being 
legally bound as such public servant not to engage in trade, engages in trade, shall be punis hed with 
simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both. 
169. Public servant unlawfully buying or bidding for property .—Whoever, being a public servant, 
and being legally bound as such public servant, not to purchase or bid for certain  property, purchases or 
bids for that property, either in his own name or in the name of another, or j ointly, or in shares with 
others, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with 
fine, or with both; and the property, if purchased, shall be confiscated. 
170. Personating a public servant .—Whoever pretends to hold any particular office as a public 
servant, knowing that he does not hold such office or falsely personates any other person ho lding such 
office, and in such assumed character does or attempts to do any act under colour of such office, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, 
or with both. 
171. Wearing garb or carrying token used by public servant with fraudulent intent .—Whoever, 
not belonging to a certain class of public servants, wears any garb or carries any token resembling any 
garb or token used by that class of public servants, with the intention that it may be believed, or with the 
knowledge that it is likely to be believed, that he belongs to that class of public ser vants, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to t hree months, or with 
fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, or with both. 
1[CHAPTER IXA 
OF OFFENCES R
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 45]
s, or with 
fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, or with both. 
1[CHAPTER IXA 
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO  ELECTIONS  
171A. “Candidate ”, “Electoral right ” defined .—For the purposes of this Chapter — 
2[(a) “candidate ” means a person who has been nominated as a candidate at any election;] 
(b) “electoral right ” means the right of a person to stand, or not to stand as, or to withdraw from 
being, a candidate or to vote or refrain from voting at an election. 
171B. Bribery .—(1) Whoever — 
(i) gives a gratification to any person with the object of inducing him or any ot her person to 
exercise any electoral right or of rewarding any person for having exercised any such right; or 
(ii) accepts either for himself or for any other person any gratification as a r eward for exercising 
any such right or for inducing or attempting to induce any other person to exercise any such right, 
commits the offence of bribery: 
Provided that a declaration of public policy or a promise of public action shall not be an offence 
under this section. 
(2) A person who offers, or agrees to give, or offers or attempts to procure, a grat ification shall be 
deemed to give a gratification. 
(3) A person who obtains or agrees to accept or attempts to obtain a gratificat ion shall be deemed to 
accept a gratification, and a person who accepts a gratification as a motive for doing what he does not 
intend to do, or as a reward for doing what he has not done, shall be deemed to have accepted  the 
gratification as a reward. 
171C. Undue influence at elections .—(1) Whoever voluntarily interferes or attempts to interfere 
with the free exercise of any electoral right commits the offence of undue influence at an election. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section ( 1), whoever — 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 39 of 1920, s. 2 (w.e.f. 14-9-1920). 
2. Subs. by Act 40 of 1975, s. 9, for cl. ( a) (w.e.f. 6-8-1975). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 45]
 1920, s. 2 (w.e.f. 14-9-1920). 
2. Subs. by Act 40 of 1975, s. 9, for cl. ( a) (w.e.f. 6-8-1975). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 46]
46 
 (a) threatens any candidate or voter, or any person in whom a candidate or voter i s interested, 
with injury of any kind, or 
(b) induces or attempts to induce a candidate or voter to believe that he or any person i n whom he 
is interested will become or will be rendered an object of Divine displeasure or of spiri tual censure, 
shall be deemed to interfere with the free exercise of the electoral right of such candidate or voter, within 
the meaning of sub-section ( 1).  
(3) A declaration of public policy or a promise of public action, or the mer e exercise or a legal right 
without intent to interfere with an electoral right, shall not be dee med to be interference within the 
meaning of this section. 
171D. Personation at elections .—Whoever at an election applies for a voting paper on votes in the 
name of any other person, whether living or dead, or in a fictitious name, or who having vot ed once at 
such election applies at the same election for a voting paper in his own name, and whoever abets, 
procures or attempts to procure the voting by any person in any such way, commits the offence  of 
personation at an election: 
1[Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to a person who has been authorise d to vote as 
proxy for an elector under any law for the time being in force in so far as he votes as a proxy for such 
elector.] 
171E. Punishment for bribery .—Whoever commits the offence of bribery shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both : 
Provided that bribery by treating shall be punished with fine only. 
Explanation .—“Treating ” means that form of bribery where the gratification consists in food, drin k, 
entertainment, or provision. 
171F. Punishment for undue influence or personation at an election .—Whoever commits the 
offence of undue influence or personation at an election shall be punished with impri sonment of either 
description for a term which ma
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 46]
ation at an election shall be punished with impri sonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to one year or with fine, or with both. 
171G. False statement in connection with an election .—Whoever with intent to affect the result of 
an election makes or publishes any statement purporting to be a statement of fact which is false and which 
he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true, in relation to t he personal character 
or conduct of any candidate shall be punished with fine. 
171H. Illegal payments in connection with an election .—Whoever without the general or special 
authority in writing of a candidate incurs or authorises expenses on account of the holding of any public 
meeting, or upon any advertisement, circular or publication, or in any other way what soever for the 
purpose of promoting or procuring the election of such candidate, shall be punished with fine which may 
extend to five hundred rupees: 
Provided that if any person having incurred any such expenses not exceeding the amount of ten 
rupees without authority obtains within ten days from the date on which such expenses were incurred the 
approval in writing of the candidate, he shall be deemed to have incurred such expenses with the authority 
of the candidate. 
171-I. Failure to keep election accounts .—Whoever being required by any law for the time being in 
force or any rule having the force of law to keep accounts of expenses incurred at or in connection with a n 
election fails to keep such accounts shall be punished with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.] 
CHAPTER X 
OF CONTEMPTS OF THE  LAWF UL AUTHORITY OF PUBLIC  SERVANTS  
172. Absconding to avoid service of summons or other proceeding .—Whoever absconds in order 
to avoid being served with a summons, notice or order proceeding from any public servant  legally 
competent, as such public servant, to issue such summons, notice or order, shall be punished wit h simple 
imprisonment f
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 46]
blic servant, to issue such summons, notice or order, shall be punished wit h simple 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to five hundred 
rupees, or with both; 
or, if the summons or notice or order is to attend in person or by agent, or to 2[produce a document or 
an electronic record in a Court of Justice], with simple imprisonment for  a term which may extend to six 
months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
                                                           
1. The proviso ins. by Act 24 of 2003, s. 5 (w.e.f. 22-9-2003).  
2. Subs. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 91 and the First Sch., for “produce a document in a Court of Justice” (w.e.f. 17 -10-2000). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 47]
47 
 173. Preventing service of summons or other proceeding, or preventing publication thereof .—
Whoever in any manner intentionally prevents the serving on himself, or on any other  person, of any 
summons, notice or order proceeding from any public servant legally competent, as such publi c servant, 
to issue such summons, notice or order, 
or intentionally prevents the lawful affixing to any place of any such summons, notice or order, 
or intentionally removes any such summons, notice or order from any place to which i t is lawfully 
affixed, 
or intentionally prevents the lawful making of any proclamation, under the author ity of any public 
servant legally competent, as such public servant, to direct such proclamation to be made, 
shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or w ith fine 
which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both; 
or, if the summons, notice, order or proclamation is to attend in person or by agent, or 1[to produce a 
document or electronic record in a Court of Justice] with simple imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
174. Non-attendance in obedience to an order from public servant .—Whoever, being legally 
bound to attend in person or by an agent at a certain place and time in obedience to a summons, not ice, 
order or proclamation proceeding from any public servant legally competent, as such publ ic servant, to 
issue the same, 
intentionally omits to attend at that place or time, or departs from the place where he is bound to 
attend before the time at which it is lawful for him to depart, 
shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or w ith fine 
which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both; 
or, if the summons, notice, order or proclamation is to attend in person or by agent in a Cour t of 
Justice, with simple imprisonment for a term which may exte
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 47]
nd in person or by agent in a Cour t of 
Justice, with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or w ith fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
Illustrations 
(a) A, being legally bound to appear before the 2[High Court] at Calcutta, in obedience to a subpoena issuing from that  
Court, intentionally omits to appear. A has committed the offence de fined in this section. 
(b) A, being legally bound to appear before a 3[District Judge], as a witness, in obedience to a summons issued by that 
3[District Judge] intentionally omits to appear. A has committed the offence defined in this section. 
4[174A.Non-appearance in response to a proclamation under section 82 of Act 2 of 1974 .—
Whoever fails to appear at the specified place and the specified time as requ ired by a proclamation 
published under sub-section ( 1) of section 82 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall be punished 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine or with both, and where a 
declaration has been made under sub-section ( 4) of that section pronouncing him as a proclaimed 
offender, he shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven year s and shall 
also be liable to fine.]  
175. Omission to produce document to public servant by person legally bound to produce it .—
Whoever, being legally bound to produce or deliver up any 5[document or electronic record] to any public 
servant, as such, intentionally omits so to produce or deliver up the same, shall be punished with simple 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to five hundred 
rupees, or with both; 
or, if the 5[document or electronic record] is to be produced or delivered up to a Court of Jus tice, with 
simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees, or with both. 
Illustration 
A, being legally bound to produce a document
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 47]
d to one 
thousand rupees, or with both. 
Illustration 
A, being legally bound to produce a document before a 6[District Court], intentionally omits to produce the same. A has 
committed the offence defined in this section. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 91 and the First Sch., for “to produce a document in a Court of Justice” (w.e.f. 17 -10-2000).  
2. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “Supreme Court”.  
3. Subs. ibid.,  for “Zila Judge”.  
4. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 44 (w.e.f. 23-6-2006 ). 
5. Subs. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 91 and the First Sch., for “do cument” (w.e.f. 17 -10-2000). 
6. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “Zila Court”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 48]
48 
 176. Omission to give notice or information to public servant by person legally bound to give 
it.—Whoever, being legally bound to give any notice or to furnish information on any subj ect to any 
public servant, as such, intentionally omits to give such notice or to furn ish such information in the 
manner and at the time required by law, shall be punished with simple imprisonm ent for a term which 
may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both; 
or, if the notice or information required to be given respects the commission of an offence, or is 
required for the purpose of preventing the commission of an offence, or in order to the app rehension of an 
offender, with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both; 
1[or, if the notice or information required to be given is required by an order  passed under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 565 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), with imprisonm ent of 
either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees, or with both.] 
177. Furnishing false information .—Whoever, being legally bound to furnish information on any 
subject to any public servant, as such, furnishes, as true, information on the subject which he knows or 
has reason to believe to be false shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both; 
or, if the information which he is legally bound to give respects the commission of an offence, or is 
required for the purpose of preventing the commission of an offence, or in order to the app rehension of an 
offender, with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to t wo years, or with fine, 
or with both. 
Illustrations 
(a) A, a landholder, knowing of the commission of a murder wi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 48]
h fine, 
or with both. 
Illustrations 
(a) A, a landholder, knowing of the commission of a murder within the  limits of his estate, wilfully misinforms the 
Magistrate of the district that the death has occurred by accident in con sequence of the bite of a snake. A is guilty of the offence 
defined in this section. 
(b) A, a village watchman, knowing that a considerable body of str angers has passed through his village in order to commit 
a dacoity in the house of Z, a wealthy merchant residing in a neighbouring place, and being bound under clause 5, section V II, 
2Regulation III, 1821, of the Bengal Code, to give early and punctu al information of the above fact to the officer of the nearest 
police-station, wilfully misinforms the police officer that a body of suspicious characters passed through the village with a view 
to commit dacoity in a certain distant place in a different direction. Here A i s guilty of the offence defined in the latter part of this 
section. 
3[Explanation .—In section 176 and in this section the word “offence ” includes any act committed at 
any place out of 4[India], which, if committed in 4[India], would be punishable under any of the following 
sections, namely, 302, 304, 382, 392, 393, 394, 395, 396, 397, 398, 399, 402, 435, 436, 449, 450, 457, 
458, 459 and 460; and the word “offender ” includes any person who is alleged to have been guilty of any 
such act.] 
178. Refusing oath or affirmation when duly required by public servant to make it .—Whoever 
refuses to bind himself by an oath 5[or affirmation] to state the truth, when required so to bind himself by 
a public servant legally competent to require that he shall so bind himself, shall be punished with simple 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees, or with both. 
179. Refusing to answer public servant authorised to question .—Whoever, being legally bound to 
state the truth on any subject to any public ser
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 48]
ised to question .—Whoever, being legally bound to 
state the truth on any subject to any public servant, refuses to answer any question demanded of  him 
touching that subject by such public servant in the exercise of the legal powers of such public servant, 
                                                           
1. Added by Act 22 of 1939, s. 2. 
2. Rep. by Act 17 of 1862, s. VII and Sch. 
3. Added by Act 3 of 1894, s. 5. 
4. The words “British India” have successively been subs. by the A. O. 19 48, the A. O. 1950 and Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., 
to read as above. 
5. Ins. by Act 10 of 1873, s. 15. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 49]
49 
 shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or w ith fine 
which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
180. Refusing to sign statement .—Whoever refuses to sign any statement made by him, when 
required to sign that statement by a public servant legally competent to requir e that he shall sign that 
statement, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or 
with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
181. False statement on oath or affirmation to public servant or person authorised to 
administer an oath or affirmation .—Whoever, being legally bound by an oath 1[or affirmation] to state 
the truth on any subject to any public servant or other person authorized by law to adminis ter such oath 
1[or affirmation], makes, to such public servant or other person as aforesaid, to uching that subject, any 
statement which is false, and which he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend  to three years, an d 
shall also be liable to fine. 
2[182. False information, with intent to cause public servant to use his lawful power  to the 
injury of another person .—Whoever gives to any public servant any information which he knows or 
believes to be false, intending thereby to cause, or knowing it to be likely t hat he will thereby cause, such 
public servant — 
(a) to do or omit anything which such public servant ought not to do or omit i f the true state of 
facts respecting which such information is given were known by him, or 
(b) to use the lawful power of such public servant to the injury or annoyance of any person, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or 
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
Illustrations 
(a) A informs a Magistrate that Z, a poli
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 49]
tend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
Illustrations 
(a) A informs a Magistrate that Z, a police-officer, subordinate to such M agistrate, has been guilty of neglect of duty or 
misconduct, knowing such information to be false, and knowing it to be likely that the information will cause the Magistrate to 
dismiss Z. A has committed the offence defined in this section. 
(b) A falsely informs a public servant that Z has contraband salt in a sec ret place, knowing such information to be false, and 
knowing that it is likely that the consequence of the information wil l be a search of Z's premises, attended with annoyance to Z. A 
has committed the offence defined in this section. 
(c) A falsely informs a policeman that he has been assaulted and ro bbed in the neighbourhood of a particular village. He 
does not mention the name of any person as one of his assailants, but knows it to be likely that in consequence of this information 
the police will make enquiries and institute searches in the village to the annoyance of the villages or some of them. A has 
committed an offence under this section.]  
183. Resistance to the taking of property by the lawful authority of a public servant .—Whoever 
offers any resistance to the taking of any property by the lawful authority of any public servant, knowing 
or having reason to believe that he is such public servant, shall be punished with imprisonm ent of either 
description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine whi ch may extend to one thousand 
rupees, or with both. 
184. Obstructing sale of property offered for sale by authority of public servant .—Whoever 
intentionally obstructs any sale of property offered for sale by the lawful author ity of any public servant, 
as such, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term w hich may extend to one 
month, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
185. Illegal purchase or bid for property offered for sale
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 49]
nd to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
185. Illegal purchase or bid for property offered for sale by authority of public servant .—
Whoever, at any sale of property held by the lawful authority of a public servant, as such, pur chases or 
bids for any property on account of any person, whether himself or any othe r, whom he knows to be 
under a legal incapacity to purchase that property at that sale, or bids for such property not intending to 
perform the obligations under which he lays himself by such bidding, shall be punished wit h 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 1873, s. 15.  
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1895, s. 1, for section 182.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 50]
50 
 imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one month, or w ith fine which may 
extend to two hundred rupees, or with both. 
186. Obstructing public servant in discharge of public functions .—Whoever voluntarily obstructs 
any public servant in the discharge of his public functions, shall be punished with im prisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred 
rupees, or with both. 
187. Omission to assist public servant when bound by law to give assistance .—Whoever, being 
bound by law to render or furnish assistance to any public servant in the execution of  his public duty, 
intentionally omits to give such assistance, shall be punished with simple impr isonment for a term which 
may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, or with both; 
and if such assistance be demanded of him by a public servant legally competent to mak e such demand 
for the purposes of executing any process lawfully issued by a Court of Justice, or of pr eventing the 
commission of an offence, or suppressing a riot, or affray, or of apprehending a person charged with or 
guilty of an offence, or of having escaped from lawful custody, shall be punished with sim ple 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred 
rupees, or with both. 
188. Disobedience to order duly promulgated by public servant .—Whoever, knowing that, by an 
order promulgated by a public servant lawfully empowered to promulgate such order, he is directed to 
abstain from a certain act, or to take certain order with certain property in his possession or under his 
management, disobeys such direction, 
shall, if such disobedience causes or tends to cause obstruction, annoyance or injury, or ri sk of 
obstruction, annoyance or injury, to any person lawfully employed, be punished with sim ple 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 50]
 person lawfully employed, be punished with sim ple 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month or with fine which may extend to tw o hundred 
rupees, or with both; 
and if such disobedience causes or tends to cause danger to human life, health or safety, or causes or 
tends to cause a riot or affray, shall be punished with imprisonment of either de scription for a term which 
may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
Explanation .—It is not necessary that the offender should intend to produce harm, or contemplate his  
disobedience as likely to produce harm. It is sufficient that he knows of the order  which he disobeys, and 
that his disobedience produces, or is likely to produce, harm. 
Illustration 
An order is promulgated by a public servant lawfully empowered to pr omulgate such order, directing that a religious 
procession shall not pass down a certain street. A knowingly disobey s the order, and thereby causes danger of riot. A has 
committed the offence defined in this section. 
189. Threat of injury to public servant .—Whoever holds out any threat of injury to any public 
servant, or to any person in whom he believes that public servant to be interested, fo r the purpose of 
inducing that public servant to do any act, or to forbear or delay to do any act, connected with the exercise 
of the public functions of such public servant, shall be punished with imprisonment of eithe r description 
for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
190. Threat of injury to induce person to refrain from applying for protection to publi c 
servant .—Whoever holds out any threat of injury to any person for the purpose of inducing th at person to 
refrain or desist from making a legal application for protection against  any injury to any public servant 
legally empowered as such to give such protection, or to cause such protection to be giv en, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of ei
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 50]
uch protection, or to cause such protection to be giv en, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, 
or with both. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 51]
51 
 CHAPTER XI 
OF FALSE  EVIDENCE AND  OFFENCES  AGAINST  PUBLIC  JUSTICE  
191. Giving false evidence .—Whoever, being legally bound by an oath or by an express provision of 
law to state the truth, or being bound by law to make a declaration upon any subject, mak es any statement 
which is false, and which he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe t o be true, is said to 
give false evidence. 
Explanation 1.—A statement is within the meaning of this section, whether it is made verbal ly or 
otherwise. 
Explanation 2.—A false statement as to the belief of the person attesting is within the meaning of  this 
section, and a person may be guilty of giving false evidence by stating that he bel ieves a thing which he 
does not believe, as well as by stating that he knows a thing which he does not know. 
Illustrations 
(a) A, in support of a just claim which B has against Z for one thousand ru pees, falsely swears on a trial that he heard Z 
admit the justice of B's claim. A has given false evidence. 
(b) A, being bound by an oath to state the truth, states that he believe s a certain signature to be the handwriting of Z, when 
he does not believe it to be the handwriting of Z. Here A states tha t which he knows to be false, and therefore gives false 
evidenc e. 
(c) A, knowing the general character of Z's handwriting, states that he b elieves a certain signature to be the handwriting of 
Z; A in good faith believing it to be so. Here A's statement is mer ely as to his belief, and is true as to his belief, and th erefore, 
although the signature may not be the handwriting of Z, A has no t given false evidence. 
(d) A, being bound by an oath to state the truth, states that he know s that Z was at a particular place on a particular day, no t 
knowing anything upon the subject. A gives false evidence wheth er Z was at that place on the day named or not. 
(e) A, an interpreter or translator, gives or certifies as a true interpretation or translation  of a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 51]
e) A, an interpreter or translator, gives or certifies as a true interpretation or translation  of a statement or document which 
he is bound by oath to interpret or translate truly, that which is not and which  he does not believe to be a true interpretation or 
translation. A has given false evidence.  
192. Fabricating false evidence .—Whoever causes any circumstance to exist or 1[makes any false 
entry in any book or record, or electronic record or makes any document or electronic record containing a 
false statement,] intending that such circumstance, false entry or false s tatement may appear in evidence 
in a judicial proceeding, or in a proceeding taken by law before a public servan t as such, or before an 
arbitrator, and that such circumstance, false entry or false statement, so ap pearing in evidence, may cause 
any person who in such proceeding is to form an opinion upon the evidence, to entertain an erroneo us 
opinion touching any point material to the result of such proceeding is said “to fabricate false evidence ”. 
Illustrations 
(a) A puts jewels into a box belonging to Z, with the intention that they may be found in that box, and that this circumstance 
may cause Z to be convicted of theft. A has fabricated false evidence. 
(b) A makes a false entry in his shop-book for the purpose of usin g it as corroborative evidence in a Court of Justice. A has 
fabricated false evidence. 
(c) A, with the intention of causing Z to be convicted of a criminal conspiracy, writes a letter in imitation of Z's handwriting, 
purporting to be addressed to an accomplice in such criminal co nspiracy, and puts the letter in a place which he knows that the 
officers of the police are likely to search. A has fabricated false e vidence. 
193. Punishment for false evidence .—Whoever intentionally gives false evidence in any stage of a 
judicial proceeding, or fabricates false evidence for the purpose of being used in  any stage of a judicial 
proceeding, shall be punished wi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 51]
evidence for the purpose of being used in  any stage of a judicial 
proceeding, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term w hich may extend to 
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine, 
and whoever intentionally gives or fabricates false evidence in any other case, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, an d shall also be liable to 
fine. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 91 and the First Sch., for ce rtain words (w.e.f. 17- 10-2000). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 52]
52 
 Explanation 1.—A trial before a Court-martial 1***is a judicial proceeding. 
Explanation 2.—An investigation directed by law preliminary to a proceeding before a Court  of 
Justice, is a stage of a judicial proceeding, though that investigation may not t ake place before a Court of 
Justice. 
Illustration 
A, in an enquiry before a Magistrate for the purpose of ascertaining w hether Z ought to be committed for trial, makes on 
oath a statement which he knows to be false. As this enquiry is a stage of a judicial proceeding, A as given false evidence. 
Explanation 3.—An investigation directed by a Court of Justice according to law, and conducted 
under the authority of a Court of Justice, is a stage of a judicial proceeding, though that  investigation may 
not take place before a Court of Justice. 
Illustration 
A, in an enquiry before an officer deputed by a Court of Justice to a scertain on the spot the boundaries of land, makes on 
oath a statement which he knows to be false. As this enquiry is a stage of a judicial proceeding, A has given false evidence. 
194. Giving or fabricating false evidence with intent to procure conviction of capital  offence .—
Whoever gives or fabricates false evidence, intending thereby to cause, or knowing it to be likely that he 
will thereby cause, any person to be convicted of an offence which is capital 2[by the law for the time 
being in force in 3[India]] shall be punished with 4[imprisonment for life], or with rigorous imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine; 
if innocent person be thereby convicted and executed .—and if an innocent person be convicted 
and executed in consequence of such false evidence, the person who gives such false evidence shal l be 
punished either with death or the punishment hereinbefore described. 
195. Giving or fabricating false evidence with intent to procure conviction of offence punishabl e 
with imprisonment for life or imprisonment .—Whoever gi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 52]
o procure conviction of offence punishabl e 
with imprisonment for life or imprisonment .—Whoever gives or fabricates false evidence intending 
thereby to cause, or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby cause , any person to be convicted of an 
offence which 2[by the law for the time being in force in 3[India]] is not capital, but punishable with 
4[imprisonment for life], or imprisonment for a term of seven years or upwards, shall be punished as a 
person convicted of that offence would be liable to be punished. 
Illustration 
A gives false evidence before a Court of Justice, intending thereby to c ause Z to be convicted of a dacoity. The punishment 
of dacoity is 4[imprisonment for life], or rigorous imprisonment for a term which may ex tend to ten years, with or without fine. 
A, therefore, is liable to 5[imprisonment for life] or imprisonment, with or without fine. 
6[195A. Threatening any person to give false evidence .—Whoever threatens another with any 
injury to his person, reputation or property or to the person or reputation of any one in whom that person 
is interested, with intent to cause that person to give false evidence shall  be punished with imprisonment 
of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with bo th; 
and if innocent person is convicted and sentenced in consequence of such false evidence, with de ath 
or imprisonment for more than seven years, the person who threatens shall be punished wi th the same 
punishment and sentence in the same manner and to the same extent such innocent person is punished and 
sentenced.] 
196. Using evidence known to be false .—Whoever corruptly uses or attempts to use as true or 
genuine evidence any evidence which he knows to be false or fabricated, shall be punished in the sam e 
manner as if he gave or fabricated false evidence. 
                                                           
1. The words “or before a Military Court of Request” omitted by Act 13 of 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 52]
                         
1. The words “or before a Military Court of Request” omitted by Act 13 of 1889, s. 2 and Sch. 
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1948, for “by the law of British India or England ”. 
3. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., for “the States”.  
4. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1956 ). 
5. Subs. by s. 117 and the Schedule, ibid., for “such transportation” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1956). 
6. Ins. by Act 2 of 2006, s. 2 (w.e.f. 16-4-2006).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 53]
53 
 197. Issuing or signing false certificate .—Whoever issues or signs any certificate required by law to 
be given or signed, or relating to any fact of which such certificate is by law admissible in evidence, 
knowing or believing that such certificate is false in any material point, shal l be punished in the same 
manner as if he gave false evidence. 
198. Using as true a certificate known to be false .—Whoever corruptly uses or attempts to use any 
such certificate as a true certificate, knowing the same to be false in any mater ial point, shall be punished 
in the same manner as if he gave false evidence. 
199. False statement made in declaration which is by law receivable as evidence .—Whoever, in 
any declaration made or subscribed by him, which declaration any Court of Justice, or  any public servant 
or other person, is bound or authorised by law to receive as evidence of any fact,  makes any statement 
which is false, and which he either knows or believes to be false or does not be lieve to be true, touching 
any point material to the object for which the declaration is made or used, shal l be punished in the same 
manner as if he gave false evidence. 
200. Using as true such declaration knowing it to be false .—Whoever corruptly uses or attempts to 
use as true any such declaration, knowing the same to be false in any material point, shal l be punished in 
the same manner as if he gave false evidence. 
Explanation .—A declaration which is inadmissible merely upon the ground of some informality, is a 
declaration within the meaning of sections 199 and 200. 
201. Causing disappearance of evidence of offence, or giving false information to scree n 
offender .—Whoever, knowing or having reason to believe that an offence has been committed, cause s 
any evidence of the commission of that offence to disappear, with the intent ion of screening the offender 
from legal punishment, or with that intention gives any information respecting the offence which he 
kno
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 53]
 legal punishment, or with that intention gives any information respecting the offence which he 
knows or believes to be false, 
if a capital offence .—shall, if the offence which he knows or believes to have been committed is 
punishable with death be punished with imprisonment of either description for a ter m which may extend 
to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine; 
if punishable with imprisonment for life .—and if the offence is punishable with 1[imprisonment for 
life], or with imprisonment which may extend to ten years, shall be punished with im prisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine; 
if punishable with less than ten years ’ imprisonment .—and if the offence is punishable with 
imprisonment for any term not extending to ten years, shall be punished with impr isonment of the 
description provided for the offence, for a term which may extend to one-f ourth part of the longest term 
of the imprisonment provided for the offence, or with fine, or with both. 
Illustration 
A, knowing that B has murdered Z, assists B to hide the body with the  intention of screening B from punishment. A is liable 
to imprisonment of either description for seven years, and also to fin e.  
202. Intentional omission to give information of offence by person bound to inform .—Whoever, 
knowing or having reason to believe that an offence has been committed, intenti onally omits to give any 
information respecting that offence which he is legally bound to give, s hall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with  both. 
203. Giving false information respecting an offence committed .—Whoever, knowing or having 
reason to believe that an offence has been committed, gives any information respecting that off ence which 
he knows or believes to be false, shall be punished with imprisonment of either d escription for a term 
which may extend
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 53]
to be false, shall be punished with imprisonment of either d escription for a term 
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Schedule , for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1956).   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 54]
54 
 1[Explanation .—In sections 201 and 202 and in this section the word “offence ” includes any act 
committed at any place out of 2[India], which, if committed in 2[India], would be punishable under any of 
the following sections, namely, 302, 304, 382, 392, 393, 394, 395, 396, 397, 398, 399, 402, 435, 436, 449, 
450, 457, 458, 459 and 460.] 
204. Destruction of document to prevent its production as evidence .—Whoever secretes or 
destroys any 3[document or electronic record] which he may be lawfully compelled to produce as 
evidence in a Court of Justice, or in any proceeding lawfully held before a public ser vant, as such, or 
obliterates or renders illegible the whole or any part of such 3[document or electronic record] with the 
intention of preventing the same from being produced or used as evidence before such Court or public 
servant as aforesaid, or after he shall have been lawfully summoned or required to produce the same for 
that purpose, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term  which may extend to 
two years, or with fine, or with both. 
205. False personation for purpose of act or proceeding in suit or prosecution .—Whoever falsely 
personates another, and in such assumed character makes any admission or statement, or con fesses 
judgment, or causes any process to be issued or becomes bail or security, or does any other act  in any suit 
or criminal prosecution, shall be punished with imprisonment of either descript ion for a term which may 
extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
206. Fraudulent removal or concealment of property to prevent its seizure as forfeited or i n 
execution .—Whoever fraudulently removes, conceals, transfers or delivers to any person any proper ty or 
any interest therein, intending thereby to prevent that property or intere st therein from being taken as a 
forfeiture or in satisfaction of a fine, under a sentence which has been pronounced, or which he knows to 
be likely to be pron
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 54]
on of a fine, under a sentence which has been pronounced, or which he knows to 
be likely to be pronounced, by a Court of Justice or other competent authority, or from being taken in 
execution of a decree or order which has been made, or which he knows to be likely  to be made by a 
Court of Justice in a civil suit, shall be punished with imprisonment of either desc ription for a term which 
may extend to two years or with fine, or with both. 
207. Fraudulent claim to property to prevent its seizure as forfeited or in execution .—Whoever 
fraudulently accepts, receives or claims any property or any interest therein, knowing that he has no right 
or rightful claim to such property or interest, or practices any deception touching any right to any proper ty 
or any interest therein, intending thereby to prevent that property or intere st therein from being taken as a 
forfeiture or in satisfaction of a fine, under a sentence which has been pronounced, or  which he knows to 
be likely to be pronounced by a Court of Justice or other competent authority, or from being taken in 
execution of a decree or order which has been made, or which he knows to be likely  to be made by a 
Court of Justice in a civil suit, shall be punished with imprisonment of either desc ription for a term which 
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
208. Fraudulently suffering decree for sum not due .—Whoever fraudulently causes or suffers a 
decree or order to be passed against him at the suit of any person for a sum not due or for a larger sum 
than is due to such person or for any property or interest in property to which such pers on is not entitled, 
or fraudulently causes or suffers a decree or order to be executed against him after it has been satisfied, or 
for anything in respect of which it has been satisfied, shall be punished wit h imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
Illustration 
A institutes a suit
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 54]
a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
Illustration 
A institutes a suit against Z. Z knowing that A is likely to obtain a decre e against him, fraudulently suffers a judgment to 
pass against him for a larger amount at the suit of B, who has no just claim  against him, in order that B, either on his own account 
or for the benefit of Z, may share in the proceeds of any sale of  Z's property which may be made under A's decree. Z has 
committed an offence under this section. 
                                                           
1. Added by Act 3 of 1894, s. 6. 
2. The words “British India” have successively been subs. by the A. O. 1 948, the A. O. 1950 and Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., 
to read as above. 
3. Subs. by Act 21 of 2000, s . 91 and the First Sch., for “document” (w.e.f. 17 -10-2000).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 55]
55 
 209. Dishonesty making false claim in Court .—Whoever fraudulently or dishonestly, or with intent 
to injure or annoy any person, makes in a Court of Justice any claim which he knows t o be false, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend t o two years, and shall 
also be liable to fine. 
210. Fraudulently obtaining decree for sum not due .—Whoever fraudulently obtains a decree or 
order against any person for a sum not due, or for a larger sum than is due, or for any pr operty or interest 
in property to which he is not entitled, or fraudulently causes a decree or or der to be executed against any 
person after it has been satisfied or for anything in respect of which it ha s been satisfied, or fraudulently 
suffers or permits any such act to be done in his name, shall be punished with impri sonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
211. False charge of offence made with intent to injure .—Whoever, with intent to cause injury to 
any person, institutes or causes to be instituted any criminal proceeding agains t that person, or falsely 
charges any person with having committed an offence, knowing that there is no just or lawful ground for 
such proceeding or charge against that person, shall be punished with imprisonment of eit her description 
for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both; 
and if such criminal proceeding be instituted on a false charge of an offence punishabl e with 
death,1[imprisonment for life], or imprisonment for seven years or upwards, shall be puni shable with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, a nd shall also be liable to 
fine. 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Chhattisgarh. — 
In Section 211 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (here- in-after referred to as the Penal Code), the 
following proviso shall be inserted, namely: — 
Provided that, if such criminal proceeding be instituted 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 55]
wing proviso shall be inserted, namely: — 
Provided that, if such criminal proceeding be instituted on a false charge, of an of fence punishable 
under section 354, section 354A, section 354B, section 354C, section 354D, section 354E, section 376B, 
section 376C, section 376F, section 509, section 509A or section 509B shall be punishable with 
imprisonment of either description which shall not be less than three yea rs but which may extend to five 
years and shall also be liable to fine. 
[Vide Chhattisgarh Act 25 of 2015, sec. 2]. 
212. Harbouring offender .—Whenever an offence has been committed, whoever harbours or 
conceals a person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be the offender, with the intent ion of 
screening him from legal punishment, 
if a capital offence .—shall, if the offence is punishable with death, be punished with imprisonment 
of either description for a term which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine; 
if punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment .—and if the offence is punishable 
with 1[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment which may extend to ten years, shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three yea rs, and shall also be 
liable to fine; 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1956). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 56]
56 
 and if the offence is punishable with imprisonment which may extend to one year, and not to te n 
years, shall be punished with imprisonment of the description provided for the off ence for a term which 
may extend to one-fourth part of the longest term of imprisonment provided for the offence, or with fine, 
or with both.  
1[“Offence ” in this section includes any act committed at any place out of 2[India], which, if 
committed in 2[India], would be punishable under any of the following sections, namely, 302, 304, 382, 
392, 393, 394, 395, 396, 397, 398, 399, 402, 435, 436, 449, 450, 457, 458, 459 and 460; and every such 
act shall, for the purposes of this section, be deemed to be punishable as if the acc used person had been 
guilty of it in 2[India].] 
Exception .—This provision shall not extend to any case in which the harbour or concealment is by the 
husband or wife of the offender. 
Illustration 
A, knowing that B has committed dacoity, knowingly conceals B in  order to screen him from legal punishment. Here, as B 
is liable to 3[imprisonment for life], A is liable to imprisonment of either description  for a term not exceeding three years, and is 
also liable to fine. 
213. Taking gift, etc., to screen an offender from punishment .—Whoever accepts or attempts to 
obtain, or agrees to accept, any gratification for himself or any other person, or an y restitution of property 
to himself or any other person, in consideration of his concealing an offence or  of his screening any 
person from legal punishment for any offence, or of his not proceeding against any person f or the purpose 
of bringing him to legal punishment, 
if a capital offence .—shall, if the offence is punishable with death, be punished with imprisonment 
of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liabl e to fine; 
if punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment .—and if the offence is punishable 
with 3[imprisonment for life], or w
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 56]
r life, or with imprisonment .—and if the offence is punishable 
with 3[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment which may extend to ten years, shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three yea rs, and shall also be 
liable to fine; 
and if the offence is punishable with imprisonment not extending to ten years, shall  be punished with 
imprisonment of the description provided for the offence for a term which may  extend to one-fourth part 
of the longest term of imprisonment provided for the offence, or with fine, or with both. 
214. Offering gift or restoration of property in consideration of screening offender .—Whoever 
gives or causes, or offers or agrees to give or cause, any gratificati on to any person, or 4[restores or causes 
the restoration of] any property to any person, in consideration of that person' s concealing an offence, or 
of his screening any person from legal punishment for any offence, or of his not proceeding against any 
person for the purpose of bringing him to legal punishment, 
if a capital offence. —shall, if the offence is punishable with death, be punished with imprisonment 
of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liabl e to fine; 
if punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment .—and if the offence is punishable 
with 3[imprisonment for life] or with imprisonment which may extend to ten years, sha ll be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to 
fine; 
and if the offence is punishable with imprisonment not extending to ten years, shall  be punished with 
imprisonment of the description provided for the offence for a term which may  extend to one-fourth part 
of the longest term of imprisonment provided for the offence, or with fine, or with both. 
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 1894, s. 7. 
2. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 56]

  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 1894, s. 7. 
2. The words “British India” have successively been subs. by the A. O. 1948, the A. O. 1950 and Act 3 of 1951 s. 3 and the Sc h., 
to read as above.  
3. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1956). 
4. Subs. by Act 42 of 1953, s. 4 and the Third Sch., for “to  restore or cause the restoration of”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 57]
57 
 1[Exception .—The provisions of sections 213 and 214 do not extend to any case in which the offenc e 
may lawfully be compounded.] 
2*    *    *    *    * 
215. Taking gift to help to recover stolen property, etc. —Whoever takes or agrees or consents to 
take any gratification under pretence or on account of helping any person to recover any movabl e 
property of which he shall have been deprived by any offence punishable under this Code, shall, unless he 
uses all means in his power to cause the offender to be apprehended and convicted of the offence, be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to tw o years, or with fine, 
or with both. 
216. Harbouring offender who has escaped from custody or whose apprehension has been 
ordered. —Whenever any person convicted of a charged with an offence, being in lawful custody for that 
offence, escapes from such custody, 
or whenever a public servant, in the exercise of the lawful powers of such public ser vant, orders a 
certain person to be apprehended for an offence, whoever, knowing of such escape or order for 
apprehension, harbours or conceals that person with the intention of preventing him from bein g 
apprehended, shall be punished in the manner following, that is to say, 
if a capital offence .—if the offence for which the person was in custody or is ordered to be 
apprehended is punishable with death, he shall be punished with imprisonment of either  description for a 
term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine; 
if punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment .—if the offence is punishable 
with 3[imprisonment for life] or imprisonment for ten years, he shall be punished wi th imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to three years, with or without fine; 
and if the offence is punishable with imprisonment which may extend to one year and not to ten 
years, he shall be punished with imprisonment of the descri
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 57]
h may extend to one year and not to ten 
years, he shall be punished with imprisonment of the description provided for the  offence for a term 
which may extend to one-fourth part of the longest term of the imprisonment provided for such offence, 
or with fine, or with both. 
4[“Offence ” in this section includes also any act or omission of which a person is alleged to have been 
guilty out of 5[India], which, if he had been guilty of it in 5[India], would have been punishable as an 
offence, and for which he is, under any law relating to extradition, 6*** or otherwise, liable to be 
apprehended or detained in custody in 5[India], and every such act or omission shall, for the purposes of 
this section, be deemed to be punishable as if the accused person had been guilty of it in 5[India].] 
Exception .—The provision does not extend to the case in which the harbour or concealment is by th e 
husband or wife of the person to be apprehended. 
7[216A. Penalty for harbouring robbers or dacoits .—Whoever, knowing or having reason to 
believe that any persons are about to commit or have recently committed robbery or dacoity, harbours 
them or any of them, with the intention of facilitating the commission of such robbery or dacoity, or of 
screening them or any of them from punishment, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section it is immaterial whether the robbery or daco ity is 
intended to be committed, or has been committed, within or without 5[India]. 
Exception. —This provision does not extend to the case in which the harbour is by the husband or 
wife of the offender.] 
7[216B. Definition of “harbour ” in sections 212, 216  and 216A .] Rep. by the Indian Penal Code 
(Amendment ) Act, 1942  (8 of 1942 ), s. 3. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 8 of 1882, s. 6, for the original Exception. 
2.  Illustra
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 57]
                         
1. Subs. by Act 8 of 1882, s. 6, for the original Exception. 
2.  Illustrations  rep. by Act 10 of 1882, s. 2 and the First Sch.  
3. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1956). 
4. Ins. by Act 10 of 1886, s. 23. 
5. The words “British India” have successively been subs. by the A. O. 1948 , the A. O. 1950 and Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., 
to read as above. 
6. The words “or under the Fugitive Offenders Act, 1881,” omitted by  Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch. 
7. Ins. by Act 3 of 1894, s. 8.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 58]
58 
 217. Public servant disobeying direction of law with intent to save person from punishment or 
property from forfeiture .—Whoever, being a public servant, knowingly disobeys any direction of the 
law as to the way in which he is to conduct himself as such public servant, intending  thereby to save, or 
knowing it to be likely that he will thereby save, any person from legal punishment, or subject him to a 
less punishment than that to which he is liable, or with intent to save, or know ing that he is likely thereby 
to save, any property from forfeiture or any charge to which it is liable by law, sha ll be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or w ith both. 
218. Public servant framing incorrect record or writing with intent to save person fro m 
punishment or property from forfeiture .—Whoever, being a public servant, and being as such public 
servant, charged with the preparation of any record or other writing, frames th at record or writing in a 
manner which he knows to be incorrect, with intent to cause, or knowing it to be li kely that he will 
thereby cause, loss or injury to the public or to any person, or with intent thereby  to save, or knowing it to 
be likely that he will thereby save, any person from legal punishment, or with int ent to save, or knowing 
that he is likely thereby to save, any property from forfeiture or other charg e to which it is liable by law, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may  extend to three years, or 
with fine, or with both. 
219. Public servant in judicial proceeding corruptly making report, etc., contrary to law .—
Whoever, being a public servant, corruptly or maliciously makes or pronounces in any stag e of a judicial 
proceeding, any report, order, verdict, or decision which he knows to be contrary to law, shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven y ears,
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 58]
ll be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven y ears, or with fine, or with 
both. 
220. Commitment for trial or confinement by person having authority who knows that he i s 
acting contrary to law .—Whoever, being in any office which gives him legal authority to commit 
persons for trial or to confinement, or to keep persons in confinement, corruptly or maliciously commits 
any person for trial or to confinement, or keeps any person in confinement, in the exer cise of that 
authority knowing that in so doing he is acting contrary to law, shall be punished w ith imprisonment o f 
either description for a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both. 
221. Intentional omission to apprehend on the part of public servant bound to apprehend .—
Whoever, being a public servant, legally bound as such public servant to apprehend or to kee p in 
confinement any person charged with or liable to be apprehended for an offence, intenti onally omits to 
apprehend such person, or intentionally suffers such person to escape, or intentionally a ids such person in 
escaping or attempting to escape from such confinement, shall be punished as follows, that is to say: — 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to  seven years, with or without 
fine, if the person in confinement, or who ought to have been apprehended, was charged wit h, or liable to 
be apprehended for, an offence punishable with death; or  
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three yea rs, with or without 
fine, if the person in confinement, or who ought to have been apprehended, was charged with, or liable to 
be apprehended for, an offence punishable with 1[imprisonment for life] or imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to ten years; or 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two yea rs, with or without 
fine, if the person in confinement, or who ought to
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 58]
which may extend to two yea rs, with or without 
fine, if the person in confinement, or who ought to have been apprehended, was charged with, or liable to 
be apprehended for, an offence punishable with imprisonment for a term less than ten years. 
222. Intentional omission to apprehend on the part of public servant bound to apprehend 
person under sentence or lawfully committed .—Whoever, being a public servant, legally bound as 
such public servant to apprehend or to keep in confinement any person under sentence of a Cou rt of 
Justice for any offence 2[or lawfully committed to custody], intentionally omits to apprehend such person, 
or intentionally suffers such person to escape or intentionally aids such person in es caping or attempting 
to escape from such confinement, shall be punished as follows, that is to say: — 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1956). 
2. Ins. by Act 27 of 1870, s. 8. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 59]
59 
 with 1[imprisonment for life] or with imprisonment of either description for a ter m which may extend to 
fourteen years, with or without fine, if the person in confinement, or who ought to have been 
apprehended, is under sentence of death; or 
 with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven year s, with or without 
fine, if the person in confinement, or who ought to have been apprehended, is subject, by a sentence of a 
Court of Justice, or by virtue of a commutation of such sentence, to 1[imprisonment for life] 2*** 3*** 
4*** 5*** or imprisonment for a term of ten years or upwards; or  
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three year s, or with fine, or 
with both, if the person in confinement, or who ought to have been apprehended is subject, by a sentence  
of a Court of Justice, to imprisonment for a term not extending to ten years 6[or if the person was lawfully 
committed to custody]. 
223. Escape from confinement or custody negligently suffered by public servant .—Whoever, 
being a public servant legally bound as such public servant to keep in confinement  any person charged 
with or convicted of any offence 6[or lawfully committed to custody], negligently suffers such person to 
escape from confinement, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which ma y extend to 
two years, or with fine, or with both. 
224. Resistance or obstruction by a person to his lawful apprehension .—Whoever intentionally 
offers any resistance or illegal obstruction to the lawful apprehension of himself  for any offence with 
which he is charged or of which he has been convicted, or escapes or attempts to escape from any custody 
in which he is lawfully detained for any such offence, shall be punished with imprisonment  of either 
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
Explanation .—The punishment in this section is in addition to the punishment for which 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 59]
with both. 
Explanation .—The punishment in this section is in addition to the punishment for which the person t o 
be apprehended or detained in custody was liable for the offence with which he was cha rged, or of which 
he was convicted. 
225. Resistance or obstruction to lawful apprehension of another person .—Whoever intentionally 
offers any resistance or illegal obstruction to the lawful apprehension of any other per son for an offence, 
or rescues or attempts to rescue any other person from any custody in which that person is lawfully 
detained for an offence, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both; 
or, if the person to be apprehended, or the person rescued or attempted to be rescued, is char ged with 
or liable to be apprehended for an offence punishable with 1[imprisonment for life] or imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to ten years, shall be punished with imprisonment of either de scription for a term 
which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine; 
or, if the person to be apprehended or rescued, or attempted to be rescued, is charged with or liable to 
be apprehended for an offence punishable with death, shall be punished with imprisonment of eit her 
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine; 
or, if the person to be apprehended or rescued, or attempted to be rescued, is liable under the sentence 
of a Court of Justice, or by virtue of a commutation of such a sentence, to 1[imprisonment for life], 3*** 
4*** 7*** or imprisonment, for a term of ten years or upwards, shall be punished with impr isonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine; 
or, if the person to be apprehended or rescued, or attempted to be rescued, is under sentence  of death, 
shall be punished with 1[imprisonment for life] or imprisonment of either description for
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 59]
of death, 
shall be punished with 1[imprisonment for life] or imprisonment of either description for a term not 
exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117, and Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1956). 
2. The words “or penal servitude for life ,” omitted by Act 17 of 1949, s. 2 (w.e.f. 6 -4-1949). 
3. The words “or to” omitted by Act 36 of 1957, s. 3 and the  Second Sch.  
4. The word “transportation” omitted by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117  and the Sch. (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
5. The words “or penal servitude” omitted by Act 17 of 1949, s. 2  (w.e.f. 6 -4-1949). 
6. Ins. by Act 27 of 1870, s. 8. 
7. The words “penal servitude,” omitted by Act 17 of 1949, s. 2 (w.e.f. 6 -4-1949). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 60]
60 
 1[225A. Omission to apprehend, or sufferance of escape, on part of public servant, in cases not 
otherwise, provided for. —Whoever, being a public servant legally bound as such public servant to 
apprehend, or to keep in confinement, any person in any case not provided for in secti on 221, section 222 
or section 223, or in any other law for the time being in force, omits to appr ehend that person or suffers 
him to escape from confinement, shall be punished — 
(a) if he does so intentionally, with imprisonment of either description for a te rm which may 
extend to three years, or with fine, or with both; and 
(b) if he does so negligently, with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to two 
years, or with fine, or with both. 
225B. Resistance or obstruction to lawful apprehension, or escape or rescue in cases not 
otherwise provided for .—Whoever, in any case not provided for in section 224 or section 225 or in any 
other law for the time being in force, intentionally offers any resistance or ill egal obstruction to the lawful 
apprehension of himself or of any other person, or escapes or attempts to escape from  any custody in 
which he is lawfully detained, or rescues or attempts to rescue any other person from any custody in 
which that person is lawfully detained, shall be punished with imprisonment of either des cription for a 
term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.] 
226. [Unlawful return from transportation. ] Rep. by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) 
Act, 1955 (26 of 1955 ), s. 117 and the Sch. (w.e.f. 1-1-1956).  
227. Violation of condition of remission of punishment .—Whoever, having accepted an y 
conditional remission of punishment, knowingly violates any condition on which such remission  was 
granted, shall be punished with the punishment to which he was originally sentenced, if he has already 
suffered no part of that punishment, and if he has suffered any part of that punishment , then with so much 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 60]
 no part of that punishment, and if he has suffered any part of that punishment , then with so much 
of that punishment as he has not already suffered. 
228. Intentional insult or interruption to public servant sitting in judicial proceeding .—Whoever 
intentionally offers any insult, or causes any interruption to any public servant, whil e such public servant 
is sitting in any stage of a judicial proceeding, shall be punished with simpl e imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
2[228A. Disclosure of identity of the victim of certain offences, etc. —(1) Whoever prints or 
publishes the name or any matter which may make known the identity of any person against whom  an 
3[offence under section 376, 4[section 376A, section 376AB, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D, 
section 376DA, section 376DB]  or section 376E] is alleged or found to have been commit ted (hereafter 
in this section referred to as the victim) shall be punished with impri sonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to two years and shall also be liable to fine. 
(2) Nothing in sub-section ( 1) extends to any printing or publication of the name or any matter which 
may make known the identity of the victim if such printing or publication is — 
(a) by or under the order in writing of the officer- in-charge of the police station or the police 
officer making the investigation into such offence acting in good faith for t he purposes of such 
investigation; or 
(b) by, or with the authorisation in writing of, the victim; or 
(c) where the victim is dead or minor or of unsound mind, by, or with the aut horisation in writing 
of, the next-of-kin of the victim: 
Provided that no such authorisation shall be given by the next-of-kin to anybody other than the  
chairman or the secretary, by whatever name called, of any recognised welfare institution or or ganisation. 
                                      
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 60]
led, of any recognised welfare institution or or ganisation. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 1886, s. 24( 1), for section 225A which had been ins. by Act 27 of 1870, s. 9 . 
2. Ins. by Act 43 of 1983, s. 2. 
3. Subs. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 4, for “offence under sectio n 376, section 376A, section 376B, section  376C or section 376D” 
(w.e.f. 3-2-2013 ). 
4. Subs. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 3, for “ section 376A, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D ” (w.e.f. 21 -4-2018). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 61]
61 
 Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub-section, “recognised welfare institution or organisation ” 
means a social welfare institution or organisation recognised in this behalf  by the Central or State 
Government. 
(3) Whoever prints or publishes any matter in relation to any proceeding before a court with respec t to 
an offence referred to in sub-section ( 1) without the previous permission of such court shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two year s and shall also be liable 
to fine. 
Explanation .—The printing or publication of the judgment of any High Court or the Supreme Court 
does not amount to an offence within the meaning of this section.] 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Arunachal Pradesh 
Amendment of section 228A .—In section 228A of the Penal Code, in sub-section ( 1), for the words, 
figure and letters “offence under section 376, section 376A, section 376B, section 376C or section 376D 
or section 376E ” the words, figure and letters “offence under section 376, section 376A, section 376AA, 
section 376B, section 376C, section 376D, section 376DA or section 376E ” shall be substituted. 
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh Act 3 of 2019, s. 4] 
229. Personation of a juror or assessor .—Whoever, by personation or otherwise, shall intentionally 
cause, or knowingly suffer himself to be returned, empanelled or sworn as a jur yman or assessor in any 
case in which he knows that he is not entitled by law to be so returned, empanelled or sworn, or knowing 
himself to have been so returned, empanelled or sworn contrary to law, shall voluntari ly serve on such 
jury or as such assessor, shall be punished with imprisonment of either descripti on for a term which may 
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
1[229A. Failure by person released on bail or bond to appear in court .—Whoever, having been 
charged with an offence and released on bail or on bond without sureties, fails without  sufficient cause 
(the burden o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 61]
nce and released on bail or on bond without sureties, fails without  sufficient cause 
(the burden of proving which shall lie upon him), to appear in court in accor dance with the terms of the 
bail or bond, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a ter m which may extend to 
one year, or with fine, or with both. 
Explanation .—The punishment under this section is — 
(a) in addition to the punishment to which the offender would be liable on a conviction for  the 
offence with which he has been charged; and 
(b) without prejudice to the power of the court to order forfeiture of the bond.] 
 
CHAPTER XII 
OF OFFENCES  RELATING TO COIN AND GOVERNMENT  STAMPS  
230. “Coin ” defined. —2[Coin is metal used for the time being as money, and stamped and issued by 
the authority of some State or Sovereign Power in order to be so used.] 
3[Indian coin .—Indian coin is metal stamped and issued by the authority of the Government of I ndia 
in order to be used as money; and metal which has been so stamped and issued shall continue to be Indian 
coin for the purposes of this Chapter, notwithstanding that it may have ceased to be used as money.] 
Illustrations 
(a) Cowries are not coin. 
(b) Lumps of unstamped copper, though used as money, are not coi n. 
(c) Medals are not coin, in as much as they are not intended to be used as money. 
(d) The coin denominated as the Company ’s rupee is 4[Indian coin]. 
5[(e) The “Farukhabad rupee ”, which was formerly used as money under the authority of the Gov ernment of India, is 
6[Indian coin] although it is no longer so used.] 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 44 (w.e.f. 23-6-2005). 
2. Subs. by Act 19 of 1872, s. 1, for the first paragraph. 
3. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for the second paragraph. 
4. Subs. ibid., for “the Queen’s coin”.  
5. Added by Act 6 of 1896, s. 1( 2). 
6. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “Queen ’s coin”  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 61]
s. 1( 2). 
6. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “Queen ’s coin”  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 62]
62 
 231. Counterfeiting coin .—Whoever counterfeits or knowingly performs any part of the process of 
counterfeiting coin, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term  which may 
extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
Explanation .—A person commits this offence who intending to practise deception, or knowing it t o 
be likely that deception will thereby be practised, causes a genuine coin to appear like a different coi n. 
232. Counterfeiting Indian coin .—Whoever counterfeits, or knowingly performs any part of the 
process of counterfeiting 1[Indian coin], shall be punished with 2[imprisonment for life], or with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
233. Making or selling instrument for counterfeiting coin .—Whoever makes or mends, or 
performs any part of the process of making or mending, or buys, sells or disposes of, any  die or 
instrument, for the purpose of being used, or knowing or having reason to believe that it  is intended to be 
used, for the purpose of counterfeiting coin, shall be punished with imprisonment of eith er description for 
a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
234. Making or selling instrument for counterfeiting Indian coin .—Whoever makes or mends, or 
performs any part of the process of making or mending, or buys, sells or disposes of, any  die or 
instrument, for the purpose of being used, or knowing or having reason to believe that it  is intended to be 
used, for the purpose of counterfeiting 1[Indian coin], shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
235. Possession of instrument or material for the purpose of using the same for c ounterfeiting 
coin. —Whoever is in possession of any instrument or material, for the purpose of usi ng the same for 
counterfeiting coin, or knowing or havin
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 62]
rument or material, for the purpose of usi ng the same for 
counterfeiting coin, or knowing or having reason to believe that the same is intended t o be used for that 
purpose, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term wh ich may extend to three 
years, and shall also be liable to fine; 
if Indian coin .—and if the coin to be counterfeited is 1[Indian coin], shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and sha ll also be liable to 
fine. 
236. Abetting in India the counterfeiting out of India of coin .—Whoever, being within 3[India], 
abets the counterfeiting of coin out of 3[India], shall be punished in the same manner as if he abetted the 
counterfeiting of such coin within 3[India]. 
237. Import or export of counterfeit coin .—Whoever imports into 3[India], or exports therefrom, 
any counterfeit coin, knowing or having reason to believe that the same is counterfei t, shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three yea rs, and shall also be 
liable to fine. 
238. Import or export of counterfeits of the Indian coin .—Whoever imports into 3[India], or 
exports therefrom, any counterfeit coin, which he knows or has reason to believe to be a  counterfeit of 
1[Indian coin], shall be punished with 2[Imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of either description 
for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
239. Delivery of coin, possessed with knowledge that it is counterfeit .—Whoever, having any 
counterfeit coin, which at the time when he became possessed of it, he knew to be counterfeit , 
fraudulently or with intent that fraud may be committed, delivers the same to an y person, or attempts to 
induce any person to receive it, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description f or a term 
which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
240. Delivery of Indian coin, possessed
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 62]
may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
240. Delivery of Indian coin, possessed with knowledge that it is counterfeit .—Whoever, having 
any counterfeit co in, which is a counterfeit of 4[Indian coin], and which, at the time when he became 
possessed of it, he knew to be a counterfeit of 4[Indian coin], fraudulently or with intent that fraud may be 
committed, delivers the same to any person, or attempts to induce any person to rece ive it, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to t en years, and shall also 
be liable to fine. 
241. Delivery of coin as genuine, which, when first possessed, the deliverer did not know  to be 
counterfeit .—Whoever delivers to any other person as genuine, or attempts to induce any other person to 
                                                           
1. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “ the Queen ’s coin”  
2. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1956).  
3. The words “British India” have successively been subs. by the A. O. 19 48, the A. O. 1950 and Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., 
to read as above. 
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “Queen’s coin”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 63]
63 
 receive as genuine, any counterfeit coin which he knows to be counterfeit, but which he did not know to 
be counterfeit at the time when he took it into his possession, shall be punishe d with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine to an amount which may extend 
to ten times the value of the coin counterfeited, or with both. 
Illustration 
A, a coiner, delivers counterfeit Company's rupees to his accomplice B, for the purpose of  uttering 
them. B sells the rupees to C, another utterer, who buys them knowing them to be count erfeit. C pays 
away the rupees for goods to D, who receives them, not knowing them to be counterf eit. D, after 
receiving the rupees, discovers that they are counterfeit and pays them away as if they were good. Here D 
is punishable only under this section, but B and C are punishable under section 239 or 240, as the case 
may be. 
242. Possession of counterfeit coin by person who knew it to be counterfeit when he became 
possessed thereof .—Whoever, fraudulently or with intent that fraud may be committed, is in possess ion 
of counterfeit coin, having known at the time when he became possessed thereof that such coin w as 
counterfeit, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
three years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
243. Possession of Indian coin by person who knew it to be counterfeit when he became 
possessed thereof .—Whoever, fraudulently or with intent that fraud may be committed, is in possess ion 
of counterfeit coin, which is a counterfeit of 1[Indian coin], having known at the time when he became 
possessed of it that it was counterfeit, shall be punished with imprisonment of eit her description for a 
term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
244. Person employed in mint causing coin to be of different weight or composition from tha t 
fixed by law .—Whoever, being employed in any mint lawfull
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 63]
fferent weight or composition from tha t 
fixed by law .—Whoever, being employed in any mint lawfully established in 2[India], does any act, or 
omits what he is legally bound to do, with the intention of causing any coin issued from  that mint to be of 
a different weight or composition from the weight or composition fixed by law sha ll be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, a nd shall also be liable to 
fine. 
245. Unlawfully taking coining instrument from mint .—Whoever, without lawful authority, takes 
out of any mint, lawfully established in 2[India], any coining tool or instrument, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, a nd shall also be liable to 
fine. 
246. Fraudulently or dishonestly diminishing weight or altering composition of coin .—Whoever 
fraudulently or dishonestly performs on any coin any operation which diminishes the weight or alters the 
composition of that coin, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
Explanation. —A person who scoops out part of the coin and puts anything else into the cavity alters  
the composition of that coin. 
247. Fraudulently or dishonestly diminishing weight or altering composition of Indian coin.—
Whoever fraudulently or dishonestly performs on 3[any Indian coin] any operation which diminishes the 
weight or alters the composition of that coin, shall be punished with imprisonm ent of either description 
for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
248. Altering appearance of coin with intent that it shall pass as coin of different  description .—
Whoever performs on any coin any operation which alters the appearance of that coin, with t he intention 
that the said coin shall pass as a coin of a different description, shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either desc
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 63]
shall pass as a coin of a different description, shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
249. Altering appearance of Indian coin with intent that it shall pass as coin of differe nt 
description .—Whoever performs on 3[any Indian coin] any operation which alters the appearance of that 
coin, with the intention that the said coin shall pass as a coin of a dif ferent description, shall be punished 
                                                           
1. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “the Queen’s coin”.  
2. The words “British India” have successively been subs. by the A. O. 1 948, the A. O. 1950 and Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., 
to read as above. 
3. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “any of the Queen’s coin”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 64]
64 
 with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to se ven years, and shall also be 
liable to fine. 
250. Delivery of coin, possessed with knowledge that it is altered .—Whoever, having coin in his 
possession with respect to which the offence defined in section 246 or 248 has been committed, and 
having known at the time when he became possessed of such coin that such offence had b een committed 
with respect to it, fraudulently or with intent that fraud may be commit ted, delivers such coin to any other 
person, or attempts to induce any other person to receive the same, shall be  punished with imprisonment 
of either description for a term which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
251. Delivery of Indian coin, possessed with knowledge that it is altered .—Whoever, having coin 
in his possession with respect to which the offence defined in section 247 or 249 has been committed, and 
having known at the time when he became possessed of such coin that such offence had b een committed 
with respect to it, fraudulently or with intent that fraud may be commit ted, delivers such coin to any other 
person, or attempts to induce any other person to receive the same, shall be  punished with imprisonment 
of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fi ne. 
252. Possession of coin by person who knew it to be altered when he became possessed 
thereof .—Whoever, fraudulently or with intent that fraud may be committed, is in possessi on of coin 
with respect to which the offence defined in either of the section 246 or 248  has been committed, having 
known at the time of becoming possessed thereof that such offence had been commit ted with respect to 
such coin, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to thr ee 
years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
253. Possession of Indian coin by person who knew it to be altered when he became po
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 64]
iable to fine. 
253. Possession of Indian coin by person who knew it to be altered when he became possessed 
thereof. —Whoever, fraudulently or with intent that fraud may be committed, is in possessi on of coin 
with respect to which the offence defined in either of the section 247 or 249 has been committed having 
known at the time of becoming possessed thereof, that such offence had been commi tted with respect to 
such coin, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a te rm which may extend to five 
years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
254. Delivery of coin as genuine, which, when first possessed, the deliverer did not know to be 
altered .—Whoever delivers to any other person as genuine or as a coin of a different desc ription from 
what it is, or attempts to induce any person to receive as genuine, or as a differe nt coin from what it is, 
any coin in respect of which he knows that any such operation as that mentioned in secti on 246, 247, 248 
or 249 has been performed, but in respect of which he did not, at the time when he took it into his 
possession, know that such operation had been performed, shall be punished with imprisonm ent of either 
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine to an amount which may extend to ten 
times the value of the coin for which the altered coin is passed, or attempted to be passed. 
255. Counterfeiting Government stamp .—Whoever counterfeits, or knowingly performs any part 
of the process of counterfeiting, any stamp issued by Government for the purpose of revenue, shall be 
punished with 1[imprisonment for life] or with imprisonment of either description for  a term which may 
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
Explanation .—A person commits this offence who counterfeits by causing a genuine stamp of one 
denomination to appear like a genuine stamp of a different denomination. 
256. Having possession of instrument or material for counterfeiting Government 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 64]
erent denomination. 
256. Having possession of instrument or material for counterfeiting Government stamp .—
Whoever has in his possession any instrument or material for the purpose of being use d, or knowing or 
having reason to believe that it is intended to be used, for the purpose of  counterfeiting any stamp issued 
by Government for the purpose of revenue, shall be punished with imprisonment of eith er description for 
a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
257. Making or selling instrument for counterfeiting Government stamp .—Whoever makes or 
performs any part of the process of making, or buys, or sells, or disposes of, any instr ument for the 
purpose of being used, or knowing or having reason to believe that it is intended to be u sed, for the 
purpose of counterfeiting any stamp issued by Government for the purpose of revenue , shall be punished 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e .f. 1-1-1956).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 65]
65 
 with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to se ven years, and shall also be 
liable to fine. 
258. Sale of counterfeit Government stamp .—Whoever sells, or offers for sale, any stamp which he 
knows or has reason to believe to be a counterfeit of any stamp issued by Government for the purpose of 
revenue, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven 
years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
259. Having possession of counterfeit Government stamp .—Whoever has in his possession any 
stamp which he knows to be a counterfeit of any stamp issued by Government for the purpo se of revenue, 
intending to use, or dispose of the same as a genuine stamp, or in order that it may be used as a genuine 
stamp, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term whic h may extend to seven 
years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
260. Using as genuine a Government stamp known to be counterfeit .—Whoever uses as genuine 
any stamp, knowing it to be a counterfeit of any stamp issued by Government for the pu rpose of revenue, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, or 
with fine, or with both. 
261. Effacing writing from substance bearing Government stamp, or removing from document  
a stamp used for it, with intent to cause loss to Government .—Whoever, fraudulently or with intent to 
cause loss to the Government, removes or effaces from any substance, bearing any stamp iss ued by 
Government for the purpose of revenue, any writing or document for which such stamp has been used, or 
removes from any writing or document a stamp which has been used for such writ ing or document, in 
order that such stamp may be used for a different writing or document, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or wi th both. 
262. Using Government stamp known to have 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 65]
 may extend to three years, or with fine, or wi th both. 
262. Using Government stamp known to have been before used .—Whoever, fraudulently or with 
intent to cause loss to the Government, uses for any purpose a stamp issued by Governm ent for the 
purpose of revenue, which he knows to have been before used, shall be punished with i mprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
263. Erasure of mark denoting that stamp has been used .—Whoever, fraudulently or with intent 
to cause loss to Government, erases or removes from a stamp issued by Government for the purpose of 
revenue, any mark, put or impressed upon such stamp for the purpose of denoting that the same has  been 
used, or knowingly has in his possession or sells or disposes of any such stamp from which such mark has 
been erased or removed, or sells or disposes of any such stamp which he knows to have been used, shall  
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to thre e years, or with 
fine, or with both. 
1[263A. Prohibition of fictitious stamps .—(1) Whoever — 
(a) makes, knowingly utters, deals in or sells any fictitious stamp, or knowingly  uses for any 
postal purpose any fictitious stamp, or 
(b) has in his possession, without lawful excuse, any fictitious stamp, or 
(c) makes or, without lawful excuse, has in his possession any die, plate, instrum ent or materials 
for making any fictitious stamp,  
shall be punished with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees. 
(2) Any such stamps, die, plate, instrument or materials in the possession of an y person for making 
any fictitious stamp 2[may be seized and, if seized] shall be forfeited. 
(3) In this section “fictitious stamp ” means any stamp falsely purporting to be issued by Government 
for the purpose of denoting a rate of postage, or any facsimile or imitation or r epresentation, whether on 
paper or otherwise, of any stamp issued by Government 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 65]
 or imitation or r epresentation, whether on 
paper or otherwise, of any stamp issued by Government for that purpose. 
(4) In this section and also in sections 255 to 263, both inclusive, the word “Government ”, when used 
in connection with, or in reference to, any stamp issued for the purpose of denoti ng a rate of postage, 
                                                           
1. Added by Act 3 of 1895, s. 2. 
2. Subs. by Act 42 of 1953, s. 4 and the Third Sch., for “ may be seized and”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 66]
66 
 shall, notwithstanding anything in section 17, be deemed to include the person or p ersons authorized by 
law to administer executive government in any part of India, and also in any part of  Her Majesty's 
dominions or in any foreign country.] 
CHAPTER XIII 
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO WEIGHTS AND  MEASURES  
264. Fraudulent use of false instrument for weighing .—Whoever fraudulently uses any instrument 
for weighing which he knows to be false, shall be punished with imprisonment of eith er description for a 
term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both. 
265. Fraudulent use of false weight or measure .—Whoever fraudulently uses any false weight or 
false measure of length or capacity, or fraudulently uses any weight or any meas ure of length or capacity 
as a different weight or measure from what it is, shall be punished with imprisonment of either  description 
for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both. 
266. Being in possession of false weight or measure .—Whoever is in possession of any instrument 
for weighing, or of any weight, or of any measure of length or capacity, w hich he knows to be false, 1*** 
intending that the same may be fraudulently used, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both. 
267. Making or selling false weight or measure .—Whoever makes, sells or disposes of any 
instrument for weighing, or any weight, or any measure of length or capacity whi ch he knows to be false, 
in order that the same may be used as true, or knowing that the same is lik ely to be used as true, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, 
or with both. 
CHAPTER XIV 
OF OFFENCES A FFECTING THE  PUBLIC  HEALTH , SAFETY , CONVENIENCE , DECENCY AND  MORALS  
268. Public nuisance .—A person is guilty of a public nuisance who does any act or is guilty of an 
illegal omission whi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 66]
 .—A person is guilty of a public nuisance who does any act or is guilty of an 
illegal omission which causes any common injury, danger or annoyance to the public or to the people in 
general who dwell or occupy property in the vicinity, or which must necessaril y cause injury, obstruction, 
danger or annoyance to persons who may have occasion to use any public right. 
A common nuisance is not excused on the ground that it causes some convenience or advantage. 
269. Negligent act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life .—Whoever unlawfully or 
negligently does any act which is, and which he knows or has reason to believe to be, likel y to spread the 
infection of any disease dangerous to life, shall be punished with imprisonment of either  description for a 
term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both. 
270. Malignant act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life .—Whoever malignantly 
does any act which is, and which he knows or has reason to believe to be, likely to spread the infection of 
any disease dangerous to life, shall be punished with imprisonment of either descript ion for a term which 
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
271. Disobedience to quarantine rule .—Whoever knowingly disobeys any rule made and 
promulgated 2[by the 3*** Government 4***] for putting any vessel into a state of quarantine, or for 
regulating the intercourse of vessels in a state of quarantine with the shore or  with other vessels, or for 
regulating the intercourse between places where an infectious disease prevails and other places, shall be 
                                                           
1. The word “and” omitted by Act 42 of 1953, s. 4 and the Third Sch. 
2. Subs. by the A. O. 1937, for “by th e G. of I., or by any Govt. ”. 
3. The words “Central or any Provincial” omitted by the A. O. 1950.  
4. The words “or the Crown Representative” omitted by the A. O. 1948.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 66]
e words “or the Crown Representative” omitted by the A. O. 1948.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 67]
67 
 punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend t o six months, or with 
fine, or with both. 
272. Adulteration of food or drink intended for sale .—Whoever adulterates any article of food or 
drink, so as to make such article noxious as food or drink, intending to sell such ar ticle as food or drink, 
or knowing it to be likely that the same will be sold as food or drink, shall be punished with imprisonment 
of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees, or with both. 
273. Sale of noxious food or drink .—Whoever sells, or offers or exposes for sale, as food or drink, 
any article which has been rendered or has become noxious, or is in a state unfit for f ood or drink, 
knowing or having reason to believe that the same is noxious as food or drink, shall be pu nished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or  with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
274. Adulteration of drugs .—Whoever adulterates any drug or medical preparation in such a manner 
as to lessen the efficacy or change the operation of such drug or medical preparati on, or to make it 
noxious, intending that it shall be sold or used for, or knowing it to be likely that it will be sold or used 
for, any medicinal purpose, as if it had not undergone such adulteration, shall be pun ished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or  with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
275. Sale of adulterated drugs .—Whoever, knowing any drug or medical preparation to have been 
adulterated in such a manner as to lessen its efficacy, to change its operation, or to render it noxious, sells 
the same, or offers or exposes it for sale, or issues it from any dispensary f or medicinal purposes as 
unadulterated, or causes it to be used for medicinal purposes by any person not knowi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 67]
l purposes as 
unadulterated, or causes it to be used for medicinal purposes by any person not knowi ng of the 
adulteration, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
276. Sale of drug as a different drug or preparation .—Whoever knowingly sells, or offers or 
exposes for sale, or issues from a dispensary for medicinal purposes, any drug or medical preparatio n, as a 
different drug or medical preparation, shall be punished with imprisonment of either  description for a 
term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupee s, or with 
both. 
277. Fouling water of public spring or reservoir .—Whoever voluntarily corrupts or fouls the water 
of any public spring or reservoir, so as to render it less fit for the purpose  for which it is ordinarily used, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three months, 
or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
278. Making atmosphere noxious to health .—Whoever voluntarily vitiates the atmosphere in any 
place so as to make it noxious to the health of persons in general dwelling or carryi ng on business in the 
neighbourhood or passing along a public way, shall be punished with fine which may extend to fi ve 
hundred rupees. 
279. Rash driving or riding on a public way .—Whoever drives any vehicle, or rides, on any public 
way in a manner so rash or negligent as to endanger human life, or to be likely t o cause hurt or injury to 
any other person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a t erm which may extend 
to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
280. Rash navigation of vessel .—Whoever navigates any vessel in a manner so rash or negligent as 
to endanger human life, or to be likely to cause hurt or injury to any other pers
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 67]
h or negligent as 
to endanger human life, or to be likely to cause hurt or injury to any other person , shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or  with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
281. Exhibition of false light, mark or buoy .—Whoever exhibits any false light, mark or buoy, 
intending or knowing it to be likely that such exhibition will mislead any navigator, shall be punished 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 68]
68 
 with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven y ears, or with fine, or wit h 
both.  
282. Conveying person by water for hire in unsafe or overloaded vessel .—Whoever knowingly or 
negligently conveys, or causes to be conveyed for hire, any person by water in any vessel, when that 
vessel is in such a state or so loaded as to endanger the life of that per son, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or  with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
283. Danger or obstruction in public way or line of navigation .—Whoever, by doing any act, or 
by omitting to take order with any property in his possession or under his charge, causes danger, 
obstruction or injury to any person in any public way or public line of navigation, sha ll be punished, with 
fine which may extend to two hundred rupees. 
 284. Negligent conduct with respect to poisonous substance .—Whoever does, with any poisonous 
substance, any act in a manner so rash or negligent as to endanger human life, or to be likely to cause hurt 
or injury to any person, 
or knowingly or negligently omits to take such order with any poisonous substance in h is possession 
as is sufficient to guard against probable danger to human life from such poisonous substance, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which m ay extend to six months, 
or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
285. Negligent conduct with respect to fire or combustible matter .—Whoever does, with fire or 
any combustible matter, any act so rashly or negligently as to endanger human lif e, or to be likely to 
cause hurt or injury to any other person, 
or knowingly or negligently omits to take such order with any fire or any com bustible matter in his 
possession as is sufficient to guard against any probable danger to human life from such fi re or 
combustible matter, 
shall be 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 68]
o guard against any probable danger to human life from such fi re or 
combustible matter, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which m ay extend to six months, 
or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
286. Negligent conduct with respect to explosive substance .—Whoever does, with any explosive 
substance, any act so rashly or negligently as to endanger human life, or to be likel y to cause hurt or 
injury to any other person, 
or knowingly or negligently omits to take such order with any explosive substance  in his possession 
as is sufficient to guard against any probable danger to human life from that substance, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which m ay extend to six months, 
or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
287. Negligent conduct with respect to machinery .—Whoever does, with any machinery, any act 
so rashly or negligently as to endanger human life or to be likely to cause hurt or  injury to any other 
person, 
or knowingly or negligently omits to take such order with any machinery in his possession or under 
his care as is sufficient to guard against any probable danger to human life from such machinery, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or 
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
288. Negligent conduct with respect to pulling down or repairing buildings .—Whoever, in 
pulling down or repairing any building, knowingly or negligently omits to tak e such order with that 
building as is sufficient to guard against any probable danger to human life from the fa ll of that building, 
or of any part thereof, shall be punished with imprisonment of either descrip tion for a term which may 
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
289. Negligent conduct with respect to animal .—Whoever knowingly
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 68]
ne thousand rupees, or with both. 
289. Negligent conduct with respect to animal .—Whoever knowingly or negligently omits to take 
such order with any animal in his possession as is sufficient to guard against  any probable danger to 
human life, or any probable danger of grievous hurt from such animal, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or  with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 69]
69 
 STATE AMENDMENTS 
Himachal Pradesh. — 
After section 289 of the Indian Penal Code, in its application to the State of Himachal Pradesh, the 
following section shall be added, namely:  — 
“289-A. Feeding of Monkeys in public place .—Whoever throws eatables in public place, other than 
those notified by the State Government in the Official Gazette, and thereby entice monkeys to assemble at 
such place fro taking eatables which result in causing danger to human life or to be likely to cause injury 
or annoyance to the public or to the people in general or to cause hindrance in smooth runn ing of 
vehicular traffic, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description f or a term which may extend 
to one month or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both ”. 
[Vide Himachal Pradesh Act 15 of 2006, sec. 2]. 
290. Punishment for public nuisance in cases not otherwise provided for .—Whoever commits a 
public nuisance in any case not otherwise punishable by this Code, shall be punished with f ine which may 
extend to two hundred rupees. 
291. Continuance of nuisance after injunction to discontinue .—Whoever repeats or continues a 
public nuisance, having been enjoined by any public servant who has lawful authority to iss ue such 
injunction not to repeat or continue such nuisance, shall be punished with simple imprisonment  for a term 
which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both. 
1[292. Sale, etc., of obscene books, etc .—2[(1) For the purposes of sub-section ( 2), a book, pamphlet, 
paper, writing, drawing, painting, representation, figure or any other object, shall be deemed to be 
obscene if it is lascivious or appeals to the prurient interest or if i ts effect, or (where it comprises two or 
more distinct items) the effect of any one of its items, is, if taken as a whole, such as to tend to deprave 
and corrupt persons who are likely, having regard to all relevant circumstances, t o read, see or hear the 
matter contained or
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 69]
 likely, having regard to all relevant circumstances, t o read, see or hear the 
matter contained or embodied in it.] 
3[(2)] Whoever — 
(a) sells, lets to hire, distributes, publicly exhibits or in any manner puts int o circulation, or for 
purposes of sale, hire, distribution, public exhibition or circulation, makes, produces  or has in his 
possession any obscene book, pamphlet, paper, drawing, painting, representation or figur e or any 
other obscene object whatsoever, or 
(b) imports, exports or conveys any obscene object for any of the purposes aforesaid, or  knowing 
or having reason to believe that such object will be sold, let to hire, distribu ted or publicly exhibited 
or in any manner put into circulation, or 
(c) takes part in or receives profits from any business in the course of which he knows or has 
reason to believe that any such obscene objects are, for any of the purposes afor esaid, made, 
produced, purchased, kept, imported, exported, conveyed, publicly exhibited or in any manner put 
into circulation, or 
(d) advertises or makes known by any means whatsoever that any person is engaged or is ready to 
engage in any act which is an offence under this section, or that any such obscene objec t can be 
procured from or through any person, or 
(e) offers or attempts to do any act which is an offence under this section, 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 8 of 1925, s. 2, for s. 292. 
2. Ins. by Act 36 of 1969, s. 2. 
3. S. 292 renumbered as sub-section ( 2) thereof by Act 36 of 1969, s. 2.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 70]
70 
 shall be punished 1[on first conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term w hich may 
extend to two years, and with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, and, in the event of a 
second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
five years, and also with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees]. 
2[Exception .—This section does not extend to — 
(a) any book, pamphlet, paper, writing, drawing, painting, representation or figure — 
(i) the publication of which is proved to be justified as being for the public good on the 
ground that such book, pamphlet, paper, writing, drawing, painting, representation or figure is in 
the interest of science, literature, art or learning or other objects of general concern, or 
(ii) which is kept or used bona fide  for religious purposes; 
(b) any representation sculptured, engraved, painted or otherwise represented on or in — 
(i) any ancient monument within the meaning of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological  
Sites and Remains Act, 1958 (24 of 1958), or  
(ii) any temple, or on any car used for the conveyance of idols, or kept or used for any 
religious purpose.]] 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Orissa 
Amendment of section 292 (45 of 1860) .--In section 292 of the Indian Penal Code (hereinafter Act 
referred to as the said Code), for the words “which may extend to three months ” the words “which may 
extend to two years ” shall be substituted and the following proviso shall be inserted before the Exception,  
namely: — 
“Provided that for a second or any subsequent offence under this section, he shall be punished wit h 
imprisonment of either description for a term which shall  not be less than six months and not more than 
two years and with fine. ” 
[Vide Orissa Act 13 of 1962, s. 2] 
Insertion of new section 292-A in Act 45 of 1860 .—After section 292 of the said Code, the 
following new section shall be inserted, namely: -- 
“292-A.Printing, etc.,
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 70]
2 of the said Code, the 
following new section shall be inserted, namely: -- 
“292-A.Printing, etc., of grossly indecent or scurrilous matter or matter intended for black 
mail .—Whoever — 
(a) Prints or causes to be printed in any newspaper, periodical or circular or   exhibits or causes to be 
exhibited to public  view or distributes or causes to be distributed or in an y manner puts into circulation any 
picture or any printed or written document which is grossly indecent, or is scurrilous or intended for blackmail; 
or 
(b)  Sells or lets for hire, or for purposes of sale or hire makes,  produces or has in his possession, any 
picture or any printed or written document which is grossly indecent o r is scurrilous or intended for blackmail; 
or 
(c) conveys any picture or any printed or written document which is  grossly  indecent or is scurrilous or 
intended for blackmail knowing or having reason to believe that such  picture or document will be printed, sold, 
let for hire, distributed or publicly  exhibited or in any manner  put into circulation; or 
(d) takes part in or receives profits from, any business  in the co urse of which he knows or has reason to 
believe that any  business in the course of which he knows or has r eason to believe that any such newspaper, 
periodical, circular, picture or other printed or written document  is printed, exh ibited, distributed, circulated, sold, let for 
hire, made, produced, kept, conveyed or purchased; or 
(e) advertises or makes known by any means whatsoever that any pers on is engaged or is ready to engage 
in any act which is an offence under this section, or  that any such newspaper, periodical, circular, picture or 
other printed or written document which is grossly indecent or is sc urrilous or intended for blackmail can be 
procured from or through any person; or 
                                                           
1. Subs. Act 36 of 1969,s. 2,for certain words (w.e.f.7-9-1969 ). 
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 70]
           
1. Subs. Act 36 of 1969,s. 2,for certain words (w.e.f.7-9-1969 ). 
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid.,  for Exception (w.e.f.7-9-1969). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 71]
71 
 (f) offers or attempts to do any act which is an offence under this s ection, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or 
with both: 
Provided that for a second or any subsequent offence under this sectio n, he shall be punished with imprisonment 
of either description for a term which  shall not be less than six months a nd not more than two years and with fine. 
Explanation  I— For the purpose of this section, the word “scurrilous ” shall be   deemed to include any matter 
which is likely to be injurious to morality or is calculated to injure any   person: 
Provided that it is not scurrilous to express in good faith anything whatev er respecting the conduct of — 
(I) a public servant in the discharge of his public functions or r especting his character, so far as his 
character appears in that conduct and no further ; or  
(II) any person touching any public question and respecting  his c haracter, so far as his character appears in 
that conduct and no further. 
Explanation  II— In deciding whether any person has committed an offence under this  section, the Court shall 
have regard, inter alia, to the following considerations, namely :— 
(a) the good character of the person charged, and where relevant, the nature of his business; 
(b) the general character and dominant effect of the matter alleged to be grossly indecent or scurrilous or 
intended for blackmail; 
(c) Any evidence offered or called by or on behalf of the accused person as to his intention in committing 
any of the acts specified in this section. ” 
[Vide Orissa Act 13 of 1962, s. 3] 
1[293. Sale, etc., of obscene objects to young person .—Whoever sells, lets to hire, distributes, exhibits or 
circulates to any person under the age of twenty years any such obscen e object as is referred to in the last preceding 
section, or offers or attempts so to do, shall be punished 2[on first conviction with imprisonment of either 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 71]
or offers or attempts so to do, shall be punished 2[on first conviction with imprisonment of either description 
for a term which may extend to three years, and with fine which m ay extend to two thousand rupees, and, in the 
event of a second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment of eit her description for a term which may extend to 
seven years, and also with fine which may extend to five thous and rupees].] 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Orissa 
Amendment of section 293 .--In section 293 of the said Code — 
(i) for the words “ any such obscene object as is referred to in the last preceding secti on”, the words, figures 
and letter “ any such obscene  object as is referred to in section 292 or any s uch newspaper, periodical, circular, 
picture or other printed or written document as is referred to in section 2 92-A ” shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the words “ which  may extend  to six months ”, the words “ which may extend to three years ” shall 
be substituted; 
(iii) in the marginal note, after the words “ obscene objects ” the words “ and grossly indecent or scurrilous 
matter or matter intended for  blackmail ”, shall be inserted. 
[Vide Orissa Act 13 of 1962, s. 4] 
3[294. Obscene acts and songs .—Whoever, to the annoyance of others, 
(a) does any obscene act in any public place, or 
(b) sings, recites or utters any obscene song, ballad or words, in o r near any public place, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term wh ich may extend to three months, or with fine, 
or with both.] 
4[294A. Keeping lottery office .—Whoever keeps any office or place for the purpose of drawing any lottery 
5[not being 6[a State lottery] or a lottery authorised by the 7[State] Government], shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six m onths, or with fine, or with both. 
And whoever publishes any proposal to pay any sum, or to deliver any goods, or to do or forbear doing anything 
for the benefit of any perso
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 71]
y any sum, or to deliver any goods, or to do or forbear doing anything 
for the benefit of any person, on any event or contingency relative or  applicable to the drawing of any ticket, lot, 
number or figure in any such lottery, shall be punished with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.] 
CHAPTER XV 
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO  RELIGION  
295. Injuring or defiling place of worship, with intent to insult the religion of any c lass.—
Whoever destroys, damages or defiles any place of worship, or any object held sacr ed by any class of 
persons with the intention of thereby insulting the religion of any class of persons or with the knowledge 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 8 of 1925, s. 2, for section 293. 
2. Subs. by Act 36 of 1969, s. 2, for certain words (w.e.f. 7-9 -1969).  
3. Subs. by Act 3 of 1895, s. 3, for section 294. 
4. Ins. by Act 27 of 1870, s. 10. 
5. Subs. by the A. O. 1937, for “not authorized by Government”.  
6. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., for “a lottery organized by the Central Government  or the Government of a Part A 
State or a Part B State”.  
7. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “Provincial”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 72]
72 
 that any class of persons is likely to consider such destruction, damage or defilem ent as an insult to their 
religion, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two 
years, or with fine, or with both. 
1[295A. Deliberate and malicious acts, intended to outrage religious feelings of any class by 
insulting its religion or religious beliefs .—Whoever, with deliberate and malicious intention of 
outraging the religious feelings of any class of 2[citizens of India], 3[by words, either spoken or written, or 
by signs or by visible representations or otherwise], insults or attempts to i nsult the religion or the 
religious beliefs of that class, shall be punished with imprisonment of eit her description for a term which 
may extend to 4[three years], or with fine, or with both.] 
296. Disturbing religious assembly .—Whoever voluntarily causes disturbance to any assembly 
lawfully engaged in the performance of religious worship, or religious cerem onies, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.  
297. Trespassing on burial places, etc .—Whoever, with the intention of wounding the feelings of 
any person, or of insulting the religion of any person, or with the knowledge that  the feelings of any 
person are likely to be wounded, or that the religion of any person is likely to be insulted thereby, 
commits any trespass in any place of worship or on any place of sepulture, or any place set apart for 
the performance of funeral rites or as a depository for the remains of the dead, or offers any indignity to 
any human corpse, or causes disturbance to any persons assembled for the performance of funeral 
ceremonies, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or 
with fine, or with both.  
298. Uttering words, etc., with deliberate intent to wound religious feelings .—Whoever, with th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 72]
.  
298. Uttering words, etc., with deliberate intent to wound religious feelings .—Whoever, with the 
deliberate intention of wounding the religious feelings of any person, utters any word or  makes any sound 
in the hearing of that person or makes any gesture in the sight of that person or  places any object in the 
sight of that person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description f or a term which may 
extend to one year, or with fine, or with both. 
CHAPTER XVI 
OF OFFENCES AFFECTING THE  HUMAN  BODY 
Of offences affecting life 
299. Culpable homicide .—Whoever causes death by doing an act with the intention of causing death, 
or with the intention of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cau se death, or with the knowledge that 
he is likely by such act to cause death, commits the offence of culpable homicide. 
Illustrations 
(a) A lays sticks and turf over a pit, with the intention of thereby cau sing death, or with the knowledge that death is likely to 
be thereby caused. Z, believing the ground to be firm, treads on  it, falls in and is killed. A has committed the offence of culpable 
homicide. 
(b) A knows Z to be behind a bush. B does not know it. A, intending  to cause, or knowing it to be likely to cause Z's death, 
induces B to fire at the bush. B fires and kills Z. Here B may be guilty of no offence; but A has committed the offence of culpable 
homicide. 
(c) A, by shooting at a fowl with intent to kill and steal it, kills B, w ho is behind a bush; A not knowing that he was there. 
Here, although A was doing an unlawful act, he was not guilty o f culpable homicide, as he did not intend to kill B, or to cause  
death by doing an act that he knew was likely to cause death . 
Explanation  1.—A person who causes bodily injury to another who is labouring under a disorder, 
disease or bodily infirmity, and thereby accelerates the death of that other, shall be deemed to have c aused 
his death. 
                                             
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 72]
at other, shall be deemed to have c aused 
his death. 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 1927, s. 2. 
2. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “His Majesty’s subjects”.  
3. Subs. by Act 41 of 1961, s. 3, for certain words (w.e.f. 27 -9-1961). 
4. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “two years”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 73]
73 
 Explanation  2.—Where death is caused by bodily injury, the person who causes such bodily injury 
shall be deemed to have caused the death, although by resorting to proper remedies and ski lful treatment 
the death might have been prevented. 
Explanation  3.—The causing of the death of a child in the mother's womb is not homicide. But it ma y 
amount to culpable homicide to cause the death of a living child, if any part of  that child has been brought 
forth, though the child may not have breathed or been completely born. 
300. Murder .—Except in the cases hereinafter excepted, culpable homicide is murder, if the act by 
which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing death, or — 
2ndly .—If it is done with the intention of causing such bodily injury as the offende r knows to be likely 
to cause the death of the person to whom the harm is caused, or — 
3rdly .—If it is done with the intention of causing bodily injury to any person and the bodily injury 
intended to be inflicted is sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death, or — 
4thly .—If the person committing the act knows that it is so imminently dangerous t hat it must, in all 
probability, cause death, or such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, and comm its such act without 
any excuse for incurring the risk of causing death or such injury as aforesaid. 
Illustrations 
(a) A shoots Z with the intention of killing him. Z dies in consequence.  A commits murder. 
(b) A, knowing that Z is labouring under such a disease that a blow is like ly to cause his death, strikes him with the intention 
of causing bodily injury. Z dies in consequence of the blow. A is g uilty of murder, although the blow might not have been 
sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause the death of a p erson in a sound state of health. But if A, not knowing that Z is 
labouring under any disease, gives him such a blow as would not in  the ordinary course of nature kill a person in a sound 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 73]
ease, gives him such a blow as would not in  the ordinary course of nature kill a person in a sound state of 
health, here A, although he may intend to cause bodily injury, is not guilty of murder, if he did not intend to cause death, or such 
bodily injury as in the ordinary course of nature would cause death . 
(c) A intentionally gives Z a sword-cut or club-wound sufficient to cau se the death of a man in the ordinary course of nature. 
Z dies in consequence. Here A is guilty of murder, although he ma y not have intended to cause Z's death. 
(d) A without any excuse fires a loaded cannon into a crowd of  persons and kills one of them. A is guilty of murder, although  
he may not have had a premeditated design to kill any particular i ndividual. 
Exception 1 .—When culpable homicide is not murder .—Culpable homicide is not murder if the 
offender, whilst deprived of the power of self-control by grave and sudden provocation, c auses the death 
of the person who gave the provocation or causes the death of any other person by mistake or accident. 
The above exception is subject to the following provisos: — 
First .—That the provocation is not sought or voluntarily provoked by the offender as an excus e for 
killing or doing harm to any person. 
Secondly .—That the provocation is not given by anything done in obedience to the law, or by a public  
servant in the lawful exercise of the powers of such public servant. 
Thirdly .—That the provocation is not given by anything done in the lawful exercise of the right of 
private defence. 
Explanation .—Whether the provocation was grave and sudden enough to prevent the offence from 
amounting to murder is a question of fact. 
Illustrations 
(a) A, under the influence of passion excited by a provocation given by Z, intentionally kills Y, Z's child. This is murder, 
inasmuch as the provocation was not given by the child, and th e death of the child was not caused by accident or misfortune in  
doing an act caused by the provoc
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 73]
e death of the child was not caused by accident or misfortune in  
doing an act caused by the provocation. 
(b) Y gives grave and sudden provocation to A. A, on this provoc ation, fires a pistol at Y, neither intending nor knowing 
himself to be likely to kill Z, who is near him, but out of sight. A kills Z. Here A has not committed murder, but merely culpable 
homicide. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 74]
74 
 (c) A is lawfully arrested by Z, a bailiff. A is excited to sudden and violent passion by the arrest, and kills Z. This is murder, 
inasmuch as the provocation was given by a thing done by a publi c servant in the exercise of his powers. 
(d) A appears as a witness before Z, a Magistrate. Z says that he does no t believe a word of A's deposition, and that A has 
perjured himself. A is moved to sudden passion by these words, and kills Z. This is murder. 
(e) A attempts to pull Z's nose. Z, in the exercise of the right of p rivate defence, lays hold of A to prevent him from doing 
so. A is moved to sudden and violent passion in consequence, an d kills Z. This is murder, inasmuch as the provocation was 
giving by a thing done in the exercise of the right of private defe nce. 
(f) Z strikes B. B is by this provocation excited to violent rage. A, a by stander, intending to take advantage of B's rage, and 
to cause him to kill Z, puts a knife into B's hand for that purpose. B kills Z with the knife. Here B may have committed only 
culpable homicide, but A is guilty of murder.  
Exception 2 .—Culpable homicide is not murder if the offender, in the exercise in good faith of t he 
right of private defence of person or property, exceeds the power given to h im by law and causes the 
death of the person against whom he is exercising such right of defence without prem editation, and 
without any intention of doing more harm than is necessary for the purpose of such defence. 
Illustration 
Z attempts to horsewhip A, not in such a manner as to cause grievo us hurt to A. A draws out a pistol. Z persists in the 
assault. A believing in good faith that he can by no other m eans prevent himself from being horsewhipped, shoots Z dead. A has 
not committed murder, but only culpable homicide. 
Exception 3 .—Culpable homicide is not murder if the offender, being a public servant or aiding  a 
public servant acting for the advancement of public justice, exceeds the powers given to hi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 74]
ding  a 
public servant acting for the advancement of public justice, exceeds the powers given to him by law, and 
causes death by doing an act which he, in good faith, believes to be lawful and necessar y for the due 
discharge of his duty as such public servant and without ill-will towards the perso n whose death is 
caused. 
Exception 4 .—Culpable homicide is not murder if it is committed without premeditation i n a sudden 
fight in the heat of passion upon a sudden quarrel and without the offender's having t aken undue 
advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual manner. 
Explanation .—It is immaterial in such cases which party offers the provocation or commits the first 
assault. 
Exception 5 .—Culpable homicide is not murder when the person whose death is caused, being above 
the age of eighteen years, suffers death or takes the risk of death with his own consent.  
Illustration 
A, by instigation, voluntarily causes Z, a person under eighteen years o f age to commit suicide. Here, on account of Z's 
youth, he was incapable of giving consent to his own death; A has there fore abetted murder. 
301. Culpable homicide by causing death of person other than person whose death was 
intended .—If a person, by doing anything which he intends or knows to be likely to ca use death, 
commits culpable homicide by causing the death of any person, whose death he neither intends nor knows 
himself to be likely to cause, the culpable homicide committed by the offender i s of the description of 
which it would have been if he had caused the death of the person whose death he intended or k new 
himself to be likely to cause. 
302. Punishment for murder .—Whoever commits murder shall be punished with death, or 
1[imprisonment for life], and shall also be liable to fine. 
303. Punishment for murder by life-convict .—Whoever, being under sentence of 1[imprisonment 
for life], commits murder shall be punished with death. 
304. Punishment for culpable homicide not amounting to murder .
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 74]
urder shall be punished with death. 
304. Punishment for culpable homicide not amounting to murder .—Whoever commits culpable 
homicide not amounting to murder shall be punished with 1[imprisonment for life], or imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liabl e to fine, if the act by 
which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing death, or of  causing such bodily inju ry as 
is likely to cause death; 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 75]
75 
 or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten y ears, or with fine, or with 
both, if the act is done with the knowledge that it is likely to cause death, but without any intention to 
cause death, or to cause such bodily injury as is likely to cause death. 
1[304A. Causing death by negligence .—Whoever causes the death of any person by doing any rash 
or negligent act not amounting to culpable homicide, shall be punished with imprisonment  of either 
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.] 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Himachal Pradesh. — 
After Section 304 A of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, in its application to the State of  Himachal 
Pradesh, the following section shall be added, namely : — 
“304-AA. Causing death or injury by driving a public service vehicle while in a s tate of 
intoxication .—Whoever, while in a state of intoxication, drives or attempts to drive a publ ic service 
vehicle and causes the death of any person not amounting to culpable homicide, or causes any  bodily 
injury likely to cause death, shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or im prisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine, as if the act by 
which death or bodily injury is caused, is done with the knowledge that he is lik ely by such act to cause 
death or cause such bodily injury as is likely to cause death. 
Explanation . —“Public service vehicle ” means any motor vehicle used or adapted to be used for the 
carriage of passengers for hire or reward, and includes a maxicab, a motorcab, contra ct carriage and stage 
carriage ”. 
[Vide Himachal Pradesh Act 19 of 1997, sec. 2]. 
In Section 304-AA of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, in its application to the State of  Himachal 
Pradesh , — 
(a) for the words “a public service vehicle ” where ever these occur, the words “any vehicle ” shall 
be substituted; and  
(b) the Explanation shall be omitted. 
[
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 75]
ccur, the words “any vehicle ” shall 
be substituted; and  
(b) the Explanation shall be omitted. 
[Vide Himachal Pradesh Act 7 of 2012, s. 2] 
2[304B. Dowry death .—(1) Where the death of a woman is caused by any burns or bodily injury or 
occurs otherwise than under normal circumstances within seven years of her marri age and it is shown that 
soon before her death she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relat ive of her 
husband for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, such death shall be called “dowry death ”, and 
such husband or relative shall be deemed to have caused her death. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub-section, “dowry ” shall have the same meaning as in 
section 2 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (28 of 1961). 
(2) Whoever commits dowry death shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which sha ll not be 
less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment for life .] 
305. Abetment of suicide of child or insane person .—If any person under eighteen years of age, 
any insane person, any delirious person, any idiot, or any person in a state of intoxication, commits  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 27 of 1870, s. 12. 
2. Ins. by Act 43 of 1986, s. 10 (w.e.f. 19- 11-1986). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 76]
76 
 suicide, whoever abets the commission of such suicide, shall be punished with death or 1[imprisonment 
for life], or imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.  
306. Abetment of suicide .—If any person commits suicide, whoever abets the commission of such 
suicide, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term  which may extend to ten 
years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
307. Attempt to murder .—Whoever does any act with such intention or knowledge, and under such 
circumstances that, if he by that act caused death, he would be guilty of murder, shal l be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and sha ll also be liable to 
fine; and if hurt is caused to any person by such act, the offender shall be liab le either to 1[imprisonment 
for life], or to such punishment as is hereinbefore mentioned. 
Attempts by life-convicts .—2[When any person offending under this section is under sentence of 
1[imprisonment for life], he may, if hurt is caused, be punished with death.] 
Illustrations 
(a) A shoots at Z with intention to kill him, under such circumstances that, if death ensued, A would be guilty of murder. A 
is liable to punishment under this section. 
(b) A, with the intention of causing the death of a child of tend er years, exposes it in a desert place. A has committed the 
offence defined by this section, though the death of the child  does not ensue. 
(c) A, intending to murder Z, buys a gun and loads it. A has not yet c ommitted the offence. A fires the gun at Z. He has 
committed the offence defined in this section, and, if by such firi ng he wounds Z, he is liable to the punishment provided by the 
latter part of  3[the first paragraph of] this section. 
(d) A, intending to murder Z by poison, purchases poison and mixes the  same with food which remains in A's keeping; A 
has not yet committed the offence defined in this section. A pla
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 76]
od which remains in A's keeping; A 
has not yet committed the offence defined in this section. A places the f ood on Z's table or delivers it to Z's servants to place it on 
Z's table. A has committed the offence defined in this section. 
 308. Attempt to commit culpable homicide .—Whoever does any act with such intention or 
knowledge and under such circumstances that, if he by that act caused death, he would be guilt y of 
culpable homicide not amounting to murder, shall be punished with imprisonment of eit her description 
for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both; and, if  hurt is caused to any person 
by such act, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which m ay extend to 
seven years, or with fine, or with both. 
Illustration 
A, on grave and sudden provocation, fires a pistol at Z, unde r such circumstances that if he thereby caused death he would 
be guilty of culpable homicide not amounting to murder. A has commit ted the offence defined in this section. 
309. Attempt to commit suicide .—Whoever attempts to commit suicide and does any act towards 
the commission of such offence, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a t erm which may 
extend to one year 4[or with fine, or with both.] 
310. Thug .—Whoever, at any time after the passing of this Act, shall have been habitually assoc iated 
with any other or others for the purpose of committing robbery or child-steal ing by means of or 
accompanied with murder, is a thug. 
311. Punishment .—Whoever is a thug, shall be punished with 1[imprisonment for life], and shall also 
be liable to fine. 
Of the causing of miscarriage, of injuries to unborn children, of the exposure  
of infants, and of the concealment of births. 
312. Causing miscarraige .—Whoever voluntarily causes a woman with child to miscarry, shall, if 
such miscarriage be not caused in good faith for the purpose of saving the life of the woman, be punished 
with imprisonment of eith
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 76]
n good faith for the purpose of saving the life of the woman, be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three y ears, or with fine, or with 
both; and, if the woman be quick with child, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for 
a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1956). 
2. Ins. by Act 24 of 1870, s. 11.  
3. Ins. by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and the Second Sch. 
4. Subs. by Act 8 of 1882, s. 7, for “and shall also be liable to fine”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 77]
77 
 Explanation .—A woman who causes herself to miscarry, is within the meaning of this section.  
313. Causing miscarriage without woman's consent .—Whoever commits the offence defined in 
the last preceding section without the consent of the woman, whether the woman is  quick with child o r 
not, shall be punished with 1[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.  
314. Death caused by act done with intent to cause miscarriage .—Whoever, with intent to cause 
the miscarriage of a woman with child, does any act which causes the death of such woman, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to t en years, and shall also 
be liable to fine; 
if act done without woman's consent .—and if the act is done without the consent of the woman, 
shall be punished either with 1[imprisonment for life], or with the punishment above mentioned. 
Explanation .—It is not essential to this offence that the offender should know that the  act is likely to 
cause death. 
315. Act done with intent to prevent child being born alive or to cause it to die after birth .—
Whoever before the birth of any child does any act with the intention of thereby pr eventing that child 
from being born alive or causing it to die after its birth, and does by such act prevent that child from bei ng 
born alive, or causes it to die after its birth, shall, if such act be not caused in g ood faith for the purpose of 
saving the life of the mother, be punished with imprisonment of either descript ion for a term which may 
extend to ten years, or with fine, or with both. 
316. Causing death of quick unborn child by act amounting to culpable homicide .—Whoever 
does any act under such circumstances, that if he thereby caused death he would be guilty of culpable 
homicide, and does by such act cause the death of a quick unborn child, shall be punished wit h 
imprisonmen
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 77]
, and does by such act cause the death of a quick unborn child, shall be punished wit h 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
Illustration 
A, knowing that he is likely to cause the death of a pregnant w oman, does an act which, if it caused the death of the woman,  
would amount to culpable homicide. The woman is injured, but does n ot die; but the death of an unborn quick child with which 
she is pregnant is thereby caused. A is guilty of the offence define d in this section. 
317. Exposure and abandonment of child under twelve years, by parent or person having care 
of it.—Whoever being the father or mother of a child under the age of twelve years, or hav ing the care of 
such child, shall expose or leave such child in any place with the intention of wholly abandoning such 
child, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which m ay extend to seven 
years, or with fine, or with both. 
Explanation .—This section is not intended to prevent the trial of the offender for murder or  culpable 
homicide, as the case may be, if the child die in consequence of the exposure. 
318. Concealment of birth by secret disposal of dead body .—Whoever, by secretly burying or 
otherwise disposing of the dead body of a child whether such child die before or after or during its birth, 
intentionally conceals or endeavors to conceal the birth of such child, shall be punished wit h 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or w ith both. 
Of Hurt 
319. Hurt .—Whoever causes bodily pain, disease or infirmity to any person is said to cause hurt. 
320. Grievous hurt .—The following kinds of hurt only are designated as “grievous ”:— 
First .—Emasculation. 
Secondly .—Permanent privation of the sight of either eye. 
Thirdly .—Permanent privation of the hearing of either ear. 
                                                           
1. Sub
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 77]
on of the hearing of either ear. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1956). 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 78]
78 
 Fourthly .—Privation of any member or joint. 
Fifthly .—Destruction or permanent impairing of the powers of any member or joint. 
Sixthly .—Permanent disfiguration of the head or face. 
Seventh ly.—Fracture or dislocation of a bone or tooth. 
Eighthly .—Any hurt which endangers life or which causes the sufferer to be during the space of 
twenty days in severe bodily pain, or unable to follow his ordinary pursuits. 
321. Voluntarily causing hurt .—Whoever does any act with the intention of thereby causing hurt to 
any person, or with the knowledge that he is likely thereby to cause hurt to any  person, and does thereby 
cause hurt to any person, is said “voluntarily to cause hurt ”.  
322. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt .—Whoever voluntarily causes hurt, if the hurt which he 
intends to cause or knows himself to be likely to cause is grievous hurt, and if t he hurt which he causes is 
grievous hurt, is said “voluntarily to cause grievous hurt ”. 
Explanation .—A person is not said voluntarily to cause grievous hurt except when he both cause s 
grievous hurt and intends or knows himself to be likely to cause grievous hurt. But he is said voluntarily 
to cause grievous hurt, if intending or knowing himself to be likely to caus e grievous hurt of one kind, he 
actually causes grievous hurt of another kind. 
Illustration 
A, intending of knowing himself to be likely permanently to disf igure Z's face, gives Z a blow which does not permanently 
disfigure Z's face, but which causes Z to suffer severe bodily pain for the space of twenty days. A has voluntarily caused grievous 
hurt. 
323. Punishment for voluntarily causing hurt .—Whoever, except in the case provided for by 
section 334, voluntarily causes hurt, shall be punished with imprisonment of either descript ion for a term 
which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
324. Voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous weapons or means .—Whoever, except in the case
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 78]
ith both. 
324. Voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous weapons or means .—Whoever, except in the case 
provided for by section 334, voluntarily causes hurt by means of any instrument for shooti ng, stabbing or 
cutting, or any instrument which, used as a weapon of offence, is likely to cause death, or by means of f ire 
or any heated substance, or by means of any poison or any corrosive substance, or by means o f any 
explosive substance or by means of any substance which it is deleterious to the hum an body to inhale, to 
swallow, or to receive into the blood, or by means of any animal, shall be punished wi th imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
325. Punishment for voluntarily causing grievous hurt .—Whoever, except in the case provided for 
by section 335, voluntarily causes grievous hurt, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
326. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt by dangerous weapons or means .—Whoever, except in 
the case provided for by section 335, voluntarily causes grievous hurt by means of any instrument for 
shooting, stabbing or cutting, or any instrument which, used as a weapon of offence, is lik ely to cause 
death, or by means of fire or any heated substance, or by means of any poison or any corrosive substance, 
or by means of any explosive substance, or by means of any substance which it is deleterious to the 
human body to inhale, to swallow, or to receive into the blood, or by means of any animal, shall be 
punished with 1[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of either description for a t erm which may 
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
2[326A. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt by use of acid, etc .—Whoever causes permanent or 
partial damage or deformity to, or burns or maims or disfigures or disables, any  part or parts of the body 
of a person or
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 78]
mity to, or burns or maims or disfigures or disables, any  part or parts of the body 
of a person or causes grievous hurt by throwing acid on or by administering acid to t hat person, or by 
using any other means with the intention of causing or with the knowledge that h e is likely to cause such 
injury or hurt, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a ter m which shall not be less 
than ten years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and with fine: 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1956). 
2. Ins. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 5 (w.e.f. 3-2-2013).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 79]
79 
 Provided that such fine shall be just and reasonable to meet the medical expenses of the treatment of 
the victim: 
Provided further that any fine imposed under this section shall be paid to the victim. 
326B. Voluntarily throwing or attempting to throw acid .—Whoever throws or attempts to throw 
acid on any person or attempts to administer acid to any person, or attempts to use  any other means, with 
the intention of causing permanent or partial damage or deformity or burns or m aiming or disfigurement 
or disability or grievous hurt to that person, shall be punished with imprisonment of ei ther description for 
a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to seven years, and shall also be 
liable to fine. 
Explanation  1.—For the purposes of section 326A and this section, "acid" includes any substance 
which has acidic or corrosive character or burning nature, that is capable of c ausing bodily injury leading 
to scars or disfigurement or temporary or permanent disability. 
Explanation  2.—For the purposes of section 326A and this section, permanent or partial damage o r 
deformity shall not be required to be irreversible.] 
327. Voluntarily causing hurt to extort property, or to constrain to an illegal to an act .—
Whoever voluntarily causes hurt, for the purpose of extorting from the sufferer, or fr om any person 
interested in the sufferer, any property or valuable security, or of constraining  the sufferer or any person 
interested in such sufferer to do anything which is illegal or which may fac ilitate the commission of an 
offence, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term  which may extend to ten 
years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
328. Causing hurt by means of poison, etc., with intent to commit and offence .—Whoever 
administers to or causes to be taken by any person any poison or any stupefying, intoxicating or 
unwholesome drug, or other thing with intent to cause hurt to such person, or wi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 79]
g, intoxicating or 
unwholesome drug, or other thing with intent to cause hurt to such person, or with intent to commit or to 
facilitate the commission of an offence or knowing it to be likely that he w ill thereby cause hurt, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also 
be liable to fine.  
329. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt to extort property, or to constrain to an illegal act .—
Whoever voluntarily causes grievous hurt for the purpose of extorting from t he sufferer or from any 
person interested in the sufferer any property or valuable security, or of constraining the sufferer or any 
person interested in such sufferer to do anything that is illegal or which  may facilitate the commission of 
an offence, shall be punished with 1[imprisonment for life], or imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
330. Voluntarily causing hurt to extort confession, or to compel restoration of propert y.—
Whoever voluntarily causes hurt, for the purpose of extorting from the suffer er or from any person 
interested in the sufferer, any confession or any information which may lead to the detection of an offence 
or misconduct, or for the purpose of constraining the sufferer or any person interest ed in the sufferer to 
restore or to cause the restoration of any property or valuable security or to sat isfy any claim or demand, 
or to give information which may lead to the restoration of any property or  valuable security, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall 
also be liable to fine. 
Illustrations 
(a) A, a police-officer, tortures Z in order to induce Z to confess that h e committed a crime. A is guilty of an offence under 
this section. 
(b) A, a police-officer, tortures B to induce him to point out where cert ain stolen property is deposited. A is guilty of an
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 79]
tortures B to induce him to point out where cert ain stolen property is deposited. A is guilty of an 
offence under this section. 
(c) A, a revenue officer, tortures Z in order to compel him to pay certain arrears of revenue due fro m Z. A is guilty of an 
offence under this section. 
(d) A, a zamindar, tortures a raiyat in order to compel him to pay his re nt. A is guilty of an offence under this section. 
331. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt to extort confession, or to compel restoration of 
property .—Whoever voluntarily causes grievous hurt for the purpose of extorting from the suf ferer or 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1956).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 80]
80 
 from any person interested in the sufferer any confession or any information whi ch may lead to the 
detection of an offence or misconduct, or for the purpose of constraining the sufferer o r any person 
interested in the sufferer to restore or to cause the restoration of any property or valuable security, or to 
satisfy any claim or demand or to give information which may lead to the r estoration of any property or 
valuable security, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a t erm which may extend 
to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
332. Voluntarily causing hurt to deter public servant from his duty .—Whoever voluntarily causes 
hurt to any person being a public servant in the discharge of his duty as such public servant, or  with intent 
to prevent or deter that person or any other public servant from dischargi ng his duty as such public 
servant, or in consequence of anything done or attempted to be done by that person in the lawful 
discharge of his duty as such public servant, shall be punished with imprisonment of either  description for 
a term which may extend to three yea rs, or with fine, or with both. 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Maharashtra. 
Amendment of section 332 of 45 of 1860 .—In section 332 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, in its 
application to the State of Maharashtra (hereinafter, in this Chapter, refer red to as “the said Code ”), for 
the words “three years ” the words “five years ” shall be substituted. 
[Vide Maharashtra Act 50 of 2018, sec. 2] 
333. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt to deter public servant from his duty .—Whoever 
voluntarily causes grievous hurt to any person being a public servant in the discharge of his duty as such 
public servant, or with intent to prevent or deter that person or any o ther public servant from discharging 
his duty as such public servant, or in consequence of anything done or attempted to be done by t hat 
person in the lawful discharge of his duty as such public servant,
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 80]
or attempted to be done by t hat 
person in the lawful discharge of his duty as such public servant, shall be punished wit h imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
334. Voluntarily causing hurt on provocation .—Whoever voluntarily causes hurt on grave and 
sudden provocation, if he neither intends nor knows himself to be likely to cause hurt to any person other 
than the person who gave the provocation, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description f or a 
term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
335. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt on provocation .—Whoever 1[voluntarily] causes grievous 
hurt on grave and sudden provocation, if he neither intends nor knows himself to be lik ely to cause 
grievous hurt to any person other than the person who gave the provocation, shall be punished wit h 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to four yea rs, or with fine which may 
extend to two thousand rupees, or with both.  
Explanation .—The last two sections are subject to the same provisos as Exception  1, section 300. 
336. Act endangering life or personal safety of others .—Whoever does any act so rashly or 
negligently as to endanger human life or the personal safety of others, shall be pun ished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three months or with fine which may 
extend to two hundred and fifty rupees, or with both. 
337. Causing hurt by act endangering life or personal safety of others .—Whoever causes hurt to 
any person by doing any act so rashly or negligently as to endanger human life, or the per sonal safety of 
others, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which m ay extend to six 
months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
338. Causing grievous hurt by act endangering life or personal safe
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 80]
e hundred rupees, or with both. 
338. Causing grievous hurt by act endangering life or personal safety of others .—Whoever 
causes grievous hurt to any person by doing any act so rashly or negligently as to endanger  human life, or 
the personal safety of others, shall be punished with imprisonment of either desc ription for a term which 
may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to o ne thousand rupees, or with both. 
Of wrongful restraint and wrongful confinement 
339. Wrongful restraint .—Whoever voluntarily obstructs any person so as to prevent that person 
from proceeding in any direction in which that person has a right to proceed, is sa id wrongfully to restrain 
that person. 
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 8 of 1882, s. 8. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 81]
81 
 Exception .—The obstruction of a private way over land or water which a person in good fai th 
believes himself to have a lawful right to obstruct, is not an offence within the meaning of this section.  
Illustration 
A obstructs a path along which Z has a right to pass, A not believ ing in good faith that he has a right to stop the path. Z is 
thereby prevented from passing. A wrongfully restrains Z. 
340. Wrongful confinement .—Whoever wrongfully restrains any person in such a manner as to 
prevent that person from proceeding s beyond certain circumscribing limits, is said “wrongfully to 
confine ” that person. 
Illustrations 
(a) A causes Z to go within a walled space, and locks Z in Z. is thus prevented from proceeding in any direction beyond the  
circumscribing line of wall. A wrongfully confines Z. 
(b) A places men with firearms at the outlets of a building, and tells Z th at they will fire at Z if Z attempts to leave the 
building. A wrongfully confines Z. 
341. Punishment for wrongful restraint .—Whoever wrongfully restrains any person shall be 
punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or w ith fine which may 
extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
342. Punishment for wrongful confinement .—Whoever wrongfully confines any person shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine 
which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
343. Wrongful confinement for three or more days .—Whoever wrongfully confines any person for 
three days, or more, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description  for a term which may 
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
344. Wrongful con finement for ten or more days .—Whoever wrongfully confines any person for 
ten days, or more, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term w hich may extend 
to three years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
345. Wrongful confinement
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 81]
term w hich may extend 
to three years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
345. Wrongful confinement of person for whose liberation writ has been issued .—Whoever 
keeps any person in wrongful confinement, knowing that a writ for the liberation of  that person has been 
duly issued, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term w hich may extend to 
two years in addition to any term of imprisonment to which he may be li able under any other section of 
this Chapter. 
346. Wrongful confinement in secret .—Whoever wrongfully confines any person in such manner as 
to indicate an intention that the confinement of such person may not be known to any per son interested in 
the person so confined, or to any public servant, or that the place of such confinement may not be known 
to or discovered by any such person or public servant as hereinbefore mentioned, shall b e punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years in addition to any other 
punishment to which he may be liable for such wrongful confinement. 
347. Wrongful confinement to extort property, or constrain to illegal act .—Whoever wrongfully 
confines any person for the purpose of extorting from the person confined, or from an y person interested 
in the person confined, any property or valuable security or of constraining the person confined or any 
person interested in such person to do anything illegal or to give any informati on which may facilitate the 
commission of an offence, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which 
may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
348. Wrongful confinement to extort confession, or compel restoration of property .—Whoever 
wrongfully confines any person for the purpose of extorting from the person confined or any person 
interested in the person confined any confession or any information which may lead t o the detection of an 
offence or misconduct, or for the p
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 81]
ssion or any information which may lead t o the detection of an 
offence or misconduct, or for the purpose of constraining the person confined or any  person interested in 
the person confined to restore or to cause the restoration of any property or v aluable security or to satisfy 
any claim or demand, or to give information which may lead to the restoration of any property or valuable 
security, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term  which may extend to three 
years, and shall also be liable to fine.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 82]
82 
 Of Criminal Force and Assault 
349. Force .—A person is said to use force to another if he causes motion, change of motion, o r 
cessation of motion to that other, or if he causes to any substance such motion, or  change of motion, or 
cessation of motion as brings that substance into contact with any part of that ot her's body, or with 
anything which that other is wearing or carrying, or with anything so situated that such contact af fects that 
other's sense of feeling: Provided that the person causing the motion, or change of motion, or cessation of 
motion, causes that motion, change of motion, or cessation of motion in one of the th ree ways hereinafter 
described: 
First .—By his own bodily power. 
Secondly .—By disposing any substance in such a manner that the motion or change or cessation of 
motion takes place without any further act on his part, or on the part of any other person. 
Thirdly .—By inducing any animal to move, to change its motion, or to cease to move. 
350. Criminal force .—Whoever intentionally uses force to any person, without that person's consent, 
in order to the committing of any offence, or intending by the use of such force to cause, or knowing it to 
be likely that by the use of such force he will cause injury, fear or annoyanc e to the person to whom th e 
force is used, is said to use criminal force to that other. 
Illustrations 
(a) Z is sitting in a moored boat on a river. A unfastens the moorings, and thus intentionally causes the boat to drift down th e 
stream. Here A intentionally causes motion to Z, and he does this by disposing substances in such a manner that the motion is 
produced without any other action on any person's part. A ha s therefore intentionally used force to Z; and if he has done so 
without Z's consent, in order to the committing of any offence , or intending or knowing it to be likely that this use of force will 
cause injury, fear or annoyance to Z, A has used criminal force to Z. 
(b) Z is riding i
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 82]
force will 
cause injury, fear or annoyance to Z, A has used criminal force to Z. 
(b) Z is riding in a chariot. A lashes Z's horses, and thereby causes them to  quicken their pace. Here A has caused change of 
motion to Z by inducing the animals to change their motion. A has th erefore used force to Z; and if A has done this without Z's 
consent, intending or knowing it to be likely that he may thereb y injure, frighten or annoy Z, A has used criminal force to Z. 
(c) Z is riding in a palanquin. A, intending to rob Z, seizes the pole a nd stops the palanquin. Here A has caused cessation of 
motion to Z, and he has done this by his own bodily power. A ha s therefore used force to Z; and as A has acted thus intentionally, 
without Z's consent, in order to the commission of an offence . A has used criminal force to Z. 
(d) A intentionally pushes against Z in the street. Here A has by his own b odily power moved his own person so as to bring 
it into contact with Z. He has therefore intentionally used force to Z; a nd if he has done so without Z's consent, intending or 
knowing it to be likely that he may thereby injure, frighten or anno y Z, he has used criminal force to Z. 
(e) A throws a stone, intending or knowing it to be likely that the stone will be thus brought into contact with Z, or with Z's 
clothes, or with something carried by Z, or that it will strike water and d ash up the water against Z's clothes or something carried 
by Z. Here, if the throwing of the stone produce the effect of ca using any substance to come into contact with Z, or Z's clothes, A 
has used force to Z; and if he did so without Z's consent, inten ding thereby to injure, frighten or annoy Z, he has used criminal 
force to Z. 
(f) A intentionally pulls up a woman's veil. Here A intentionally uses fo rce to her, and if he does so without her consent 
intending or knowing it to be likely that he may thereby injure, f righten or annoy her, he has used criminal force to her. 
(g) Z is bathin
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 82]
t he may thereby injure, f righten or annoy her, he has used criminal force to her. 
(g) Z is bathing. A pours into the bath water which he knows to be boil ing. Here A intentionally by his own bodily power 
causes such motion in the boiling water as brings that water into con tact with Z, or with other water so situated that such contact 
must affect Z's sense of feeling; A has therefore intentionally used forc e to Z; and if he has done this without Z's consent 
intending or knowing it to be likely that he may thereby cause in jury, fear or annoyance to Z, A has used criminal force. 
(h) A incites a dog to spring upon Z, without Z's consent. Here, if  A intends to cause injury, fear or annoyance to Z, he uses 
criminal force to Z.  
351. Assault .—Whoever makes any gesture, or any preparation intending or knowing it to be l ikely 
that such gesture or preparation will cause any person present to apprehend that he who m akes that 
gesture or preparation is about to use criminal force to that person, is said to commit an ass ault. 
Explanation. —Mere words do not amount to an assault. But the words which a person uses may give 
to his gestures or preparation such a meaning as may make those gestures or preparat ions amount to an 
assault. 
Illustrations 
(a) A shakes his fist at Z, intending or knowing it to be likely that h e may thereby cause Z to believe that A is about to stri ke 
Z. A has committed an assault. 
(b) A begins to unloose the muzzle of a ferocious dog, intending or kn owing it to be likely that he may thereby cause Z to 
believe that he is about to cause the dog to attack Z. A has comm itted an assault upon Z. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 83]
83 
 (c) A takes up a stick, saying to Z, “I will give you a beating ”. Here, though the words used by A could in no case amount to 
an assault, and though the mere gesture, unaccompanied by an y other circumstances, might not amount to an assault, the gesture 
explained by the words may amount to an assault. 
352. Punishment for assault or criminal force otherwise than on grave provocation .—Whoever 
assaults or uses criminal force to any person otherwise than on grave and sudden provocation given by 
that person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term  which may extend to 
three months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
Explanation .—Grave and sudden provocation will not mitigate the punishment for an offence under 
this section, if the provocation is sought or voluntarily provoked by the of fender as an excuse for the 
offence, or 
if the provocation is given by anything done in obedience to the law, or by a p ublic servant, in the 
lawful exercise of the powers of such public servant, or 
if the provocation is given by anything done in the lawful exercise of the right of private defenc e. 
 Whether the provocation was grave and sudden enough to mitigate the offence, is a question of fact. 
353. Assault or criminal force to deter public servant from discharge of his duty .—Whoever 
assaults or uses criminal force to any person being a public servant in the execution of his duty as such 
public servant, or with intent to prevent or deter that person from discharging his duty as such public 
servant, or in consequence of anything done or attempted to be done by such person to th e lawful 
discharge of his duty as such public servant, shall be punished with imprisonment of either  description for 
a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Maharashtra. — 
Amendment of section 353 of 45 of 1860. —In section 353 of the said Code, for the words “two 
years ” the wo
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 83]
t of section 353 of 45 of 1860. —In section 353 of the said Code, for the words “two 
years ” the words “five years ” shall be substituted. 
[Vide Maharashtra Act 40 of 2018, sec. 3] 
354. Assault or criminal force to woman with intent to outrage her modesty .—Whoever assaults 
or uses criminal force to any woman, intending to outrage or knowing it to be lik ely that he will there by 
outrage her modesty, 1[shall be punished with imprisonment of either desc ription for a term which shall not be less 
than one year but which may extend to five years, a nd shall also be liable to fine].  
STATE AMENDMENT 
Chhattisgarh 
In Section 354 of the Penal Code, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely : — 
Provided that where offence is committed, under this Section by a relative, guardian or t eacher or a 
person in a position of trust or authority towards the person assaulted, he shall be punishabl e with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than two years but which may ext end 
to seven years and shall also be liable to fine. 
[Vide Chhattisgarh Act 25 of 2015, sec. 3] 
2[354A. Sexual harassment and punishment for sexual harassment .—(1) A man committing any of 
the following acts — 
(i) physical contact and advances involving unwelcome and explicit sexual overtures; or 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 6, for “ shall be punished with imprisonment of either descr iption for a term which may extend to two years, or  
with fine, or with both” (w.e.f. 3 -2-2013). 
2. Ins. by s. 7 , ibid., (w.e.f. 3-2-2013). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 84]
84 
 (ii) a demand or request for sexual favours; or 
(iii) showing pornography against the will of a woman; or 
(iv) making sexually coloured remarks,  
shall be guilty of the offence of sexual harassment. 
(2) Any man who commits the offence specified in clause ( i) or clause ( ii) or clause ( iii) of  
sub-section ( 1) shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to t hree years, 
or with fine, or with both. 
(3) Any man who commits the offence specified in clause ( iv) of sub-section ( 1) shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with 
both. 
354B . Assault or use of criminal force to woman with intent to disrobe .—Any man who assaults 
or uses criminal force to any woman or abets such act with the intention of di srobing or compelling her to 
be naked, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term w hich shall not be less 
than three years but which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
354C. Voyeurism .—Any man who watches, or captures the image of a woman engaging in a private 
act in circumstances where she would usually have the expectation of not being obse rved either by the 
perpetrator or by any other person at the behest of the perpetrator or disseminates such image shall be 
punished on first conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term  which shall not be less 
than one year, but which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine, and be punished on a 
second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be 
less than three years, but which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
 Explanation  1.—For the purpose of this section, “private act ” includes an act of watching carried out 
in a place which, in the circumstances, would reasonably be expected to provide pri vacy and where the 
victim's genitals,
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 84]
he circumstances, would reasonably be expected to provide pri vacy and where the 
victim's genitals, posterior or breasts are exposed or covered only in underwear; or the victim is using a 
lavatory; or the victim is doing a sexual act that is not of a kind ordinarily done in public.  
Explanation  2.—Where the victim consents to the capture of the images or any act, but not to t heir 
dissemination to third persons and where such image or act is disseminated, such disseminati on shall be 
considered an offence under this section. 
354D. Stalking .—(1) Any man who — 
(i) follows a woman and contacts, or attempts to contact such woman to foster personal  
interaction repeatedly despite a clear indication of disinterest by such woman; or 
(ii) monitors the use by a woman of the internet, email or any other form of electronic 
communication, 
commits the offence of stalking: 
Provided that such conduct shall not amount to stalking if the man who pursued it pr oves 
that— 
(i) it was pursued for the purpose of preventing or detecting crime and the man accuse d 
of stalking had been entrusted with the responsibility of prevention and detection of crime by 
the State; or 
(ii) it was pursued under any law or to comply with any condition or requirement 
imposed by any person under any law; or 
(iii) in the particular circumstances such conduct was reasonable and justified. 
(2) Whoever commits the offence of stalking shall be punished on first convicti on with imprisonment 
of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall a lso be liable to fine; and be 
punished on a second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment of either description for a term which 
may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine.] 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh (UTs) 
After section 354D, insert the following section, namely:- 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 85]
85 
 354E. Sextortion. —(1) Whoever, — 
(a) being in a position of authority; or 
(b) being in a fiduciary relationship; or 
(c) being a public servant, 
abuses such authority or fiduciary relationship or misuses his official posi tion to employ physical or non 
physical forms of coercion to extort or demand sexual favours from any woman in ex change of some 
benefits or other favours that such person is empowered to grant or withhold, shall  be guilty of offence of 
sextortion. 
Explanation .–For the purpose of this section, ‘sexual favour ’ shall mean and include any kind of 
unwanted sexual activity ranging from sexually suggestive conduct, sexually explic it actions such as 
touching, exposure of private body parts to sexual intercourse, including exposure over the el ectronic 
mode of communication. 
(2) Any person who commits the offence of sextortion shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment 
for a term which shall not be less than three years but may extend to five years and with fine.  
[Ins. by the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganization (Adaptation of Central Laws) Orde r, 2020, vide 
notification No. S.O. 1123( E) dated (18-3-2020) and vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation 
(Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification No. S.O.3774(E), dated (23-10-2020). 
Chhattisgarh 
After Section 354D of the Penal Code, the following shall be inserted, namely :— 
354E. Liability person present who fails to prevent the commission of offenc e under Section 354, 
354A, 354B, 354C, 354D. — 
Whoever, being present at the time of commission of an offence under section 354, sec tion 354A, 
section 354B, section 354C or section 354D and being able to prevent such offence, f ails to prevent the 
commission of such offence or not being in position to prevent the commission of s uch offence, fails to 
give information of the commission of such offence to the nearest magistrate o r police officer, by any 
mode, with the intention of screening the offender from legal
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 85]
magistrate o r police officer, by any 
mode, with the intention of screening the offender from legal punishment, shall be liable for abetment of 
such offence and shall be punished with imprisonment of either description which m ay extend to three 
years or with fine or with both.] 
[Vide Chhattisgarh Act 25 of 2015, s. 3] 
Arunachal Pradesh 
Amendment of section 354. —In section 354 of the principal Act, for the words “shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less  than one year but which may 
extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine “the words “ shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which shall not be less than two years but which may extend to seven years, 
and shall also be liable to fine ” shall be substituted. 
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh Act 3 of 2019, s. 5] 
Amendment of section 354B .—In section 354B of the principal Act, for the words “shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less t han three years but 
which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine ” the words “shall be punished on first 
conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less than three years but 
which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine; and be punished on a second or  
subsequent convicting with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years but 
which may extend to ten years with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees ” shall be substituted. 
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh Act 3 of 2019, s. 6] 
Amendment of section 354D. —In section 354D of the principal Act, for sub-section (2),  the following 
sub-section shall be substituted, namely: -- 
“(2) Whoever commits the offence of stalking shall be punished on first conviction w ith 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years and sha ll also be liable to 
fine; and be 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 85]
r description for a term which may extend to three years and sha ll also be liable to 
fine; and be punished on a second or subsequent conviction with imprisonment or either descr iption for a 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 86]
86 
 term which shall not be less than three years but which may extend to sev en years and with fine which 
shall not be less than one lakh rupees: 
Provided that the count may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the j udgment, 
impose a sentence of lesser period of imprisonment than specified minimum imprisonment. ”. 
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh Act 3 of 2019, s.7] 
355. Assault or criminal force with intent to dishonour person, otherwise than on grave 
provocation. —Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any person, intending thereby to disho nor that 
person, otherwise than on grave and sudden provocation given by that person, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or wi th both.  
356. Assault or criminal force in attempt to commit theft of property carried by a person .—
Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any person, in attempting to commit theft on any property 
which that person is then wearing or carrying, shall be punished with imprisonment of eit her description 
for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
357. Assault or criminal force in attempt wrongfully to confine a person .—Whoever assaults or 
uses criminal force to any person, in attempting wrongfully to confine that pe rson, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
358. Assault or criminal force on grave provocation .—Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to 
any person on grave and sudden provocation given by that person, shall be punished with simple 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to two hundred 
rupees, or with both. 
Explanation .—The last section is subject to the same Explanation  as section 352. 
Of Kidnapping, Abduction, Slavery and Forced Labour 
359. Kidnapping .—Kidnapping is o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 86]
section 352. 
Of Kidnapping, Abduction, Slavery and Forced Labour 
359. Kidnapping .—Kidnapping is of two kinds: kidnapping from 1[India], and kidnapping from 
lawful guardianship. 
360. Kidnapping from India .—Whoever conveys any person beyond the limits of 1[India] without 
the consent of that person, or of some person legally authorised to consent on behalf of that person, is said 
to kidnap that person from 1[India]. 
361. Kidnapping from lawful guardianship .—Whoever takes or entices any minor under 2[sixteen] 
years of age if a male, or under 3[eighteen] years of age if a female, or any person of unsound mind, out of 
the keeping of the lawful guardian of such minor or person of unsound mind, without the consent  of such 
guardian, is said to kidnap such minor or person from lawful guardianship. 
Explanation .—The words “lawful guardian ” in this section include any person lawfully entrusted 
with the care or custody of such minor or other person. 
Exception .—This section does not extend to the act of any person who in good faith believes himsel f 
to be the father of an illegitimate child, or who in good faith believes himself  to be entitled to the lawful 
custody of such child, unless such act is committed for an immoral or unlawful purpose. 
362. Abduction .—Whoever by force compels, or by any deceitful means induces, any person to go 
from any place, is said to abduct that person. 
363. Punishment for kidnapping .—Whoever kidnaps any person from 1[India] or from lawful 
guardianship, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term w hich may extend to 
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
4[363A. Kidnapping or maiming a minor for purposes of begging .—(1) Whoever kidnaps any 
minor or, not being the lawful guardian of a minor, obtains the custody of the mi nor, in order that such 
                                                           
1. The words “British India” have successively been subs. by the A. O. 1 948, the A.
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 86]
               
1. The words “British India” have successively been subs. by the A. O. 1 948, the A. O. 1950 and Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., 
to read as above. 
2. Subs. by Act 42 of 1949, s. 2, for “fourteen”.  
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “sixteen ”. 
4. Ins. by Act 52 of 1959, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15-1-1960). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 87]
87 
 minor may be employed or used for the purposes of begging shall be punishable with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
(2) Whoever maims any minor in order that such minor may be employed or used for the purposes of 
begging shall be punishable with imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine. 
(3) Where any person, not being the lawful guardian of a minor, employs or uses such minor for the 
purposes of begging, it shall be presumed, unless the contrary is proved, that he kidnapped or otherwise 
obtained the custody of that minor in order that the minor might be employed or used for the purposes of 
begging. 
(4) In this section, — 
(a) “begging ” means — 
(i) soliciting or receiving alms in a public place, whether under the pretence of singing, 
dancing, fortunetelling, performing tricks or selling articles or otherwise; 
(ii) entering on any private premises for the purpose of soliciting or receiving alms; 
(iii) exposing or exhibiting, with the object of obtaining or extorting alms, any sor e, wound, 
injury, deformity or disease, whether of himself or of any other person or of an animal; 
(iv) using a minor as an exhibit for the purpose of soliciting or receiving alms; 
(b) “minor ” means — 
(i) in the case of a male, a person under sixteen years of age; and 
(ii) in the case of a female, a person under eighteen years of age.]  
364. Kidnapping or abducting in order to murder .—Whoever kidnaps or abducts any person in 
order that such person may be murdered or may be so disposed of as to be put in danger of be ing 
murdered, shall be punished with 1[imprisonment for life] or rigorous imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
IIIustrations 
(a) A kidnaps Z from 2[India], intending or knowing it to be likely that Z may be sacri ficed to an idol. A has committed the 
offence defined in this section. 
(b) A forcibly carries 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 87]
cri ficed to an idol. A has committed the 
offence defined in this section. 
(b) A forcibly carries or entices B away from his home in order that B may be murdered. A has committed the offence 
defined in this section. 
3[364A. Kidnapping for ransom, etc .—Whoever kidnaps or abducts any person or keeps a person in 
detention after such kidnapping or abduction, and threatens to cause death or hurt to suc h person, or by 
his conduct gives rise to a reasonable apprehension that such person may be put to death or hurt, or causes 
hurt or death to such person in order to compel the Government or 4[any foreign State or international 
inter-governmental organisation or any other person] to do or abstain from doing any act or to pay a 
ransom, shall be punishable with death, or imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fi ne.] 
365. Kidnapping or abducting with intent secretly and wrongfully to confine person .—Whoever 
kidnaps or abducts any person with intent to cause that person to be secretly and wrong fully confined, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term w hich may extend to seven years, 
and shall also be liable to fine. 
366. Kidnapping, abducting or inducing woman to compel her marriage, etc .—Whoever kidnaps 
or abducts any woman with intent that she may be compelled, or knowing it to be l ikely that she will be 
compelled, to marry any person against her will, or in order that she may be forced or seduced to illicit 
intercourse, or knowing it to be likely that she will be forced or seduced to illicit intercourse, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to t en years, and shall also 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1956). 
2. The words “British India” have successively been subs. by the A. O. 19 48, the A. O. 1950 and Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., 
to rea
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 87]
essively been subs. by the A. O. 19 48, the A. O. 1950 and Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., 
to read as above. 
3. Ins. by Act 42 of 1993, s. 2. 
4. Subs. by Act 24 of 1995, s. 2, for “any other person”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 88]
88 
 be liable to fine; 1[and whoever, by means of criminal intimidation as defined in this Code or of abuse of 
authority or any other method of compulsion, induces any woman to go from any place wit h intent that 
she may be, or knowing that it is likely that she will be, forced or seduced t o illicit intercourse with 
another person shall also be punishable as aforesaid]. 
2[366A. Procuration of minor girl .—Whoever, by any means whatsoever, induces any minor girl 
under the age of eighteen years to go from any place or to do any act with inten t that such girl may be, or 
knowing that it is likely that she will be, forced or seduced to illici t intercourse with another person shall 
be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
366B. Importation of girl from foreign country .—Whoever imports into 3[India] from any country 
outside India 4[or from the State of Jammu and Kashmir] any girl under the age of twenty- one years with 
intent that she may be, or knowing it to be likely that she will be, forced or seduced to illicit intercourse 
with another person, 5***shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to ten years and shall 
also be liable to fine.] 
367. Kidnapping or abducting in order to subject person to grievous hurt, slavery, etc .—
Whoever kidnaps or abducts any person in order that such person may be subjected, or may be so 
disposed of as to be put in danger of being subjected to grievous hurt, or slavery, or  to the unnatural lust 
of any person, or knowing it to be likely that such person will be so subjected or dispose d of, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to t en years, and shall also 
be liable to fine. 
368. Wrongfully concealing or keeping in confinement, kidnapped or abducted person .—
Whoever, knowing that any person has been kidnapped or has been abducted, wrongfully conceals or 
confines such person, shall be punished in the
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 88]
dnapped or has been abducted, wrongfully conceals or 
confines such person, shall be punished in the same manner as if he had kidnapped or abducted such 
person with the same intention or knowledge, or for the same purpose as that wit h or for which he 
conceals or detains such person in confinement. 
369. Kidnapping or abducting child under ten years with intent to steal from its person .—
Whoever kidnaps or abducts any child under the age of ten years with the intenti on of taking dishonestly 
any movable property from the person of such child, shall be punished with impri sonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
6[370. Trafficking of person .—(1) Whoever, for the purpose of exploitation, ( a) recruits, ( b) transports, 
(c) harbours, ( d) transfers, or ( e) receives, a person or persons, by — 
First. —using threats, or 
Secondly. —using force, or any other form of coercion, or 
Thirdly. —by abduction, or 
Fourthly. —by practising fraud, or deception, or 
Fifthly. —by abuse of power, or 
Sixthly. —by inducement, including the giving or receiving of  payments or benefits, in order to achieve 
the consent of any person having control over the person recr uited, transported, harboured, transferred or 
received, 
commits the offence of trafficking. 
Explanation 1. —The expression "exploitation" shall include any act of physic al exploitation or any form 
of sexual exploitation, slavery or practices simila r to slavery, servitude, or the forced removal of o rgans. 
Explanation 2. —The consent of the victim is immaterial in determination of the offence of 
trafficking. 
(2) Whoever commits the offence of trafficking shall be punished with rigorous im prisonment for a 
term which shall not be less than seven years, but which may extend to ten years, and shall  also be liable 
to fine. 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 20 of 1923, s. 2.  
2. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. 

<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 88]
                                        
1. Ins. by Act 20 of 1923, s. 2.  
2. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. 
3. The words “British India” have successively been subs. by the A. O. 1948, the A. O. 1950 and Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., 
to read as above.  
4. Ins. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., (w.e.f. 1-4- 1951). 
5. Certain words omitted by s. 3 and the Sch., ibid. 
6. Subs. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 8, for section 370 (w.e.f. 3-2 -2013).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 89]
89 
 (3) Where the offence involves the trafficking of more than one person, it shall be punishable with rigoro us 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less tha n ten years but which may extend to imprisonment fo r life, and 
shall also be liable to fine. 
(4) Where the offence involves the trafficking of a mino r, it shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonmen t for 
a term which shall not be less than ten years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shal l also be liable 
to fine. 
(5) Where the offence involves the trafficking of more than one minor, it sh all be punishable with 
rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than fourteen years, bu t which may extend t o 
imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine. 
(6) If a person is convicted of the offence of trafficking of minor on more than one occasion, then 
such person shall be punished with imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment for the 
remainder of that person's natural life, and shall also be liable to fine. 
(7) When a public servant or a police officer is involved in the trafficking of  any person then, such 
public servant or police officer shall be punished with imprisonment for lif e, which shall mean 
imprisonment for the remainder of that person ’s natural life, and shall also be liable to fine. 
370A. Exploitation of a trafficked person. —(1) Whoever, knowingly or having reason to believe 
that a minor has been trafficked, engages such minor for sexual exploitati on in any manner, shall be 
punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than fi ve years, but which may 
extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
(2) Whoever, knowingly by or having reason to believe that a person has been traf ficked, engages 
such person for sexual exploitation in any manner, shall be punished with rigorous i mprisonment for a 
term which shall not be less than three years, but which may extend to five yea rs, and
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 89]
nment for a 
term which shall not be less than three years, but which may extend to five yea rs, and shall also be liable 
to fine.] 
371. Habitual dealing in slaves .—Whoever habitually imports, exports, removes, buys, sells, traffics 
or deals in slaves, shall be punished with 1[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of either 
description for a term not exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
372. Selling minor for purposes of prostitution, etc .—Whoever sells, lets to hire, or otherwise 
disposes of any 2[person under the age of eighteen years with intent that such person shall at any age be 
employed or used for the purpose of prostitution or illicit intercourse with any  person or for any unlawful 
and immoral purpose, or knowing it to be likely that such person will at any age be] em ployed or used for 
any such purpose, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which ma y extend 
to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
3[Explanation I .—When a female under the age of eighteen years is sold, let for hire, or otherwise 
disposed of to a prostitute or to any person who keeps or manages a brothel, th e person so disposing of 
such female shall, until the contrary is proved, be presumed to have disposed of her with the i ntent that 
she shall be used for the purpose of prostitution. 
Explanation II .—For the purposes of this section “illicit intercourse ” means sexual intercourse 
between persons not united by marriage or by any union or tie which, though not amounting t o a 
marriage, is recognised by the personal law or custom of the community to which t hey belong or, where 
they belong to different communities, of both such communities, as constituting  between them a quasi -
marital relation.] 
373. Buying minor for purposes of prostitution, etc .—Whoever buys, hires or otherwise obtains 
possession of any 4[person under the age of eighteen years with intent that such person shall at any age be 
emplo
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 89]
any 4[person under the age of eighteen years with intent that such person shall at any age be 
employed or used for the purpose of prostitution or illicit intercourse with any  person or for any unlawful 
and immoral purpose, or knowing it to be likely that such person will at any age be] em ployed or used for 
any such purpose, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may  extend 
to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
5[Explanation I .—Any prostitute or any person keeping or managing a brothel, who buys, hires or 
otherwise obtains possession of a female under the age of eighteen years shall, unt il the contrary is 
proved, be presumed to have obtained possession of such female with the intent that she shall be used for 
the purpose of prostitution. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life”  (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
2. Subs. by Act 18 of 1924, s. 2, for certain words.  
3. Ins. by Act 18 of 1924, s. 3 
4. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for certain words. 
5. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 90]
90 
 Explanation II .—“Illicit intercourse ” has the same meaning as in section 372.] 
374. Unlawful compulsory labour .—Whoever unlawfully compels any person to labour against the 
will of that person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description f or a term which may 
extend to one year, or with fine, or with both. 
1[Sexual offences ] 
2[375. Rape .—A man is said to commit “rape” if he — 
(a) penetrates his penis, to any extent, into the vagina, mouth, urethra or anus of a woman or 
makes her to do so with him or any other person; or 
(b) inserts, to any extent, any object or a part of the body, not being the penis, into the vagina, the 
urethra or anus of a woman or makes her to do so with him or any other person; or 
(c) manipulates any part of the body of a woman so as to cause penetration into the vagina, 
urethra, anus or any part of body of such woman or makes her to do so with him or any  other person; 
or 
(d) applies his mouth to the vagina, anus, urethra of a woman or makes her to do so  with him or 
any other person, 
under the circumstances falling under any of the following seven descriptions: — 
First .—Against her will. 
Secondly .—Without her consent. 
Thirdly .—With her consent, when her consent has been obtained by putting her or any person in  
whom she is interested, in fear of death or of hurt. 
Fourthly .—With her consent, when the man knows that he is not her husband and that her 
consent is given because she believes that he is another man to whom she is or bel ieves herself to be 
lawfully married. 
Fifthly .—With her consent when, at the time of giving such consent, by reason of unsoundness of 
mind or intoxication or the administration by him personally or through another of any stupefying or 
unwholesome substance, she is unable to understand the nature and consequences of that to which she 
gives consent. 
Sixthly .—With or without her consent, when she is under eighteen years of age. 
Seventhly .—When she is unable to co
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 90]
 without her consent, when she is under eighteen years of age. 
Seventhly .—When she is unable to communicate consent. 
Explanation  1.—For the purposes of this section, “vagina ” shall also include labia majora . 
Explanation  2.—Consent means an unequivocal voluntary agreement when the woman by words, 
gestures or any form of verbal or non-verbal communication, communicates willing ness to participate in 
the specific sexual act: 
Provided that a woman who does not physically resist to the act of penetration shall not by the reason 
only of that fact, be regarded as consenting to the sexual activity. 
Exception  1.—A medical procedure or intervention shall not constitute rape. 
Exception  2.—Sexual intercourse or sexual acts by a man with his own wife, the wife not being under 
fifteen years of age, is not rape. 
376. Punishment for rape .—(1) Whoever, except in the cases provided for in sub-section ( 2), 
commits rape, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment of either description  for a term which 3[shall 
not be less than ten years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to f ine]. 
(2) Whoever, — 
(a) being a police officer, commits rape — 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 43 of 1983, s. 3, for the heading “ Of rape ” and ss. 375 and 376.  
2. Subs. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 9, for sections 375, 376, 37 6A, 376B, 376C and 376D (w.e.f. 03- 02-2013).  
3. Subs. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 4, for “ shall not be less than seven years, but which may extend to imprisonme nt for life, and shall 
also be liable to fine ” (w.e.f. 21 -4-2018). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 91]
91 
 (i) within the limits of the police station to which such police officer is appointed;  or 
(ii) in the premises of any station house; or 
(iii) on a woman in such police officer's custody or in the custody of a police office r 
subordinate to such police officer; or 
(b) being a public servant, commits rape on a woman in such public servant's custody or in the 
custody of a public servant subordinate to such public servant; or 
(c) being a member of the armed forces deployed in an area by the Central or a Stat e Government 
commits rape in such area; or 
(d) being on the management or on the staff of a jail, remand home or other place of custody 
established by or under any law for the time being in force or of a women' s or children's institution, 
commits rape on any inmate of such jail, remand home, place or institution; or 
(e) being on the management or on the staff of a hospital, commits rape on a woman i n that 
hospital; or 
(f) being a relative, guardian or teacher of, or a person in a position of trust or  authority towards 
the woman, commits rape on such woman; or 
(g) commits rape during communal or sectarian violence; or 
(h) commits rape on a woman knowing her to be pregnant; or 
1*   *   *   *  * 
(j) commits rape, on a woman incapable of giving consent; or 
(k) being in a position of control or dominance over a woman, commits rape on such woman; or 
(l) commits rape on a woman suffering from mental or physical disability; or 
(m) while committing rape causes grievous bodily harm or maims or disfigures or endangers the 
life of a woman; or 
(n) commits rape repeatedly on the same woman, 
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years, but which 
may extend to imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment for the re mainder of that person's 
natural life, and shall also be liable to fine. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub-section, — 
(a) “armed forces ” means the naval, military an
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 91]
lanation .—For the purposes of this sub-section, — 
(a) “armed forces ” means the naval, military and air forces and includes any member of the 
Armed Forces constituted under any law for the time being in force, including the par amilitary forces 
and any auxiliary forces that are under the control of the Central Government or the State 
Government; 
(b) “hospital ” means the precincts of the hospital and includes the precincts of any inst itution for 
the reception and treatment of persons during convalescence or of persons requiring medical  attention 
or rehabilitation; 
(c) “police officer ” shall have the same meaning as assigned to the expression “police ” under the 
Police Act, 1861 (5 of 1861); 
(d) “women's or children's institution ” means an institution, whether called an orphanage or a 
home for neglected women or children or a widow's home or an institution called by any  other name, 
which is established and maintained for the reception and care of women or children. 
2[(3) Whoever, commits rape on a woman under sixteen years of age shall be punished with 
rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than twenty years, but whi ch may extend to 
imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person' s natural life, 
and shall also be liable to fine: 
                                                           
1. Clause ( i) omitted by Act 22 of 2018 s. 4 . (w.e.f. 21-4-2018). 
2. Ins. by s. 4. ibid., (w.e.f. 21-4-2018). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 92]
92 
  Provided that such fine shall be just and reasonable to meet the medical expenses and  
rehabilitation of the victim:  
Provided further that any fine imposed under this sub-section shall be paid to the victim.] 
1[376A. Punishment for causing death or resulting in persistent vegetative state of victi m.—
Whoever, commits an offence punishable under sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2) of section 376 and in 
the course of such commission inflicts an injury which causes the death of the w oman or causes the 
woman to be in a persistent vegetative state, shall be punished with rigorous i mprisonment for a term 
which shall not be less than twenty years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, which shall 
mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person's natural life, or with death. 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Arunachal Pradesh 
Insertion of section 376AA. —After section 376A of the principal act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely :- 
“376AA. Punishment for rape on a women up to twelve years of age .—Whoever commits rape on 
a women up to twelve years of age shall be punished with death, or rigorous im prisonment for a term 
which shall not be less than fourteen years but which may extend to imprisonment for  life which shall 
mean imprisonment for the remained of that person ’s natural life, and shall also be liable to fine. ”. 
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh Act 3 of 2019, s. 8] 
Insertion of section 376DA. —After section 376D of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted namely: -- 
“376D.Punishment for gang rape on a woman twelve years of age .—Where a woman up to twelve 
years of age, is raped by one or more persons constituting a group of action in furt herance of a common 
intention, each of those persons shall be deemed to have committed the offence of rape  and shall be 
punished with death, or rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than twe nty years, but 
which may extend to imprisonment for life which shall 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 92]
ch shall not be less than twe nty years, but 
which may extend to imprisonment for life which shall mean imprisonment for the remai nder of that 
person ’s natural life, and shall also be liable to fine: 
Provided that such fine shall be just and reasonable to meet the medical expenses and rehabilitation of 
the victim: 
Provided further that any fine imposed under this section shall be paid to the victim. ”. 
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh Act 3 of 2019, s. 9] 
2[376AB.Punishment for rape on woman under twelve years of age. —Whoever, commits rape on 
a woman under twelve years of age shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for  a term which shall 
not be less than twenty years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, wh ich shall mean 
imprisonment for the remainder of that person's natural life, and with fine or with death:  
Provided that such fine shall be just and reasonable to meet the medical expenses and rehabilitation of 
the victim: 
Provided further that any fine imposed under this section shall be paid to the victim.] 
1[376B. Sexual intercourse by husband upon his wife during separation .—Whoever has sexual 
intercourse with his own wife, who is living separately, whether under a decree of separation or 
otherwise, without her consent, shall be punished with imprisonment of either descri ption for a term 
which shall not be less than two years but which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
Explanation .—In this section, “sexual intercourse ” shall mean any of the acts mentioned in clauses 
(a) to ( d) of section 375. 
1[376C. Sexual intercourse by a person in authority .—Whoever, being — 
(a) in a position of authority or in a fiduciary relationship; or 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 9, for sections 375, 376, 37 6A, 376B, 376C and 376D (w.e.f. 03- 02-2013). 
2. Ins. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 5 (w.e.f. 21-4-2018). 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 92]
. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 5 (w.e.f. 21-4-2018). 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 93]
93 
 (b) a public servant; or 
(c) superintendent or manager of a jail, remand home or other place of custody establi shed by or 
under any law for the time being in force, or a women's or children's institution; or 
(d) on the management of a hospital or being on the staff of a hospital,  
abuses such position or fiduciary relationship to induce or seduce any woman either in his custody or 
under his charge or present in the premises to have sexual intercourse with him, such sexua l intercourse 
not amounting to the offence of rape, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment  of either description 
for a term which shall not be less than five years, but which may extend to ten y ears, and shall also be 
liable to fine. 
Explanation 1.—In this section, “sexual intercourse ” shall mean any of the acts mentioned in 
clauses ( a) to ( d) of section 375. 
Explanation  2.—For the purposes of this section, Explanation  1 to section 375 shall also be 
applicable. 
Explanation  3.—“Superintendent ”, in relation to a jail, remand home or other place of custody or 
a women's or children ’s institution, includes a person holding any other office in such jail, remand 
home, place or institution by virtue of which such person can exercise any author ity or control over 
its inmates. 
Explanation  4.—The expressions “hospital ” and “women's or children ’s institution ” shall 
respectively have the same meaning as in Explanation  to sub-section ( 2) of section 376.] 
1[376D. Gang rape .—Where a woman is raped by one or more persons constituting a group or acting 
in furtherance of a common intention, each of those persons shall be deemed to have committ ed the 
offence of rape and shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than 
twenty years, but which may extend to life which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that 
person's natural life, and with fine: 
Provided that such fine shall be just and reasonable to meet the medical expen
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 93]
life, and with fine: 
Provided that such fine shall be just and reasonable to meet the medical expenses and rehabilitation of 
the victim: 
Provided further that any fine imposed under this section shall be paid to the victim.] 
2[376DA.Punishment for gang rape on woman under sixteen years of age. —Where a woman 
under sixteen years of age is raped by one or more persons constituting a group or acting in furtherance of 
a common intention, each of those persons shall be deemed to have committed the offence of rape and 
shall be punished with imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment f or the remainder of that 
person's natural life, and with fine: 
 Provided that such fine shall be just and reasonable to meet the medical expenses a nd rehabilitation 
of the victim:  
Provided further that any fine imposed under this section shall be paid to the victim. 
2[376DB.Punishment for gang rape on woman under twelve years of age. —Where a woman 
under twelve years of age is raped by one or more persons constituting a group or acting  in furtherance of 
a common intention, each of those persons shall be deemed to have committed the offence of rape and 
shall be punished with imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment f or the remainder of that 
person's natural life, and with fine, or with death:  
Provided that such fine shall be just and reasonable to meet the medical expenses and rehabilitation of 
the victim:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 9, for sections 375, 376, 37 6A, 376B, 376C and 376D (w.e.f. 03- 02-2013). 
2. Ins. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 6 (w.e.f. 21-4-2018). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 94]
94 
 Provided further that any fine imposed under this section shall be paid to the victim.] 
376E. Punishment for repeat offenders .—Whoever has been previously convicted of an offence 
punishable under section 376 or section 376A or 1[section 376AB or section 376D or section 376DA or 
section 376DB,] and is subsequently convicted of an offence punishable under any of the said sect ions 
shall be punished with imprisonment for life which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that 
person's natural life, or with death.]] 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Chhattisgarh 
After Section 376E of the Penal Code, the following shall be inserted, namely: — 
376F. Liability of person in-charge of workplace and others to give information about o ffence.  
—Whoever, being person in-charge of any work place or any other person present at such pla ce, having 
knowledge that an offence under section 376 or section 376D, is being committed at such place and being 
in a position to prevent commission of such offence fails so, to prevent such of fence or to give 
information of the commission of such offence, to any magistrate or police officer,  by any mode, with the 
intention of screening the offender from legal punishment, shall be liable to be puni shed for abetment of 
such offence with imprisonment of either description which may extend to three yea rs and fine and no 
such person shall incur any liability for giving such information. 
Explanation: —Work-place includes any mode of transport owned, hired or otherwise engaged by the 
person in-charge of the work place for the conveyance of the woman, who was subjected t o such offence, 
to and from her residence to such work-place. 
[Vide Chhattisgarh Act 25 of 2015, s. 5 ]. 
Of Unnatural Offences 
377. Unnatural offences .—Whoever voluntarily has carnal intercourse against the order of nature 
with any man, woman or animal, shall be punished with 2[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 94]
hed with 2[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
Explanation .—Penetration is sufficient to constitute the carnal intercourse necessary to th e offence 
described in this section. 
CHAPTER XVII 
OF OFFENCES AGAINST  PROPERTY  
Of Theft 
378. Theft .—Whoever, intending to take dishonestly any movable property out of the possession of 
any person without that person's consent, moves that property in order to such taki ng, is said to commi t 
theft. 
Explanation 1.—A thing so long as it is attached to the earth, not being movable property, i s not the 
subject of theft; but it becomes capable of being the subject of theft as soon as it is se vered from the earth. 
Explanation 2.—A moving effected by the same act which effects the severance may be a theft. 
Explanation 3.—A person is said to cause a thing to move by removing an obstacle which pr evented 
it from moving or by separating it from any other thing, as well as by actually moving it . 
Explanation 4.—A person, who by any means causes an animal to move, is said to move that animal, 
and to move everything which, in consequence of the motion so caused, is moved by that animal. 
Explanation 5.—The consent mentioned in the definition may be express or implied, and may be 
given either by the person in possession, or by any person having for that purpose authority  either express 
or implied. 
Illustrations 
(a) A cuts down a tree on Z's ground, with the intention of dishonestly tak ing the tree out of Z's possession without Z's 
consent. Here, as soon as A has severed the tree in order to such taking, h e has committed theft. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 7, for “ section 376D ” (w.e.f. 21 -4-2018). 
2. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1956). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 94]
or “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1956). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 95]
95 
 (b) A puts a bait for dogs in his pocket, and thus induces Z's dog to foll ow it. Here, if A's intention be dishonestly to take the 
dog out of Z's possession without Z's consent, A has committed theft as soon  as Z's dog has begun to follow A. 
(c) A meets a bullock carrying a box of treasure. He drives the bulloc k in a certain direction, in order that he may 
dishonestly take the treasure. As soon as the bullock begins to move, A ha s committed theft of the treasure. 
(d) A being Z's servant, and entrusted by Z with the care of Z's plate,  dishonestly runs away with the plate, without Z's 
consent. A has committed theft. 
(e) Z, going on a journey, entrusts his plate to A, the keeper of a wa rehouse, till Z shall return. A carries the plate to a 
goldsmith and sells it. Here the plate was not in Z's possession. It could not therefore be taken out of Z's possession, and A has 
not committed theft, though he may have committed criminal breach  of trust. 
(f) A finds a ring belonging to Z on a table in the house which Z occup ies. Here the ring is in Z's possession, and if A 
dishonestly removes it, A commits theft. 
(g) A finds a ring lying on the highroad, not in the possession of any person. A, by taking it, commits no theft, though he 
may commit criminal misappropriation of property. 
(h) A sees a ring belonging to Z lying on a table in Z's house. Not ven turing to misappropriate the ring immediately for fear 
of search and detection, A hides the ring in a place where it is hig hly improbable that it will ever be found by Z, with the 
intention of taking the ring from the hiding place and selling it w hen the loss is forgotten. Here A, at the time of first moving the 
ring, commits theft. 
(i) A delivers his watch to Z, a jeweller, to be regulated. Z carries it to h is shop. A, not owing to the jeweller any debt for 
which the jeweller might lawfully detain the watch as a security, enters th e shop openly, takes his watch by force out of Z's hand, 
and car
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 95]
the watch as a security, enters th e shop openly, takes his watch by force out of Z's hand, 
and carries it away. Here A, though he may have committed crimi nal trespass and assault, has not committed theft, inasmuch as 
what he did was not done dishonestly.  
(j) If A owes money to Z for repairing the watch, and if Z retains the wa tch lawfully as a security for the debt, and A takes 
the watch out of Z's possession, with the intention of depriving Z o f the property as a security for his debt, he commits theft, 
inasmuch as he takes it dishonestly. 
(k) Again, if A, having pawned his watch to Z, takes it out of Z's poss ession without Z's consent, not having paid what he 
borrowed on the watch, he commits theft, though the watch is his ow n property inasmuch as he takes it dishonestly. 
(l) A takes an article belonging to Z out of Z's possession without Z's co nsent, with the intention of keeping it until he 
obtains money from Z as a reward for its restoration. Here A takes dishonestly; A has therefor committed theft. 
(m) A, being on friendly terms with Z, goes into Z's library in Z's absence,  and takes away a book without Z's express 
consent for the purpose merely of reading it, and with the intentio n of returning it. Here, it is probable that A may have conceived  
that he had Z's implied consent to use Z's book. If this was A's impressio n, A has not committed theft. 
(n) A asks charity from Z's wife. She gives A money, food and cl othes, which A knows to belong to Z her husband. Here it 
is probable that A may conceive that Z's wife is authorised to give aw ay alms. If this was A's impression, A has not committed 
theft. 
(o) A is the paramour of Z's wife. She gives a valuable property, which A  knows to belong to her husband Z, and to be such 
property as she has not authority from Z to give. If A takes the property d ishonestly, he commits theft. 
(p) A, in good faith, believing property belonging to Z to be A's own property, takes that property out of 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 95]
in good faith, believing property belonging to Z to be A's own property, takes that property out of B's possession. 
Here, as A does not take dishonestly, he does not commit theft.  
379. Punishment for theft .—Whoever commits theft shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Gujarat. — 
In the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (XLV of 1860), after section 379, the following sections shall be 
inserted, namely: — 
379A. Snatching .—(1) Whoever, with the intention to commit theft, suddenly or quickly or forcibly  
seizes or secures or grabs or takes away fromany person or from his physical possession any moveable 
property, and makes or attempt to make escape with such property, is said to commit snatching. 
 (2) Whoever attempts to commit snatching shall be punished with rigoro us imprisonment for a 
term which shall  not  be less than  five years but which may extend to t en years, and with fine which 
may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees. 
(3) Whoever commits snatching shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term  which 
shall not be less than seven years but which may extend to ten years, and with fine whi ch may extend 
to twenty-five thousand rupees. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 96]
96 
 (4) Whoever, after committing or attempting to commit snatching, causes hurt or wrongf ul restraint 
of fear of hurt, in order to effect his escape shal l be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to three years, in addition to the punishment provided for the offence of snatching 
by the preceding sub-sections. 
379B.Snatching after preparation made for causing death, hurt or restraint in order to the 
committing of snatching .—Whoever commits or attempts to commit snatching, having made preparation 
for causing death, or hurt, or restraint, or fear of death, or of hurt, or of res traint, to any person, in order to 
the committing of such snatching, or in order to the retaining of property taken by such snatching, shall be 
punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven year s but which may 
extend to ten years, and with fine which may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees.  
[Vide Gujarat Act 6 of 2019, s. 2] 
380. Theft in dwelling house, etc .—Whoever commits theft in any building, tent or vessel, which 
building, tent or vessel is used as a human dwelling, or used for the custody of property, shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to se ven years, and shall also be 
liable to fine. 
381. Theft by clerk or servant of property in possession of master .—Whoever, being a clerk or 
servant, or being employed in the capacity of a clerk or servant, commits thef t in respect of any property 
in the possession of his master or employer, shall be punished with imprisonment of eit her description for 
a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.  
382. Theft after preparation made for causing death, hurt or restraint in order to the 
committing of the theft .—Whoever commits theft, having made preparation for causing death, or hurt, 
or restraint, or fear of death, or of hurt, or of restraint, to any pe rson, in order to the committ
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 96]
or restraint, or fear of death, or of hurt, or of restraint, to any pe rson, in order to the committing of such 
theft, or in order to the effecting of his escape after the committing of such theft, or in order to the 
retaining of property taken by such theft, shall be punished with rigorous impri sonment for a term which 
may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
  Illustrations 
(a) A commits theft on property in Z's possession; and while committin g this theft, he has a loaded pistol under his garment 
having provided this pistol for the purpose of hurting Z in case Z sh ould resist. A has committed the offence defined in this 
section. 
(b) A picks Z's pocket, having posted several of his companions near him , in order that they may restrain Z, if Z should 
perceive what is passing and should resist, or should attempt to apprehen d A. A has committed the offence defined in this section.  
STATE AMENDMENT 
Tripura 
After the section 382 of the Indian Penal Code, the following new sections will be inserted: — 
“382A. Snatching : Whoever commits theft stealthily from a person or through assault or by usi ng 
criminal force and thereby causes hurt or endangers the life of that person is sai d to commit the offence of 
‘Snatching ’. 
382B.  Whoever commits ‘Snatching ’ shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not 
be less than seven years but may extend to a term of ten years or with fine or with both. 
382C. Vehicle lifting: Whoever commits theft of a ‘vehicle ’ either from open or close arena, is said 
to commit the offence of ‘vehicle lifting ’. 
Note: —The term ‘Vehicle ’ shall have the same meaning as defined in sub-section 28 of section 2 of 
Motor Vehicles Act 1988:,  
382D. Whoever commits the offence of ‘vehicle lifting ’ shall be punished with imprisonment for a 
term which shall not be less than seven years but may extend to a term of ten year s or with fine or with 
both”. 
382E. Cattle lifting: Whoever commits theft o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 96]
 to a term of ten year s or with fine or with 
both”. 
382E. Cattle lifting: Whoever commits theft of a ‘Cattle ’ either from open or close arena, is said to 
commit the offence of ‘Cattle lifting ’. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 97]
97 
 Note:-  For the purpose of this section, the term ‘Cattle ’ means a cow and a calf, whether male or 
female, bull, bullock, buffalo-male or female or calf of she-buffalo, whether male or female and an ox or 
oxen. 
382F. Whoever commits the offence of ‘Cattle lifting ’ shall be punished with imprisonment for a 
term which shall not be less than seven years but may extend to a term of t em years or with fine or with 
both. ” 
[Vide Tripura  Act 4 of 2019, s. 2] 
Of Extortion 
383. Extortion .—Whoever intentionally puts any person in fear of any injury to that person, or to any 
other, and thereby dishonestly induces the person so put in fear to deliver to any person any property, or 
valuable security or anything signed or sealed which may be converted into a valuable s ecurity, commits 
“extortion ”. 
Illustrations 
(a) A threatens to publish a defamatory libel concerning Z unless Z gives h im money. He thus induces Z to give him money. 
A has committed extortion. 
(b) A threatens Z that he will keep Z's child in wrongful confinement, unless Z will sign and deliver to A a promissory note 
binding Z to pay certain monies to A. Z sings and delivers the note. A has committed extortion. 
(c) A threatens to send club-men to plough up Z's field unless Z will sign and deliver to B a bond binding Z under a penalty 
to deliver certain produce to B, and thereby induces Z to sign and de liver the bond. A has committed extortion. 
(d) A, by putting Z in fear of grievous hurt, dishonestly induces Z to  sign or affix his seal to a blank paper and deliver it to 
A. Z sings and delivers the paper to A. Here, as the paper so signe d may be converted into a valuable security. A has committed 
extortion. 
384. Punishment for extortion .—Whoever commits extortion shall be punished with imprisonment 
of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or wit h both. 
385. Putting person in fear of injury in order to commit extortion .—Whoever, in order t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 97]
it h both. 
385. Putting person in fear of injury in order to commit extortion .—Whoever, in order to the 
committing of extortion, puts any person in fear, or attempts to put any person i n fear, of any injury, shall 
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to t wo years, or with 
fine, or with both. 
386. Extortion by putting a person in fear of death or grievous hurt .—Whoever commits 
extortion by putting any person in fear of death or of grievous hurt to that person or to any other, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to t en years, and shall also 
be liable to fine. 
387. Putting person in fear of death or of grievous hurt, in order to commit extortion .—
Whoever, in order to the committing of extortion, puts or attempts to put any pe rson in fear of death or of 
grievous hurt to that person or to any other, shall be punished with imprisonment of eit her description for 
a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
388. Extortion by threat of accusation of an offence punishable with death or impri sonment for 
life, etc .—Whoever commits extortion by putting any person in fear of an accusation against th at person 
or any other, of having committed or attempted to commit any offence punishable with death, or with 
1[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment for a term which may extend t o ten years, or of having 
attempted to induce any other person to commit such offence, shall be punished with imprisonm ent of 
either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine; and, if the 
offence be one punishable under section 377 of this Code, may be punished with 1[imprisonment for life]. 
389. Putting person in fear or accusation of offence, in order to commit extortion .—Whoever, in 
order to the committing of extortion, puts or attempts to put any person in fea r of an accusation, against 
that person 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 97]
ng of extortion, puts or attempts to put any person in fea r of an accusation, against 
that person or any other, of having committed, or attempted to commit, an of fence punishable with death 
or with 1[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment for a term which may extend t o ten years, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to t en years, and shall also 
be liable to fine; and, if the offence be punishable under section 377 of this Code, m ay be punished with 
1[imprisonment for life]. 
Of Robbery and dacoity 
390. Robbery .—In all robbery there is either theft or extortion. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1956). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 98]
98 
 When theft is robbery .—Theft is “robbery ” if, in order to the committing of the theft, or in 
committing the theft, or in carrying away or attempting to carry away propert y obtained by the theft, the 
offender, for that end voluntarily causes or attempts to cause to any person death or hurt or wrongful 
restraint, or fear of instant death or of instant hurt, or of instant wrongful restraint . 
When extortion is robbery .—Extortion is “robbery ” if the offender, at the time of committing the 
extortion, is in the presence of the person put in fear, and commits the extortion by put ting that person in 
fear of instant death, of instant hurt, or of instant wrongful restraint to that person or to some other  person, 
and, by so putting in fear, induces the person so put in fear then and there to deliver up the thing extort ed. 
Explanation .—The offender is said to be present if he is sufficiently near to put t he other person in 
fear of instant death, of instant hurt, or of instant wrongful restraint. 
Illustrations 
(a) A holds Z down, and fraudulently takes Z's money and jewels from Z' s clothes, without Z's consent. Here A has 
committed theft, and, in order to the committing of that theft, h as voluntarily caused wrongful restraint to Z. A has therefore 
committed robbery. 
(b) A meets Z on the high road, shows a pistol, and demands Z's purse.  Z, in consequence, surrenders his purse. Here A has 
extorted the purse from Z by putting him in fear of instant hurt, and being at the time of committing the extortion in his presence. 
A has therefore committed robbery. 
(c) A meets Z and Z's child on the high road. A takes the child, an d threatens to filing it down a precipice, unless Z delivers 
his purse. Z, in consequence, delivers his purse. Here A has extorted the pu rse from Z, by causing Z to be in fear of instant hurt to 
the child who is there present. A has therefore committed robbery on Z . 
(d) A obtains property from Z by saying “Your child is in th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 98]
has therefore committed robbery on Z . 
(d) A obtains property from Z by saying “Your child is in the hands of my gang, and will be put to death unless you send us 
ten thousand rupees ”. This is extortion, and punishable as such: but it is not robbery, unless Z is put in fear of the instant death of 
his child. 
391. Dacoity .—When five or more persons conjointly commit or attempt to commit a robbery, or  
where the whole number of persons conjointly committing or attempting to commit a robber y, and 
persons present and aiding such commission or attempt, amount to five or more, every person so 
committing, attempting or aiding, is said to commit “dacoity ”. 
392. Punishment for robbery .—Whoever commits robbery shall be punished with rigorous 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine; and, if t he robbery 
be committed on the highway between sunset and sunrise, the imprisonment may be extended to four teen 
years. 
393. Attempt to commit robbery .—Whoever attempts to commit robbery shall be punished with 
rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
394. Voluntarily causing hurt in committing robbery .—If any person, in committing or in 
attempting to commit robbery, voluntarily causes hurt, such person, and any other person j ointly 
concerned in committing or attempting to commit such robbery, shall be punish ed with 1[imprisonment 
for life], or with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten year s, and shall also be liable 
to fine. 
395. Punishment for dacoity .—Whoever commits dacoity shall be punished with 1[imprisonment for 
life], or with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, a nd shall also be liable to 
fine. 
396. Dacoity with murder .—If any one of five or more persons, who are conjointly committing 
dacoity, commits murder in so committing dacoity, every one of those persons shall  be punished with 
death, or
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 98]
mmits murder in so committing dacoity, every one of those persons shall  be punished with 
death, or 1[imprisonment for life], or rigorous imprisonment for a term which may ext end to ten years, 
and shall also be liable to fine. 
397. Robbery, or dacoity, with attempt to cause death or grievous hurt .—If, at the time of 
committing robbery or dacoity, the offender uses any deadly weapon, or causes griev ous hurt to any 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1956). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 99]
99 
 person, or attempts to cause death or grievous hurt to any person, the imprison ment with which such 
offender shall be punished shall not be less than seven years. 
398. Attempt to commit robbery or dacoity when armed with deadly weapon .—If, at the time of 
attempting to commit robbery or dacoity, the offender is armed with any deadly weapon, the 
imprisonment with which such offender shall be punished shall not be less than seven years. 
399. Making preparation to commit dacoity .—Whoever makes any preparation for committing 
dacoity, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall 
also be liable to fine. 
400. Punishment for belonging to gang of dacoits .—Whoever, at any time after the passing of this 
Act, shall belong to a gang of persons associated for the purpose of habitually com mitting dacoity, shall 
be punished with 1[imprisonment for life], or with rigorous imprisonment for a term which m ay extend to 
ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
401. Punishment for belonging to gang of thieves .—Whoever, at any time after the passing of this 
Act, shall belong to any wandering or other gang of persons associated for the purpose of habitually 
committing theft or robbery, and not being a gang of thugs  or dacoits, shall be punished with rigorous 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
402. Assembling for purpose of committing dacoity .—Whoever, at any time after the passing of 
this Act, shall be one of five or more persons assembled for the purpose of commit ting dacoity, shall be 
punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, and shal l also be liable 
to fine. 
Of criminal misappropriation of property 
403. Dishonest misappropriation of property .—Whoever dishonestly misappropriates or converts 
to his own use any movable property, shall be punished with imprisonment of either des cription for a 
term which m
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 99]
any movable property, shall be punished with imprisonment of either des cription for a 
term which may extend to two yea rs, or with fine, or with both. 
Illustrations 
(a) A takes property belonging to Z out of Z's possession, in good fa ith believingat the time when he takes it, that the 
property belongs to himself. A is not guilty of theft; but if A, after discovering his mistake, dishonestly appropriates the property 
to his own use, he is guilty of an offence under this section. 
(b) A, being on friendly terms with Z, goes into Z's library in Z's absence , and takes away a book without Z's express 
consent. Here, if A was under the impression that he had Z's implied consent to take the book for the purpose of reading it, A has 
not committed theft. But, if A afterwards sells the book for his own benef it, he is guilty of an offence under this section. 
(c) A and B, being , joint owners of a horse, A takes the horse out of B's possession, intendin g to use it. Here, as A has a right 
to use the horse, he does not dishonestly misappropriate it. But, if A sell s the horse and appropriates the whole proceeds to his 
own use, he is guilty of an offence under this section. 
Explanation 1.—A dishonest misappropriation for a time only is a misappropriation wi thin the 
meaning of this section. 
Illustration 
A finds a Government promissory note belonging to Z, bearing a blank endorsement. A, knowing that the note belongs to Z, 
pledges it with a banker as a security or a loan, intending at a future time to restore it to Z. A has committed an offence under this 
section. 
Explanation 2.—A person who finds property not in the possession of any other person, and takes 
such property for the purpose of protecting it for, or of restoring it to, the owner, does not take or 
misappropriate it dishonestly, and is not guilty of an offence; but he is guilty of the offence above def ined, 
if he appropriates it to his own use, when he knows or has the means of discovering t he o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 99]
ef ined, 
if he appropriates it to his own use, when he knows or has the means of discovering t he owner, or before 
he has used reasonable means to discover and give notice to the owner and has kept the property a 
reasonable time to enable the owner to claim it. 
What are reasonable means or what is a reasonable time in such a case, is a question of fact. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1956). 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 100]
100 
 It is not necessary that the finder should know who is the owner of the property, or that any particular 
person is the owner of it; it is sufficient if, at the time of appropriating  it, he does not believe it to be his 
own property, or in good faith believe that the real owner cannot be found. 
Illustrations 
(a) A finds a rupee on the high road, not knowing to whom the rupee belongs, A picks up the rupee. Here A has not 
committed the offence defined in this section. 
(b) A finds a letter on the road, containing a bank note. From the direction  and contents of the letter he learns to whom the 
note belongs. He appropriates the note. He is guilty of an offence under this section. 
(c) A finds a cheque payable to bearer. He can form no conjecture  as to the person who has lost the cheque. But the name of 
the person, who has drawn the cheque, appears. A knows that this perso n can direct him to the person in whose favour the cheque 
was drawn. A appropriates the cheque without attempting to discover the owner. He is guilty of an offence under this section. 
(d) A sees Z drop his purse with money in it. A picks up the purse wit h the intention of restoring it to Z, but afterwards 
appropriates it to his own use. A has committed an offence under this secti on. 
(e) A finds a purse with money, not knowing to whom it belongs; h e afterwards discovers that it belongs to Z, and 
appropriates it to his own use. A is guilty of an offence under this secti on. 
(f) A finds a valuable ring, not knowing to whom it belongs. A sells it immediately without attempting to discover the 
owner. A is guilty of an offence under this section.  
404. Dishonest misappropriation of property possessed by deceased person at the time of his 
death .—Whoever dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use property, knowing t hat such 
property was in the possession of a deceased person at the time of that person's decease, and has not since 
been in the possession of any person l
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 100]
rson at the time of that person's decease, and has not since 
been in the possession of any person legally entitled to such possession, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to 
fine, and if the offender at the time of such person's decease was employed by him as a clerk or servant, 
the imprisonment may extend to seven years. 
Illustration 
Z dies in possession of furniture and money. His servant A, before the  money comes into the possession of any person 
entitled to such possession, dishonestly misappropriates it. A has com mitted the offence defined in this section. 
Of criminal breach of trust 
405. Criminal breach of trust .—Whoever, being in any manner entrusted with property, or with any 
dominion over property, dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use t hat property, or 
dishonestly uses or disposes of that property in violation of any direction of l aw prescribing the mode in 
which such trust is to be discharged, or of any legal contract, express or impl ied, which he has made 
touching the discharge of such trust, or wilfully suffers any other person so t o do, commits “criminal 
breach of trust ”. 
1[2[Explanation 1].—A person, being an employer 3[of an establishment whether exempted under 
section 17 of the Employees ’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 (19 of 1952) or 
not] who deducts the employee ’s contribution from the wages payable to the employee for credit to a 
Provident Fund or Family Pension Fund established by any law for the time being in force, shal l be 
deemed to have been entrusted with the amount of the contribution so deducted by him and if he makes 
default in the payment of such contribution to the said Fund in violation of the said law, sha ll be deemed 
to have dishonestly used the amount of the said contribution in violation of a d irection of law as 
aforesaid.] 
4[Explanation 2.—A person, being an employ
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 100]
tion in violation of a d irection of law as 
aforesaid.] 
4[Explanation 2.—A person, being an employer, who deducts the employees ’ contribution from the 
wages payable to the employee for credit to the Employees ’ State Insurance Fund held and administered 
by the Employees ’ State Insurance Corporation established under the Employees ’ State Insurance Act, 
1948 (34 of 1948), shall be deemed to have been entrusted with the amount of the contribution so 
deducted by him and if he makes default in the payment of such contribution to the said Fund in violation 
of the said Act, shall be deemed to have dishonestly used the amount of the said contribu tion in violation 
of a direction of law as aforesaid.] 
Illustrations 
(a) A, being executor to the will of a deceased person, dishonestly d isobeys the law which directs him to divide the effects 
according to the will, and appropriates them to his own use. A has comm itted criminal breach of trust. 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 40 of 1973, s. 9 (w.e.f. 1- 11-1973). 
2. Explanation  numbered as Explanation 1 by Act 38 of 1975, s. 9 (w.e.f. 1-9-1975). 
3. Ins. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 27 (w.e.f. 1-8-1988). 
4. Ins. by Act 38 of 1975, s. 9 (w.e.f. 1-9-1975). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 101]
101 
 (b) A is a warehouse-keeper. Z going on a journey, entrusts his furniture  to A, under a contract that it shall be returned on 
payment of a stipulated sum for warehouse room. A dishonestly sells th e goods. A has committed criminal breach of trust. 
(c) A, residing in Calcutta, is agent for Z, residing at Delhi. There is an express  or implied contract between A and Z, that all 
sums remitted by Z to A shall be invested by A, according to Z's direc tion. Z remits a lakh of rupees to A, with directions to A to 
invest the same in Company's paper. A dishonestly disobeys the directions  and employs the money in his own business. A has 
committed criminal breach of trust. 
(d) But if A, in the last illustration, not dishonestly but in good faith , believing that it will be more for Z's advantage to hold 
shares in the Bank of Bengal, disobeys Z's directions, and buys shares in the Bank of Bengal, for Z, instead of buying Company's 
paper, here, thought Z should suffer loss, and should be entitled  to bring a civil action against A, on account of that loss, ye t A, 
not having acted dishonestly, has not committed criminal breach of trust. 
(e) A, a revenue-officer, is entrusted with public money and is eithe r directed by law, or bound by a contract, express or 
implied, with the Government, to pay into a certain treasury all the p ublic money which he holds. A dishonestly appropriates the 
money. A has committed criminal breach of trust. 
(f) A, a carrier, is entrusted by Z with property to be carried by land or by w ater. A dishonestly misappropriates the property . 
A has committed criminal breach of trust.  
406. Punishment for criminal breach of trust .—Whoever commits criminal breach of trust shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to  three years, or with 
fine, or with both. 
407. Criminal breach of trust by carrier, etc .—Whoever, being entrusted with property as a carrier, 
wharfinger or warehouse-keeper, co
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 101]
rier, etc .—Whoever, being entrusted with property as a carrier, 
wharfinger or warehouse-keeper, commits criminal breach of trust in respect of such property, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall 
also be liable to fine. 
408. Criminal breach of trust by clerk or servant .—Whoever, being a clerk or servant or employed 
as a clerk or servant, and being in any manner entrusted in such capacity with proper ty, or with any 
dominion over property, commits criminal breach of trust in respect of that property, shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to se ven years, and shall also be 
liable to fine. 
409. Criminal breach of trust by public servant, or by banker, merchant or agent .—Whoever, 
being in any manner entrusted with property, or with any dominion over propert y in his capacity of a 
public servant or in the way of his business as a banker, merchant, factor, broker, at torney or agent, 
commits criminal breach of trust in respect of that property, shall be pun ished with 1[imprisonment for 
life], or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also 
be liable to fine. 
Of the receiving of stolen property 
410. Stolen property .—Property, the possession whereof has been transferred by theft, or by 
extortion, or by robbery, and property which has been criminally misappropriated or in respect of which 
2***3***criminal breach of trust has been committed, is designated as “stolen property ”, 4[whether the 
transfer has been made, or the misappropriation or breach of trust has bee n committed, within or without 
5[India]]. But, if such property subsequently comes into the possession of a person leg ally entitled to the 
possession thereof, it then ceases to be stolen property. 
411. Dishonestly receiving stolen property .—Whoever dishonestly receives or retains any stolen 
property, knowing or hav
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 101]
iving stolen property .—Whoever dishonestly receives or retains any stolen 
property, knowing or having reason to believe the same to be stolen property, shall be pun ished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or w ith both. 
412. Dishonestly receiving property stolen in the commission of a dacoity .—Whoever dishonestly 
receives or retains any stolen property, the possession whereof he knows or has reason to believe to have 
been transferred by the commission of dacoity, or dishonestly receives from a person, w hom he knows or 
has reason to believe to belong or to have belonged to a gang of dacoits, property which h e knows or has 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1956). 
2. The word “the” rep by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and the First  Sch.  
3. The words “offence of” rep . by Act 8 of1882, s. 9. 
4. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. 
5. The words “British India” have successively been subs. by the A. O. 1948, the A. O. 1950 and Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., 
to read as above (w.e.f. 1-4-1951). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 102]
102 
 reason to believe to have been stolen, shall be punished with 1[imprisonment for life], or with rigorous 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.  
413. Habitually dealing in stolen property. —Whoever habitually receives or deals in property 
which he knows or has reason to believe to be stolen property, shall be punished w ith 1[imprisonment for 
life], or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also 
be liable to fine. 
414. Assisting in concealment of stolen property .—Whoever voluntarily assists in concealing or 
disposing of or making away with property which he knows or has reason to believe to be stolen property, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may  extend to three years, or 
with fine, or with both. 
Of Cheating 
415. Cheating .—Whoever, by deceiving any person, fraudulently or dishonestly induces the person 
so deceived to deliver any property to any person, or to consent that any person shall reta in any property, 
or intentionally induces the person so deceived to do or omit to do anything which  he would not do or 
omit if he were not so deceived, and which act or omission causes or is likely to ca use damage or harm to 
that person in body, mind, reputation or property, is said to “cheat ”. 
Explanation .—A dishonest concealment of facts is a deception within the meaning of this section. 
Illustrations 
(a) A, by falsely pretending to be in the Civil Service, intentionally de ceives Z, and thus dishonestly induces Z to let him 
have on credit goods for which he does not mean to pay. A che ats. 
(b) A, by putting a counterfeit mark on an article, intentionally dece ives Z into a belief that this article was made by a certain 
celebrated manufacturer, and thus dishonestly induces Z to buy and pa y for the article. A cheats. 
(c) A, by exhibiting to Z a false sample of an article intentionally dec eives Z in
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 102]
icle. A cheats. 
(c) A, by exhibiting to Z a false sample of an article intentionally dec eives Z into believing that the article corresponds with 
the sample, and thereby dishonestly induces Z to buy and pay for the  article. A cheats. 
(d) A, by tendering in payment for an article a bill on a house with w hich A keeps no money, and by which A expects that 
the bill will be dishonoured, intentionally deceives Z, and thereby  dishonestly induces Z to deliver the article, intending not to 
pay for it. A cheats. 
(e) A, by pledging as diamond articles which he knows are not diamond s, intentionally deceives Z, and thereby dishonestly 
induces Z to lend money. A cheats. 
(f) A Intentionally deceives Z into a belief that A means to repay an y money that Z may lend to him and thereby dishonestly 
induces Z to lend him money, A not intending to repay it. A chea ts. 
(g) A intentionally deceives Z into a belief that A means to deliver to Z a certain quantity of indigo plant which he does not 
intend to deliver, and thereby dishonestly induces Z to advance mone y upon the faith of such delivery. A cheats; but if A, at the  
time of obtaining the money, intends to deliver the indigo plant, a nd afterwards breaks his contract and does not deliver it, he 
does not cheat, but is liable only to a civil action for breach of con tract. 
(h) A intentionally deceives Z into a belief that A has performed A's  part of a contract made with Z, which he has not 
performed, and thereby dishonestly induces Z to pay money. A cheats. 
(i) A sells and conveys an estate to B. A, knowing that in consequenc e of such sale he has no right to the property, sells or 
mortgages the same to Z, without disclosing the fact of the previou s sale and conveyance to B, and receives the purchase or 
mortgage money from Z. A cheats.  
416. Cheating by personation. —A person is said to “cheat by personation ” if he cheats by 
pretending to be some other person, or by knowingly substituting one person for or a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 102]
f he cheats by 
pretending to be some other person, or by knowingly substituting one person for or anothe r, or 
representing that he or any other person is a person other than he or such other person really is. 
Explanation .—The offence is committed whether the individual personated is a real or imaginary 
person. 
Illustrations 
(a) A cheats by pretending to be a certain rich banker of the same name . A cheats by personation. 
(b) A cheats by pretending to be B, a person who is deceased. A chea ts by personation.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1956).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 103]
103 
 417. Punishment for cheating .—Whoever cheats shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both. 
418. Cheating with knowledge that wrongful loss may ensue to person whose interest offender is 
bound to protect .—Whoever cheats with the knowledge that he is likely thereby to cause wr ongful loss 
to a person whose interest in the transaction to which the cheating relates, he was bound, eit her by law, or 
by a legal contract, to protect, shall be punished with imprisonment of either descripti on for a term which 
may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
419. Punishment for cheating by personation .—Whoever cheats by personation shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three y ears, or with fine, or with 
both. 
420. Cheating and dishonestly inducing delivery of property .—Whoever cheats and thereby 
dishonestly induces the person deceived to deliver any property to any person, or to mak e, alter or destroy 
the whole or any part of a valuable security, or anything which is signed or sea led, and which is capable 
of being converted into a valuable security, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for 
a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
Of fraudulent f eeds and dispositions of property 
421. Dishonest or fraudulent removal or concealment of property to prevent distribution among 
creditors .—Whoever dishonestly or fraudulently removes, conceals or delivers to any person, or transfers 
or causes to be transferred to any person, without adequate consideration, any property , intending thereby 
to prevent, or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby prevent, the distri bution of that property 
according to law among his creditors or the creditors of any other person, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 103]
 shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or wi th both. 
422. Dishonestly or fraudulently preventing debt being available for creditors .—Whoever 
dishonestly or fraudulently prevents any debt or demand due to himself or to any o ther person from being 
made available according to law for payment of his debts or the debts of such other per son, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, 
or with both. 
423. Dishonest or fraudulent execution of deed of transfer containing false statement o f 
consideration .—Whoever dishonestly or fraudulently signs, executes or becomes a party to any deed o r 
instrument which purports to transfer or subject to any charge any property, or  any interest therein, and 
which contains any false statement relating to the consideration for such transfe r or charge, or relating t o 
the person or persons for whose use or benefit it is really intended to operat e, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or wi th both. 
424. Dishonest or fraudulent removal or concealment of property .—Whoever dishonestly or 
fraudulently conceals or removes any property of himself or any other person, or dishonestl y or 
fraudulently assists in the concealment or removal thereof, or dishonestly releases any dem and or claim to 
which he is entitled, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a t erm which may 
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
Of mischief 
425. Mischief .—Whoever with intent to cause, or knowing that he is likely to cause, wrongful l oss or 
damage to the public or to any person, causes the destruction of any property, or any such chang e in any 
property or in the situation thereof as destroys or diminishes its value or utility, or affects it injuriously, 
commits “mischief ”. 
Explanatio
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 103]
oys or diminishes its value or utility, or affects it injuriously, 
commits “mischief ”. 
Explanation 1.—It is not essential to the offence of mischief that the offender should i ntend to cause 
loss or damage to the owner of the property injured or destroyed. It is sufficien t if he intends to cause, or 
knows that he is likely to cause, wrongful loss or damage to any person by injuring any pr operty, whether 
it belongs to that person or not. 
Explanation 2.—Mischief may be committed by an act affecting property belonging to the pe rson 
who commits the act, or to that person and others jointly. 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 104]
104 
 Illustrations 
(a) A voluntarily burns a valuable security belonging to Z intending to ca use wrongful loss to Z. A has committed mischief. 
(b) A introduces water in to an ice-house belonging to Z and thus causes the ice to melt, intending wrongful loss to Z. A has 
committed mischief. 
(c) A voluntarily throws into a river a ring belonging to Z, with the intention  of thereby causing wrongful loss to Z. A has 
committed mischief. 
(d) A, knowing that his effects are about to be taken in executio n in order to satisfy a debt due from him to Z, destroys those 
effects, with the intention of thereby preventing Z from obtaining satisfac tion of the debt, and of thus causing damage to Z. A ha s 
committed mischief. 
(e) A having insured a ship, voluntarily causes the same to be cast away , with the intention of causing damage to the 
underwriters. A has committed mischief. 
(f) A causes a ship to be cast away, intending thereby to cause dama ge to Z who has lent money on bottomry on the ship. A 
has committed mischief. 
(g) A, having joint property with Z in a horse, shoots the horse, inten ding thereby to cause wrongful loss to Z. A has 
committed mischief. 
(h) A causes cattle to enter upon a field belonging to Z, intending to ca use and knowing that he is likely to cause damage to 
Z's crop. A has committed mischief. 
426. Punishment for mischief .—Whoever commits mischief shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine, or with both. 
427. Mischief causing damage to the amount of fifty rupees .—Whoever commits mischief and 
thereby causes loss or damage to the amount of fifty rupees or upwards, shall be punishe d with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or w ith both.  
428. Mischief by killing or maiming animal of the value of ten rupees .—Whoever commits 
mischief by killing, poisoning, maiming or rendering useless any animal or anima
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 104]
 .—Whoever commits 
mischief by killing, poisoning, maiming or rendering useless any animal or animals of  the value of the ten 
rupees or upwards, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
429. Mischief by killing or maiming cattle, etc., of any value or any animal of t he value of fifty 
rupees .—Whoever commits mischief by killing, poisoning, maiming or rendering useless, any elephant, 
camel, horse, mule, buffalo, bull, cow or ox, whatever may be the value thereof, or any ot her animal of 
the value of fifty rupees or upwards, shall be punished with imprisonment of  either description for a term 
which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both. 
430. Mischief by injury to works of irrigation or by wrongfully diverting water .—Whoever 
commits mischief by doing any act which causes, or which he knows to be likely to cause , a diminution 
of the supply of water for agricultural purposes, or for food or drink f or human beings or for animals 
which are property, or for cleanliness or for carrying on any manufacture, shall  be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or w ith both. 
431. Mischief by injury to public road, bridge, river or channel .—Whoever commits mischief by 
doing any act which renders or which he knows to be likely to render any public road, bridge, navigable 
river or navigable channel, natural or artificial, impassable or less s afe for travelling or conveying 
property, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term whi ch may extend to five 
years, or with fine, or with both. 
432. Mischief by causing inundation or obstruction to public drainage attended with damage .—
Whoever commits mischief by doing any act which causes or which he knows to be likel y to cause an 
inundation or an obstruction to any public drainage attended with injury or damage, shall  be
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 104]
se an 
inundation or an obstruction to any public drainage attended with injury or damage, shall  be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five y ears, or with fine, or with 
both. 
433. Mischief by destroying, moving or rendering less useful a light-house or sea-mark .—
Whoever commits mischief by destroying or moving any light-house or other li ght used as a sea-mark, or 
any sea-mark or buoy or other thing placed as a guide for navigators, or by any act  which renders any 
such light-house, sea-mark, buoy or other such thing as aforesaid less useful as a guide for navigators, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, or 
with fine, or with both. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 105]
105 
 434. Mischief by destroying or moving, etc., a land-mark fixed by public authority .—Whoever 
commits mischief by destroying or moving any land-mark fixed by the authori ty of a public servant, or by 
any act which renders such land-mark less useful as such, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both. 
435. Mischief by fire or explosive substance with intent to cause damage to amount of one 
hundred or (in case of agricultural produce) ten rupees .—Whoever commits mischief by fire or any 
explosive substance intending to cause, or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby cause, damage to 
any property to the amount of one hundred rupees or upwards 1[or (where the property is agricultural 
produce) ten rupees or upwards], shall be punished with imprisonment of either descripti on for a term 
which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine. 
436. Mischief by fire or explosive substance with intent to destroy house, etc .—Whoever commits 
mischief by fire or any explosive substance, intending to cause, or knowing it to be li kely that he will 
thereby cause, the destruction of any building which is ordinarily used as a place of worship or as a 
human dwelling or as a place for the custody of property, shall be punished wi th 2[imprisonment for life], 
or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be 
liable to fine. 
437. Mischief with intent to destroy or make unsafe a decked vessel or one of twenty t ons 
burden .—Whoever commits mischief to any decked vessel or any vessel of a burden of twenty tons or 
upwards, intending to destroy or render unsafe, or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby destroy or 
render unsafe, that vessel, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
438. Punishment for the mischief de
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 105]
ich may 
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
438. Punishment for the mischief described in section 437 committed by fire or explosiv e 
substance. —Whoever commits, or attempts to commit, by fire or any explosive substance, such mischief 
as is described in the last preceding section, shall be punished with 2[imprisonment for life], or with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
439. Punishment for intentionally running vessel aground or ashore with intent to commit theft, 
etc.—Whoever intentionally runs any vessel aground or ashore, intending to commit theft of any  property 
contained therein or to dishonestly misappropriate any such property, or with intent that such theft or 
misappropriation of property may be committed, shall be punished with imprisonment  of either 
description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
440. Mischief committed after preparation made for causing death or hurt .—Whoever commits 
mischief, having made preparation for causing to any person death, or hurt, or wrongful restraint, or fear 
of death, or of hurt, or of wrongful restraint, shall be punished with imprisonment of  either description for 
a term which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
Of criminal trespass 
441. Criminal trespass .—Whoever enters into or upon property in the possession of another with 
intent to commit an offence or to intimidate, insult or annoy any person in possession of such property ,  
or having lawfully entered into or upon such property, unlawfully remains there with i ntent thereby to 
intimidate, insult or annoy any such person, or with intent to commit an offence,  
is said to commit “criminal trespass ”. 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Orissa 
Amendment of section 441 .-In the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (45 of 1860), for section 441, the 
following section shall be substituted, namely: — 
“441.Criminal tres
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 105]
f 1860), for section 441, the 
following section shall be substituted, namely: — 
“441.Criminal trespass .-Whoever enters into or upon property in possession of another with 
intent to commit an offence or to intimidate, insult or annoy any person in posse ssion of such 
property, 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 8 of 1882, s. 10 
2. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation forlife” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1956).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 106]
106 
    Or having lawfully entered into or upon such property, unlawfully remains there wi th intent 
thereby to intimidate, insult or annoy any such person or with intent to commit an offence. 
   Or having lawfully entered into or upon such property, remains there with the intent ion of 
taking unauthorized possession or making unauthorized use of such property and fails t o withdraw 
from such property or its possession or use, when called upon to do so by that another person by 
notice in writing, duly served  on him, 
Is said to commit criminal trespass. ” 
[Vide Orissa Act 22 of 1986, s. 2] 
442. House-trespass .—Whoever commits criminal trespass by entering into or remaining in any 
building, tent or vessel used as a human dwelling or any building used as a place for w orship, or as a 
place for the custody of property, is said to commit “house-trespass ”. 
Explanation .—The introduction of any part of the criminal trespasser's body is entering suffici ent to 
constitute house-trespass. 
443. Lurking house-trespass .—Whoever commits house-trespass having taken precautions to 
conceal such house-trespass from some person who has a right to exclude or eject the tr espasser from the 
building, tent or vessel which is the subject of the trespass, is said to commit “lurking house-trespass ”. 
444. Lurking house-trespass by night .—Whoever commits lurking house-trespass after sunset and 
before sunrise, is said to commit “lurking house-trespass by night ”. 
445. House-breaking .—A person is said to commit “house-breaking ” who commits house-trespass if 
he effects his entrance into the house or any part of it in any of the six ways hereinafter described; or if, 
being in the house or any part of it for the purpose of committing an offence, or  having committed an 
offence therein, he quits the house or any part of it in any of such six ways, that is to say: — 
First .—If he enters or quits through a passage made by himself, or by any abettor of the ho use-
trespas
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 106]
 .—If he enters or quits through a passage made by himself, or by any abettor of the ho use-
trespass, in order to the committing of the house-trespass. 
Secondly .—If he enters or quits through any passage not intended by any person, other than himsel f 
or an abettor of the offence, for human entrance; or through any passage to which he has  obtained access 
by scaling or climbing over any wall or building. 
Thirdly .—If he enters or quits through any passage which he or any abettor of the house-trespas s has 
opened, in order to the committing of the house-trespass by any means by which that passag e was not 
intended by the occupier of the house to be opened. 
Fourthly .—If he enters or quits by opening any lock in order to the committing of the house-tr espass, 
or in order to the quitting of the house after a house-trespass. 
Fifthly .—If he effects his entrance or departure by using criminal force or committing  an assault, or 
by threa tening any person with assault. 
Sixthly .—If he enters or quits by any passage which he knows to have been fastened against such  
entrance or departure, and to have been unfastened by himself or by an abettor of the house-trespass. 
Explanation .—Any out-house or building occupied with a house, and between which and such house 
there is an immediate internal communication, is part of the house within the meaning of this sect ion. 
Illustrations 
(a) A commits house-trespass by making a hole through the wall of Z's  house, and putting his hand through the aperture. 
This is house-breaking. 
(b) A commits house-trespass by creeping into a ship at a port-hole be tween decks. This is house-breaking. 
(c) A commits house-trespass by entering Z's house through a window. This i s house-breaking. 
(d) A commits house-trespass by entering Z's house through the door, ha ving opened a door which was fastened. This is 
house-breaking. 
(e) A commits house-trespass by entering Z's house through the door, ha ving lifted a latch by putting
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 106]
) A commits house-trespass by entering Z's house through the door, ha ving lifted a latch by putting a wire through a hole 
in the door. This is house-breaking. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 107]
107 
 (f) A finds the key of Z's house door, which Z had lost, and commit s house-trespass by entering Z's house, having opened 
the door with that key. This is house-breaking. 
(g) Z is standing in his doorway. A forces a passage by knocking Z do wn, and commits house-trespass by entering the 
house. This is house-breaking. 
(h) Z, the door-keeper of Y, is standing in Y's doorway. A commits h ouse-trespass by entering the house, having deterred Z 
from opposing him by threatening to beat him. This is house-breaking.  
446. House-breaking by night .—Whoever commits house-breaking after sunset and before sunrise, 
is said to commit “house-breaking by night ”. 
447. Punishment for criminal trespass .—Whoever commits criminal trespass shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three months, or  with fine which 
may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
448. Punishment for house-trespass .—Whoever commits house-trespass shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
449. House-trespass in order to commit offence punishable with death .—Whoever commits 
house-trespass in order to the committing of any offence punishable with death,  shall be punished with 
1[imprisonment for life], or with rigorous imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years, and shall also 
be liable to fine. 
450. House-trespass in order to commit offence punishable with imprisonment for li fe.—
Whoever commits house-trespass in order to the committing of any offence punish able with 
1[imprisonment for life], shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term not 
exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
451. House-trespass in order to commit offence punishable with imprisonment .—Whoever 
commits house-trespass in order to the committing of any offence punishable wit h imprisonment, shall 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 107]
mmits house-trespass in order to the committing of any offence punishable wit h imprisonment, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend t o two years, and shall 
also be liable to fine; and if the offence intended to be committed is theft, the term of the imprisonment 
may be extended to seven years. 
452. House-trespass alter preparation for hurt, assault or wrongful restraint .—Whoever 
commits house-trespass, having made preparation for causing hurt to any person or for  assaulting any 
person, or for wrongfully restraining any person, or for putting and person in fear  of hurt, or of assault, or 
of wrongful restraint, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description f or a term which may 
extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
453. Punishment for lurking house-trespass or house-breaking .—Whoever commits lurking 
house-trespass or house-breaking, shall be punished with imprisonment of either descr iption for a term 
which may extend to two years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
454. Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking in order to commit offence punishable with 
imprisonment .—Whoever commits lurking house-trespass or house-breaking, in order to the commit ting 
of any offence punishable with imprisonment, shall be punished with imprisonment of eith er description 
for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine; and if  the offence intended to 
be committed is theft, the term of the imprisonment may be extended to ten years. 
455. Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking after preparation for hurt, assault or wrongful 
restraint .—Whoever commits lurking hou se-trespass, or house-breaking, having made preparation for 
causing hurt to any person, or for assaulting any person, or for wrongfully restraining any person, or for 
putting any person in fear of hurt or of assault or of wrongful restraint, shal l be punished with 
imprisonment of either descript
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 107]
urt or of assault or of wrongful restraint, shal l be punished with 
imprisonment of either description or a term which may extend to ten years, a nd shall also be liable to 
fine. 
456. Punishment for lurking house-trespass or house-breaking by night .—Whoever commits 
lurking hou se-trespass by night, or house-breaking by night, shall be punished with impr isonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
457. Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking by night in order to commit offence punishable 
with imprisonment .—Whoever commits lurking house-trespass by night, or house-breaking by night, in 
order to the committing of any offence punishable with imprisonment, shall be punished w ith 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1956). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 108]
108 
 fine; and, if the offence intended to be committed is theft, the term of the impr isonment may be extended 
to fourteen years. 
458. Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking by night after preparation for hurt, assault, or 
wrongful restraint .—Whoever commits lurking house-trespass by night, or house-breaking by night, 
having made preparation for causing hurt to any person or for assaulting any person, or for wrongfully 
restraining any person, or for putting any person in fear of hurt, or of assaul t, or of wrongful restraint, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may  extend to fourteen years, 
and shall also be liable to fine. 
459. Grievous hurt caused whilst committing lurking house-trespass or house-breaking .—
Whoever, whilst committing lurking house-trespass or house-breaking, causes grievous hurt to any person  
or attempts to cause death or grievous hurt to any person, shall be punished with 1[imprisonment for life], 
or imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten y ears, and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
460. All persons jointly concerned in lurking house-trespass or house-breaking by night 
punishable where death or grievous hurt caused by one of them .—If, at the time of the committing of 
lurking house-trespass by night or house-breaking by night, any person guilty of such offence shall 
voluntarily cause or attempt to cause death or grievous hurt to any person, every p erson jointly concerned 
in committing such lurkking house-trespass by night or house-breaking by night , shall be punished with 
1[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of either description for a ter m which may extend to ten 
years, and shall also be liable to fine.  
461. Dishonestly breaking open receptacle containing property .—Whoever dishonestly or with 
intent to commit mischief, breaks open or unfastens any closed receptacle which contains or which he 
believes to contain property, shall be punish
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 108]
tens any closed receptacle which contains or which he 
believes to contain property, shall be punished with imprisonment of either descri ption for a term which 
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
462. Punishment for same offence when committed by person entrusted with custody .—
Whoever, being entrusted with any closed receptacle which contains or which he believes to  contain 
property, without having authority to open the same, dishonestly, or with inten t to commit mischief, 
breaks open or unfastens that receptacle, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
CHAPTER XVIII 
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO  DOCUMENTSAND TO2*** P ROPERTY  MARKS  
463. Forgery .—3[Whoever makes any false document or false electronic record or part of a 
document or electronic record, with intent to cause damage or injury], to the public or to any person, or to 
support any claim or title, or to cause any person to part with property, or to ent er into any express or 
implied contract, or with intent to commit fraud or that fraud may be committed, commits for gery. 
464. Making a false document .—3[A person is said to make a false document or false electronic 
record — 
First. —Who dishonestly or fraudulently — 
(a) makes, signs, seals or executes a document or part of a document; 
(b) makes or transmits any electronic record or part of any electronic record; 
(c) affixes any 4[electronic signature] on any electronic record; 
(d) makes any mark denoting the execution of a document or the authenticity of t he 
4[electronic signature], 
with the intention of causing it to be believed that such document or part of docum ent, electronic 
record or 4[electronic signature] was made, signed, sealed, executed, transmitted or affixed by or by the 
authority of a person by whom or by whose authority he knows that it was not made , singed, sealed, 
executed or affixed; or 
Secondly. —Who without
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 108]
ity he knows that it was not made , singed, sealed, 
executed or affixed; or 
Secondly. —Who without lawful authority, dishonestly or fraudulently, by cance llation or otherwise, alters a document or an 
electronic record in any material part thereof, after it has been made, executed or affixed with 4[electronic signature] either by 
himself or by any other person, whether such person be living or d ead at the time of such alteration; or 
Thirdly. —Who dishonestly or fraudulently causes any person to sign, seal, ex ecute or alter a document or an electronic 
record or to affix his 4[electronic signature] on any electronic record knowing that such person by  reason of unsoundness of mind 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1956). 
2. The words “TRADE OR” omitted by Act 43 of 1958, s. 135 and Sch . (w.e.f. 25 -11-1959). 
3. Subs. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 91 and the First Sch., for ce rtain words (w.e.f. 17- 10-2000). 
4. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 51, for “digital signature”  (w.e.f. 27- 10-2009).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 109]
109 
 or intoxication cannot, or that by reason of deception practised upon him, he does not know the contents of the document or 
electronic record or the nature of the alteration.] 
Illustrations 
(a) A has a letter of credit upon B for rupees 10,000, written by Z. A, in order to defraud B, adds cipher to the 10,000, and makes the sum 
1,00,000 intending that it may be believed by B tha t Z so wrote the letter. A has committed forgery.  
(b) A, without Z's authority, affixes Z's seal to a document  purporting to be a conveyance of an estate from Z to  A, with the intention of 
selling the estate to B and thereby of obtaining from B the purchase-money. A has committed forgery. 
(c) A picks up a cheque on a banker signed by B, payabl e to bearer, but without any sum having been inserted i n the cheque. A fraudulently 
fills up the cheque by inserting the sum of ten thousand r upees. A commits forgery. 
(d) A leaves with B, his agent, a cheque on a banker, s igned by A, without inserting the sum payable and aut horizes B to fill up the cheque 
by inserting a sum not exceeding ten thousand rupees fo r the purpose of making certain payments. B fraudulently fills up the cheque by inserting 
the sum of twenty thousand rupees. B commits forgery. 
(e) A draws a bill of exchange on himself in the name of B without B's authority, intending to discount it as a ge nuine bill with a banker and 
intending to take up the bill on its maturity. Here, as A draws the bill with intent to deceive the banker  by leading him to suppose that he had the 
security of B, and thereby to discount the bill, A i s guilty of forgery. 
(f) Z's will contains these words —“I direct that all my remaining property be equally div ided between A, B and C. ” A dishonestly scratches 
out B's name, intending that it may be believed that the  whole was left to himself and C. A has committed forgery . 
(g) A endorses a Government promissory note and makes it payab le to Z or his order by writing on the bill 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 109]
ndorses a Government promissory note and makes it payab le to Z or his order by writing on the bill the words “Pay to Z or his order ” 
and signing the endorsement. B dishonestly erases the wor ds “Pay to Z or his order ”, and thereby converts the special endorsement into a b lank 
endorsement. B commits forgery. 
(h) A sells and conveys an estate to Z. A afterwards, in orde r to defraud Z of his estate, executes a conveyance of t he same estate to B, dated 
six months earlier than the date of the conveyance to Z, intending it to be believed that he had conveyed  the estate to B before he conveyed it to 
Z. A has committed forgery. 
(i) Z dictates his will to A. A intentionally writes dow n a different legatee named by Z, and by representing  to Z that he has prepared the 
will according to his instructions, induces Z to sign th e will. A has committed forgery. 
(j) A writes a letter and signs it with B's name without B's authority, certifying that A is a man of good characte r and in distressed 
circumstances from unforeseen misfortune, intending by means of such letter to obtain alms from Z and other persons. H ere, as A made a false 
document in order to induce Z to part with property,  A has committed forgery. 
(k) A without B's authority writes a letter and signs it in B's name certifying to A's character, intending ther eby to obtain employment under 
Z. A has committed forgery inasmuch as he intended to d eceive Z by the forged certificate, and thereby to induce Z to enter into an express o r 
implied contract for service. 
Explanation 1.—A man ’s signature of his own name may amount to forgery.  
Illustrations 
(a) A signs his own name to a bill of exchange, intending  that it may be believed that the bill was drawn by an other person of the same 
name. A has committed forgery. 
(b) A writes the word “accepted ” on a piece of paper and signs it with Z's name, in orde r that B may afterwards write on the paper a bill of 
exchange drawn by B upon Z, and negoti
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 109]
in orde r that B may afterwards write on the paper a bill of 
exchange drawn by B upon Z, and negotiate the bill as though it had been accepted by Z. A is guilty of fo rgery; and if B, knowing the fact, draws 
the bill upon the paper pursuant to A's intention, B is  also guilty of forgery. 
(c) A picks up a bill of exchange payable to the order  of a different person of the same name. A endorses the bil l in his own name, intending 
to cause it to be believed that it was endorsed by the person to whose order it was payable; here A has committe d forgery. 
(d) A purchases an estate sold under execution of a decre e against B. B, after the seizure of the estate, in co llusion with Z, executes a lease 
of the estate, to Z at a nominal rent and for a long period and dates the lease six months prior to the seizure , with intent to defraud A, and to cause 
it to be believed that the lease was granted before th e seizure. B, though he executes the lease in his own n ame, commits forgery by antedating it. 
(e) A, a trader, in anticipation of insolvency, lodges effects with B for A's benefit, and with intent to de fraud his creditors; and in order to 
give a colour to the transaction, writes a promissory no te binding himself to pay to B a sum for value receive d, and antedates the note, intending 
that it may be believed to have been made before A was on the point of insolvency. A has committed forgery un der the first head of the 
definition. 
Explanation 2 .—The making of a false document in the name of a fictiou s person, intending it to be believed that the docume nt was made 
by a real person, or in the name of a deceased person, in tending it to be believed that the document was made by  the person in his lifetime, may 
amount to forgery. 
Illustration 
A draws a bill of exchange upon a fictious person, and  fraudulently accepts the bill in the name of such fi ctitious person with intent to negotiate 
it. A commits forgery. 
1[Explanation  3.—For the purposes of this 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 109]
person with intent to negotiate 
it. A commits forgery. 
1[Explanation  3.—For the purposes of this section, the expression “affixing 2[electronic signature] ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in 
clause ( d) of sub-section ( 1) of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000  (21 of 2000) .] 
465. Punishment for forgery .—Whoever commits forgery shall be punished with imprisonmen t of either description for a term which may 
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
466. Forgery of record of Court or of public registe r, etc .—3[Whoever forges a document or an electronic record], p urporting to be a 
record or proceeding of or in a Court of Justice, or a register of birth, baptism, marriage or burial, or a re gister kept by a public servant as such, or 
a certificate or document purporting to be made by a public servant in his official capacity, or an author ity to institute or defend a suit, or to take 
any proceedings therein, or to confess judgment, or a p ower of attorney, shall be punished with imprisonment o f either description for a term 
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
1[Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “register ” includes any list, data or record of any entries mainta ined in the electronic form 
as defined in clause ( r) of sub­section ( 1) of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000  (21 of 2000) .] 
467. Forgery of valuable security, will, etc .—Whoever forges a document which purports to be a valuable 
security or a will, or an authority to adopt a son, or which purports to  give authority to any person to make or transfer any 
valuable security, or to receive the principal, interest or dividends thereo n, or to receive or deliver any money, movable property, 
or valuable security, or any document purporting to be an acquit tance or receipt acknowledging the payment of money, or an 
acquittance or receipt for the delivery of any movable property or v aluable s ecurity, shal
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 109]
 or an 
acquittance or receipt for the delivery of any movable property or v aluable s ecurity, shall be punished with 4[imprisonment for 
life], or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 91 and the First Sch. (w. e.f. 17- 10-2000).  
2. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 51, for “digital signatu re” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009). 
3. Subs. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 91 and the First Sch., f or certain words (w.e.f. 17- 10-2000). 
4. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “t ransportation for life” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1956). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 110]
110 
 468. Forgery for purpose of cheating .—Whoever commits forgery, intending that the 1[document or 
electronic record forged] shall be used for the purpose of cheating , shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also b e liable to fine. 
469. Forgery for purpose of harming reputation .—Whoever commits forgery, 2[intending that the document 
or electronic record forged] shall harm the reputation of any party, o r knowing that it is likely to be used for that 
purpose, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description f or a term which may extend to three years, an d 
shall also be liable to fine. 
470. Forged document .—A false 3[document or electronic record] made wholly or in part by forgery is 
designated “a forged 3[document or electronic record] ”. 
471. Using as genuine a forged document or electronic record .—Whoever fraudulently or dishonestly uses 
as genuine any 3[document or electronic record] which he knows or has reason to believe to be a forged 3[document 
or electronic record], shall be punished in the same manner as if he had f orged such 3[document or electronic 
record]. 
472. Making or possessing counterfeit seal, etc., with intent to commit fo rgery punishable under section 
467.—Whoever makes or counterfeits any seal, plate or other instrument for making an impression, intending that 
the same shall be used for the purpose of committing any forgery which would be punishable under section 467 of 
this Code, or, with such intent, has in his possession any suc h seal, plate or other instrument, knowing the same to be 
counterfeit, shall be punished with 4[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of either description f or a term 
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
473. Making or possessing counterfeit seal, etc., with intent to commit forger y punishable otherwise. —
Whoever makes or counterfeits any seal, plate or other instrument
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 110]
t forger y punishable otherwise. —
Whoever makes or counterfeits any seal, plate or other instrument fo r making an impression, intending that the same 
shall be used for the purpose of committing any forgery which would be punishable under any section of this 
Chapter other than section 467, or, with such intent, has in his pos session any such seal, plate or other instrument, 
knowing the same to be counterfeit, shall be punished with impriso nment of either description for a term which may 
extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
474. Having possession of document described in section 466 or 467, knowing it to be forged an d 
intending to use it genuine .—5[Whoever has in his possession any document or electronic record, 
knowing the same to be forged and intending that the same shall fraudulently  or dishonestly be used as 
genuine, shall, if the document or electronic record is one of the description m entioned in section 466 of 
this Code], be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which ma y extend to seven 
years, and shall also be liable to fine; and if the document is one of the descript ion mentioned in secti on 
467, shall be punished with 4[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of either description, for a 
term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
475. Counterfeiting device or mark used for authenticating documents described in section 467, 
or possessing counterfeit marked material .—Whoever counterfeits upon, or in the substance of, any 
material, any device or mark used for the purpose of authenticating any document descri bed in section 
467 of this Code, intending that such device or mark shall be used for the purpose  of giving the 
appearance of authenticity to any document then forged or thereafter to be forged on suc h material, or 
who, with such intent, has in his possession any material upon or in the substance of whi ch any such 
device or mark has been counterfei
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 110]
session any material upon or in the substance of whi ch any such 
device or mark has been counterfeited, shall be punished with 4[imprisonment for life], or with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, a nd shall also be liable to 
fine. 
476. Counterfeiting device or mark used for authenticating documents other than those 
described in section 467, or possessing counterfeit marked material .—Whoever counterfeits upon, or 
in the substance of, any material, any device or mark used for the purpose of au thenticating 6[any 
document or electronic record] other than the documents described in section 467 of this Code, intending 
that such device or mark shall be used for the purpose of giving the appearan ce of authenticity to any 
document then forged or thereafter to be forged on such material, or who with such intent , has in his 
possession any material upon or in the substance of which any such device or mark has  been 
counterfeited, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term whi ch may extend to 
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 91 and the First Sch., “d ocument forget” (w.e.f. 17 -10-2000). 
2. Subs. by s. 91, and the First Sch., ibid., “intending that the document forged” (w.e.f. 17 -10-2000).  
3. Subs. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 91 and the First Sch., fo r “document” (w.e.f. 17 -10-2000). 
5. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1956). 
4. Subs. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 91 and the First Sch., f or certain words (w.e.f. 17- 10-2000). 
6. Subs. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 91 and the First Sch., f or “any document” (w.e.f. 17 -10-2000). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 111]
111 
 477. Fraudulent cancellation, destruction, etc., of will, authority to adopt, or valuable 
security .—Whoever fraudulently or dishonestly, or with intent to cause damage or injury t o the public or 
to any person, cancels, destroys or defaces, or attempts to cancel, destroy or deface, or  secretes or 
attempts to secrete any document which is or purports to be a will, or an authority  to adopt a son, or any 
valuable security, or commits mischief in respect of such document, shall be punished  with 
1[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of either description for a term  which may extend to seven 
years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
2[477A. Falsification of accounts .—Whoever, being a clerk, officer or servant, or employed or 
acting in the capacity of a clerk, officer or servant, wilfully, and wit h intent to defraud, destroys, alters, 
mutilates or falsifies any 3[book, electronic record, paper, writing] valuable security or account which 
belongs to or is in the possession of his employer, or has been received by him for or on behalf of his 
employer, or wilfully, and with intent to defraud, makes or abets the making of any false entry in, or 
omits or alters or abets the omission or alteration of any material parti cular from or in. any such 5[book, 
electronic record, paper, writing] valuable security or account, shall be punishe d with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both. 
Explanation .—It shall be sufficient in any charge under this section to allege a general  intent to 
defraud without naming any particular person intended to be defrauded or specifying any partic ular sum 
of money intended to be the subject of the fraud, or any particular day on which the  offence was 
committed.]  
4[Of  5*** property and other marks 
478. [Trade Mark .] Rep. by the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act , 1958 (43 of 1958), s. 135 andSch.  
(w. e. f.  25-11-1959). 
479. Property mark .—A 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 111]
ise Marks Act , 1958 (43 of 1958), s. 135 andSch.  
(w. e. f.  25-11-1959). 
479. Property mark .—A mark used for denoting that movable property belongs to a particular 
person is called a property mark. 
480. [Using a false trade mark .] Rep. by the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act , 1958 (43 of 1958),           
s. 135 and Sch.  (w.e.f.  25- 11-1959). 
481. Using a false property mark .—Whoever marks any movable property or goods or any case, 
package or other receptacle containing movable property or goods, or uses any ca se, package or other 
receptacle having any mark thereon, in a manner reasonably calculated to cause it to be be lieved that the 
property or goods so marked, or any property or goods contained in any such receptacle so marked, 
belong to a person to whom they do not belong, is said to use a false property mark. 
482. Punishment for using a false property mark .—Whoever uses 6*** any false property mark 
shall, unless he proves that he acted without intent to defraud, be punished wit h imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both. 
483. Counterfeiting a property mark used by another .—Whoever counterfeits any 7*** property 
mark used by any other person shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which 
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
484. Counterfeiting a mark used by a public servant .—Whoever counterfeits any property mark 
used by a public servant, or any mark used by a public servant to denote that any propert y has been 
manufactured by a particular person or at a particular time or place, or that th e property is of a particular 
quality or has passed through a particular office, or that it is entitl ed to any exemption, or uses as genuine 
any such mark knowing the same to be counterfeit, shall be punished with imprisonment of eit her 
description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
         
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 111]
description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for l ife” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1956).  
2. Ins. by Act 3 of 1895, s. 4. 
3. Subs. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 91 and the First Sch., for “bo ok, paper, writing” (w.e.f. 17 -10-2000).  
4. Subs. by Act 4 of 1889, s. 3, for the original heading and  ss. 478 to 489. 
5. The word “ Trade ” omitted by Act 43 of 1958, s. 135 and the Sch. (w.e.f. 25- 11-1959). 
6. The words “any false trade mark or” omitted by s. 135 and the Sch., ibid. (w.e.f. 25- 11-1959). 
7. The words “trade mark or” omit ted by s. 135 and the Sch., ibid. (w.e.f. 25- 11-1959). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 112]
112 
 1[485. Making or possession of any instrument for counterfeiting a property mark .—Whoever 
makes or has in his possession any die, plate or other instrument for the purpose of  counterfeiting a 
proper ty mark, or has in his possession a property mark for the purpose of denoting that any  goods belong 
to a person to whom they do not belong, shall be punished with imprisonment of either d escription for a 
term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.] 
486. Selling goods marked with a counterfeit property mark .—2[Whoever sells, or exposes, or has 
in possession for sale, any goods or things with a counterfeit property mark] aff ixed to or impressed upon 
the same or to or upon any case, package or other receptacle in which such goods are c ontained, shall, 
unless he proves 
(a) that, having taken all reasonable precautions against committing an offence against  this 
section, he had at the time of the commission of the alleged offence no reason to suspect the  
genuineness of the mark, and 
(b) that, on demand made by or on behalf of the prosecutor, he gave all the information in his 
power with respect to the persons from whom he obtained such goods or things, or 
(c) that otherwise he had acted innocently, 
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may exte nd to one year, or with 
fine, or with both. 
487. Making a false mark upon any receptacle containing goods .—Whoever makes any false 
mark upon any case, package or other receptacle containing goods, in a manner reasonably cal culated to 
cause any public servant or any other person to believe that such receptacle contains goods which it does 
not contain or that it does not contain goods which it does contain, or that the goods contained in such 
receptacle are of a nature or quality different from the real nature or  quality thereof, shall, unless he 
proves that he acted without intent to defraud, be punished with imprisonment of either description fo
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 112]
oves that he acted without intent to defraud, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
488. Punishment for making use of any such false mark .—Whoever makes use of any such false 
mark in any manner prohibited by the last foregoing section shall, unless he prov es that he acted without 
intent to defraud, be punished as if he had committed an offence against that section. 
489. Tampering with property mark with intent to cause injury .—Whoever removes, destroys, 
defaces or adds to any property mark, intending or knowing it to be likely that he may thereby cause 
injury to any person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either descripti on for a term which may 
extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.] 
3[Of currency-notes and bank-notes  
489A. Counterfeiting currency-notes or bank-notes .—Whoever counterfeits, or knowingly 
performs any part of the process of counterfeiting, any currency-note or bank-note, shal l be punished with 
4[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten 
years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section and of sections 489B, 5[489C, 489D and 489E], the 
expression “bank-note ” means a promissory note or engagement for the payment of money to bearer on  
demand issued by any person carrying on the business of banking in any part of the worl d, or issued by or 
under the authority of any State or Sovereign Power, and intended to be used as equivalent to, or as a 
substitute for money. 
489B. Using as genuine, forged or counterfeit currency-notes or bank-notes .—Whoever sells to, 
or buys or receives from, any other person, or otherwise traffics in or uses as  genuine, any forged or 
counterfeit currency-note or bank-note, knowing or having reason to believe the same t o be forged or 
counterfeit, shall be punished with 4[imprisonment for life], or with im
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 112]
 the same t o be forged or 
counterfeit, shall be punished with 4[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of either description for 
a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 43 of 1958, s. 135 and the Sch., for s. 48 5 (w.e.f. 25- 11-1959). 
2. Subs. by s. 135 and the Sch., ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 25- 11-1959).  
3. Added by Act 12 of 1899, s. 2. 
4. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1956). 
5. Subs. by Act 35 of 1950, s. 3 and the Second Sch., fo r “489C and 489D”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 113]
113 
 489C. Possession of forged or counterfeit currency-notes or bank-notes .—Whoever has in his 
possession any forged or counterfeit currency-note or bank-note, knowing or having reason to be lieve the 
same to be forged or counterfeit and intending to use the same as genuine or that it ma y be used as 
genuine, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven 
years, or with fine, or with both. 
489D. Making or possessing instruments or materials for forging or counterfeiting currency 
notes or bank-notes .—Whoever makes, or performs any part of the process of making, or buys or sells  
or disposes of, or has in his possession, any machinery, instrument or material f or the purpose of being 
used, or knowing or having reason to believe that it is intended to be used, for forgi ng or counterfeiting 
any currency-note or bank-note, shall be punished with 1[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.] 
2[489E. Making or using documents resembling currency-notes or bank-notes .—(1) Whoever 
makes, or causes to be made, or uses for any purpose whatsoever, or delivers to any person, any document 
purporting to be, or in any way resembling, or so nearly resembling as to be calcul ated to deceive, any 
currency-note or bank-note shall be punished with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees. 
(2) If any person, whose name appears on a document the making of which is an offence under  
sub-section ( 1), refuses, without lawful excuse, to disclose to a police-officer on being so requi red the 
name and address of the person by whom it was printed or otherwise made, he shall be puni shed with fine 
which may extend to two hundred rupees. 
(3) Where the name of any person appears on any document in respect of which any person is 
charged with an offence under sub-section ( 1) or on any other document used or distributed in con
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 113]
 
charged with an offence under sub-section ( 1) or on any other document used or distributed in connection 
with that document it may, until the contrary is proved, be presumed that that person caused the document 
to be made.] 
CHAPTER XIX 
OFTHE  CRIMINAL  BREACHOF  CONTRACTSOF  SERVICE  
490. [Breach of contract of service during voyage or journey .] Rep. by the Workmen's Breach of 
Contract (Repealing) Act, 1925 (3 of 1925), s. 2 and Sch.  
491. Breach of contract to attend on and supply wants of helpless person .—Whoever, being 
bound by a lawful contract to attend on or to supply the wants of any person who, by reason of youth, o r 
of unsoundness of mind, or of a disease or bodily weakness, is helpless or incapable of pr oviding for his 
own safety or of supplying his own wants, voluntarily omits so to do, shall be punished w ith 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may 
extend to two hundred rupees, or with both. 
492. [Breach of contract to serve at distant place to which servant is conveyed at master's exp ense.] 
Rep. by the Workmen's Breach of Contract (Repealing ) Act,1925 (3 of 1925), s. 2 and Sch. 
CHAPTER XX 
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO MARRIAGE  
493. Cohabitation caused by a man deceitfully inducing a belief of lawful marriage .—Every man 
who by deceit causes any woman who is not lawfully married to him to believe that she is lawfully 
married to him and to cohabit or have sexual intercourse with him in that bel ief, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and s hall also be liable to 
fine. 
494. Marrying again during lifetime of husband or wife .—Whoever, having a husband or wife 
living, marries in any case in which such marriage is void by reason of its taking  place during the life of 
such husband or wife, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description f or a term which may 
extend to seven years, and shall also
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 113]
with imprisonment of either description f or a term which may 
extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transp ortation for life” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
2. Ins. by Act 6 of 1943, s. 2.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 114]
114 
 Exception .—This section does not extend to any person whose marriage with such husband or wife 
has been declared void by a Court of competent jurisdiction, 
nor to any person who contracts a marriage during the life of a former husband or  wife, if such 
husband or wife, at the time of the subsequent marriage, shall have been continually absent from such 
person for the space of seven years, and shall not have been heard of by such person as being ali ve within 
that time provided the person contracting such subsequent marriage shall, before such marri age takes 
place, inform the person with whom such marriage is contracted of the real state of f acts so far as the 
same are within his or her knowledge. 
495. Same offence with concealment of former marriage from person with whom subsequen t 
marriage is contracted. —Whoever commits the offence defined in the last preceding section having 
concealed from the person with whom the subsequent marriage is contracted, the fact  of the former 
marriage, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten 
years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
496. Marriage ceremony fraudulently gone through without lawful marriage .—Whoever, 
dishonestly or with a fraudulent intention, goes through the ceremony of being marri ed, knowing that he 
is not thereby lawfully married, shall be punished with imprisonment of e ither description for a term 
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
497. Adultery .—Whoever has sexual intercourse with a person who is and whom he knows or has 
reason to believe to be the wife of another man, without the consent or connivance  of that man, such 
sexual intercourse not amounting to the offence of rape, is guilty of the offe nce of adultery, and shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to f ive years, or with fine, 
or with both. In such case the wife shall not be punishable as an
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 114]
end to f ive years, or with fine, 
or with both. In such case the wife shall not be punishable as an abettor. 
498. Enticing or taking away or detaining with criminal intent a married woman .—Whoever 
takes or entices away any woman who is and whom he knows or has reason to believe to be the wife of 
any other man, from that man, or from any person having the care of her on behalf of that m an, with 
intent that she may have illicit intercourse with any person, or conceals or detai ns with that intent any 
such woman, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
two years, or with fine, or with both. 
1[CHAPTER XXA 
OFCRUELTY BY HUSBANDOR RELATIVESOF HUSBAND  
498A. Husband or relative of husband of a woman subjecting her to cruelty .—Whoever, being 
the husband or the relative of the husband of a woman, subjects such woman to cruelty  shall be punished 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “cruelty ” means — 
(a) any wilful conduct which is of such a nature as is likely to drive the w oman to commit suicide 
or to cause grave injury or danger to life, limb or health (whether mental or physi cal) of the woman; 
or 
(b) harassment of the woman where such harassment is with a view to coercing her or  any person 
related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any property or valuable security  or is on account of 
failure by her or any person related to her to meet such demand.] 
CHAPTER XXI 
OF DEFAMATION  
499. Defamation .—Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible 
representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing 
or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the reputation of such per son, is said, except 
in the cases hereinafter excepted, to defame that person. 
                                             
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 114]
he cases hereinafter excepted, to defame that person. 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 46 of 1983, s. 2 (w.e.f. 25- 12-1983). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 115]
115 
 Explanation 1.—It may amount to defamation to impute anything to a deceased person, if the 
imputation would harm the reputation of that person if living, and is intended to be hurt ful to the fellings 
of his family or other near relatives. 
Explanation 2.—It may amount to defamation to make an imputation concerning a company or an 
association or collection of persons as such. 
Explanation 3.—An imputation in the form of an alternative or expressed ironically, may am ount to 
defamation. 
Explanation 4.—No imputation is said to harm a person's reputation, unless that imputation directly  
or indirectly, in the estimation of others, lowers the moral or intellectual  character of that person, or 
lowers the character of that person in respect of his caste or of his calling, or  lowers the credit of that 
person, or causes it to be believed that the body of that person is in a loothsome stat e, or in a state 
generally considered as disgraceful. 
Illustrations 
(a) A says — “Z is an honest man; he never stole B's watch ”; intending to cause it to be believed that Z did steal B's watch. 
This is defamation, unless it fall within one of the exceptions. 
(b) A is asked who stole B's watch. A points to Z, intending to cause it to  be believed that Z stole B's watch. This is 
defamation, unless it fall within one of the exceptions. 
(c) A draws a picture of Z running away with B's watch, intending it to be  believed that Z stole B's watch. This is 
defamation, unless it fall within one of the exceptions. 
First Exception .—Imputation of truth which public good requires to be made or published .—It 
is not defamation to impute anything which is true concerning any person, i f it be for the public good that 
the imputation should be made or published. Whether or not it is for the public good is a question of fact. 
Second Exception .—Public conduct of public servants .—It is not defamation to express in good 
faith any opinion whatever respecting the conduct of a publ
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 115]
It is not defamation to express in good 
faith any opinion whatever respecting the conduct of a public servant in the discharg e of his public 
functions, or respecting his character, so far as his character appears in that conduct, and no further. 
Third Exception .—Conduct of any person touching any public question .—It is not defamation to 
express in good faith any opinion whatever respecting the conduct of any person touching  any public 
question, and respecting his character, so far as his character appears in that conduct, and no further. 
Illustration 
It is not defamation in A to express in good faith any opinion w hatever resp ecting Z's conduct in petitioning Government on 
a public question, in signing a requisition for a meeting on a p ublic question, in presiding or attending at such meeting, in 
forming or joining any society which invites the public support, in  voting or canvassing for a particular candidate for any 
situation in the efficient discharge of the duties of which the public is interested. 
Fourth Exception .—Publication of reports of proceedings of courts. —It is not defamation to 
publish substantially true report of the proceedings of a Court of Justice, or of  the result of any such 
proceedings. 
Explanation .—A Justice of the Peace or other officer holding an enquiry in open Court prelimi nary to 
a trial in a Court of Justice, is a Court within the meaning of the above section. 
Fifth Exception .—Merits of case decided in Court or conduct of witnesses and others 
concerned .—It is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion whatever respecting the merits of 
any case, civil or criminal, which has been decided by a Court of Justice, or respe cting the conduct of any 
person as a party, witness or agent, in any such case, or respecting the characte r of such person, as far as 
his character appears in that conduct, and no further. 
  Illustrations 
(a) A says —“I think Z's evidence on that trial is so contradictory that he 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 115]
ther. 
  Illustrations 
(a) A says —“I think Z's evidence on that trial is so contradictory that he must be stupid  or dishonest. ” A is within this 
exception if he says this in good faith, inasmuch as the opinion which he expresses respects Z's character as it appears in Z's 
conduct as a witness, and no farther. 
(b) But if A says —“I do not believe what Z asserted at that trial because I know him to be a man without veracity ”; A is not 
within this exception, inasmuch as the opinion which express of Z's character, is an opinion not founded on Z's conduct as a 
witness. 
Sixth Exception .—Merits of public performance .—It is not defamation to express in good faith any 
opinion respecting the merits of any performance which its author has submitted to the j udgment of the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 116]
116 
 public, or respecting the character of the author so far as his character app ears in such performance, and 
no further. 
Explanation .—A performance may be submitted to the judgment of the public expressly or by acts on 
the part of the author which imply such submission to the judgment of the public. 
Illustrations 
(a) A person who publishes a book, submits that book to the judgment of the public. 
(b) A person who makes a speech in public, submits that speech to the  judgment of the public. 
(c) An actor or singer who appears on a public stage, submits his acting o r singing to the judgment of the public. 
(d) A says of a book published by Z —“Z’s book is foolish; Z must be a weak man. Z's book is indecent; Z mu st be a man 
of impure mind ”. A is within the exception, if he says this in good faith, inasm uch as the opinion which he expresses of Z 
respects Z's character only so far as it appears in Z's book, and no further. 
(e) But if A says “I am not surprised that Z's book is foolish and indecent, for he is a weak man and a libertine ”. A is not 
within this exception, in as much as the opinion which he expresses of Z's character is an opinion  not founded on Z's book. 
Seventh Exception .—Censure passed in good faith by person having lawful authority over 
another .—It is not defamation in a person having over another any authority, either conferr ed by law or 
arising out of a lawful contract made with that other, to pass in good faith any censure on the conduct of 
that other in matters to which such lawful authority relates. 
Illustration 
A Judge censuring in good faith the conduct of a witness, or o f an officer of the Court; a head of a department censuring in 
good faith those who are under his orders, a parent censuring in goo d faith a child in the presence of other children; a 
schoolmaster, whose authority is derived from a parent, censuring in g ood faith a pupil in the presence of other pupils; a master 
censuring a servant in good faith 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 116]
in g ood faith a pupil in the presence of other pupils; a master 
censuring a servant in good faith for remissness in service; a banker ce nsuring in good faith the cashier of his bank for the 
conduct of such cashier as such cashier- are within this exception. 
Eighth Exception .—Accusation preferred in good faith to authorised person .—It is not 
defamation to prefer in good faith an accusation against any person to any of those who have lawful 
authority over that person with respect to the subject-matter of accusation. 
Illustration 
If A in good faith accuses Z before a Magistrate; if A in good faith complains of the conduct of Z, a servant, to Z's master; if 
A in good faith complains of the conduct of Z, a child, to Z's fat her-A is within this exception. 
Ninth Exception .—Imputation made in good faith by person for protection of his or other's 
interests .—It is not defamation to make an imputation on the character of another provided that  the 
imputation be made in good faith for the protection of the interest s of the person making it, or of any 
other person, or for the public good. 
Illustrations 
(a) A, a shopkeeper, says to B, who manages his business —“Sell nothing to Z unless he pays you ready money, for I have 
no opinion of his honesty. ” A is within the exception, if he has made this imputation on Z in go od faith for the protection of his 
own interests. 
(b) A, a Magistrate, in making a report to his own superior officer, casts a n imputation on the character of Z. Here, if the 
imputation is made in good faith, and for the public good, A is with in the exception. 
Tenth Exception .—Caution intended for good of person to whom conveyed or for public good .—
It is not defamation to convey a caution, in good faith, to one person against another , provided that such 
caution be intended for the good of the person to whom it is conveyed, or of some person i n whom that 
person is interested, or for the public good. 
500. Punishment for defamation .
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 116]
erson i n whom that 
person is interested, or for the public good. 
500. Punishment for defamation .—Whoever defames another shall be punished with simple 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
501. Printing or engraving matter known to be defamatory .—Whoever prints or engraves any 
matter, knowing or having good reason to believe that such matter is defamatory of any per son, shall be 
punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
502. Sale of printed or engraved substance containing defamatory matter .—Whoever sells or 
offers for sale any printed or engraved substance containing defamatory matter , knowing that it contains 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 117]
117 
 such matter, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may  extend to two years, or 
with fine, or with both. 
CHAPTER XXII 
OF CRIMINAL  INTIMIDATION , INSULT AND  ANNOYANCE  
503. Criminal intimidation .—Whoever threatens another with any injury to his person, reputation or 
property, or to the person or reputation of any one in whom that person is int erested, with intent to cause 
alarm to that person, or to cause that person to do any act which he is not legal ly bound to do, or to omit 
to do any act which that person is legally entitled to do, as the means of avoiding the execution of such 
threat, commits criminal intimidation. 
Explanation .—A threat to injure the reputation of any deceased person in whom the person threatened 
is interested, is within this section. 
Illustration 
A, for the purpose of inducing B to resist from prosecuting a civil su it, threatens to burn B's house. A is guilty of criminal 
intimidation. 
504. Intentional insult with intent to provoke breach of the peace .—Whoever intentionally 
insults, and thereby gives provocation to any person, intending or knowing it to be li kely that such 
provocation will cause him to break the public peace, or to commit any other of fence, shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two yea rs, or with fine, or with 
both. 
1[505. Statements conducing to public mischief .—2[(1)] Whoever makes, publishes or circulates 
any statement, rumour or report, — 
(a) with intent to cause, or which is likely to cause, any officer, soldier, 3[sailor or airman] in the 
Army, 4[Navy or Air Force] 5[of India] to mutiny or otherwise disregard or fail in his duty as such; or  
(b) with intent to cause, or which is likely to cause, fear or alarm to the public, or to any section 
of the public whereby any person may be induced to commit an offence against the St ate or against 
the public tranquility; or 
(c) with intent to incite, or which is like
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 117]
ainst the St ate or against 
the public tranquility; or 
(c) with intent to incite, or which is likely to incite, any class or community of persons to commit 
any offence against any other class or community, 
shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to 6[three years], or with fine, or with both. 
7[(2) Statements creating or promoting enmity, hatred or ill-will between classes .—Whoever 
makes, publishes or circulates any statement or report containing rumour or alar ming news with intent to 
create or promote, or which is likely to create or promote, on grounds of relig ion, race, place of birth, 
residence, language, caste or community or any other ground whatsoever, feelings of enmit y, hatred or  
ill-will between different religious, racial, language or regional g roups or castes or communities, shall be 
punished with imprisonment which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
(3) Offence under sub-section ( 2) committed in place of worship, etc .—Whoever commits an 
offence specified in sub-section ( 2) in any place of worship or in any assembly engaged in the 
performance of religious worship or religious ceremonies, shall be punished with im prisonment which 
may extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine.] 
Exception .—It does not amount to an offence, within the meaning of this section, when th e person 
making, publishing or circulating any such statement, rumour or report, has reasonable grounds for 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 4 of 1898, s. 6, for s. 505. 
2. Section 505 re-numbered as sub-section ( 1) of that section by Act 35 of 1969, s. 3 (w.e.f. 4-9-1969).  
3. Subs. b y Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and the First Sch., for “or sailor”.  
4. Subs. by s. 2 and the First Sch., ibid.,  for “or Navy”.  
5. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “of Her Majesty or in the Imperial S ervice Troops” The words “or in the Royal Indian Marine” 
occurring af ter the word “Majesty” omitted by A
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 117]
 Troops” The words “or in the Royal Indian Marine” 
occurring af ter the word “Majesty” omitted by Act 35 of 1934, s. 2 and Sch.  
6. Subs. by Act 41 of 1961, s. 4, for “two years”  (w.e.f. 12-9-1961). 
7. Ins. by Act 35 of 1969, s. 3 (w.e.f. 4-9-1969). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 118]
118 
 believing that such statement, rumour or report is true and makes, publishes or circulat es it 2[in good faith 
and] without any such intent as aforesaid.] 
506. Punishment for criminal intimidation .—Whoever commits the offence of criminal 
intimidation shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a ter m which may extend to 
two years, or with fine, or with both; 
If threat be to cause death or grievous hurt, etc .—and if the threat be to cause death or grievous 
hurt, or to cause the destruction of any property by fire, or to cause an offence puni shable with death or 
1[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, or to impute 
unchastity to a woman, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both. 
507. Criminal intimidation by an anonymous communication .—Whoever commits the offence of 
criminal intimidation by an anonymous communication, or having taken precaution to conceal the name 
or abode of the person from whom the threat comes, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to two years, in addition to the punis hment provided for the 
offence by the last preceding section. 
508. Act caused by inducing person to believe that he will be rendered an object of the D ivine 
displeasure .—Whoever voluntarily causes or attempts to cause any person to do anything which that 
person is not legally bound to do, or to omit to do anything which he is legally entitled to do, by inducing 
or attempting to induce that person to believe that he or any person in whom he is interested will become 
or will be rendered by some act of the offender an object of Divine displea sure if he does not do the thing 
which it is the object of the offender to cause him to do, or if he does the thing which it is the object  of the 
offender to cause him to omit, shall be punished with imprisonment
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 118]
g which it is the object  of the 
offender to cause him to omit, shall be punished with imprisonment of either descript ion for a term which 
may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both. 
Illustrations 
(a) A sits dhurna at Z's door with the intention of causing it to be beli eved that, by so sitting, he renders Z an object of 
Divine displeasure. A has committed the offence defined in this section. 
(b) A threatens Z that, unless Z performs a certain act, A will kill one of A's own children, under such circumstances that the 
killing would be believed to render Z an object of Divine displeasure.  A has committed the offence defined in this section. 
509. Word, gesture or act intended to insult the modesty of a woman .—Whoever, intending to 
insult the modesty of any woman, utters any words, makes any sound or gesture, or exhi bits any object, 
intending that such word or sound shall be heard, or that such gesture or object shall  be seen, by such 
woman, or intrudes upon the privacy of such woman, 2[shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to three years, and also with fine]. 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Chhattisgarh  
After Section 509 of the Penal Code, the following shall be inserted, namely: — 
509A. Sexual harassment by relative. —Whoever, being related to a woman through blood, 
adoption or marriage, and not being her husband, takes the advantage of his proximity and induces , 
seduces or threatens such woman with intent to insult her modesty by word, gestur e or act shall be 
punished with rigorous imprisonment which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to five 
years and shall also liable to fine. 
509B. Sexual harassment by electronic mode. —Whoever, by means of telecommunication device 
or by any other electronic mode including internet, makes creates, solicits or init iates the transmission of 
any comment, request, suggestion, proposal, image or other communication, which is obscene, l ewd, 
lascivious, filthy 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 118]
t, suggestion, proposal, image or other communication, which is obscene, l ewd, 
lascivious, filthy or indecent with intent to harass or cause or having k nowledge that it would harass or 
cause annoyance or mental agony to a woman shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment  for a term 
which shall not be less than six months but may extend to two years and shall also be liable to fine. 
[Vide Chhattisgarh Act 25 of 2015, sec. 6]. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation  for life ” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1956).  
2. Subs. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 10, for “shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may exten d to one year, or 
with fine, or with both” (w.e.f. 3-2-2013). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN PENAL CODE.pdf - page 119]
119 
 510. Misconduct in public by a drunken person .—Whoever, in a state of intoxication, appears in 
any public place, or in any place which it is a trespass in him to enter, and there conducts him self in such 
a manner as to cause annoyance to any person, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to twenty-four hours, or with fine which may extend to ten rupees, or with both. 
CHAPTER XXIII 
OF ATTEMPTS TO  COMMIT  OFFENCES  
511. Punishment for attempting to commit offences punishable with imprisonment for life or 
other imprisonment .—Whoever attempts to commit an offence punishable by this Code with 
1[imprisonment for life] or imprisonment, or to cause such an offence to be c ommitted, and in such 
attempt does any act towards the commission of the offence, shall, where no express provision is made by 
this Code for the punishment of such attempt, be punished with 2[imprisonment of any description 
provided for the offence, for a term which may extend to one-half of the imprisonm ent for life or, as the 
case may be, one-half of the longest term of imprisonment provided for that offence ], or with such fine as 
is provided for the offence, or with both. 
Illustrations 
(a) A makes an attempt to steal some jewels by breaking open a box , and finds after so opening the box, that there is no 
jewel in it. He has done an act towards the commission of theft, and the refore is guilty under this section. 
(b) A makes an attempt to pick the pocket of Z by thrusting his hand into  Z's pocket. A fails in the attempt in consequence of 
Z's having nothing in his pocket. A is guilty under this section.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation  for life ” (w.e.f. 1 -1-1956). 
2. Subs. by s. 117 and the Sch. , ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1-1-1956).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN RESERVE FORCES ACT, 1888.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE INDIAN RESERVE FORCES ACT, 1888 
________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
________ 
 
SECTION  
1. Title and commencement. 
2. Division of Reserve Forces into Regular and Supp lementary Reserves. 
3. Locality of service of Reserves.  
4. Power to make rules for regulation of Reserve Fo rces. 
5. Liability of Reserve Forces to military law. 
6. Punishment of certain offences by persons belong ing to Reserve Forces. 
7. Reinstatement in civil employ of persons belongi ng to Reserve Forces on termination of periods of 
training, muster or Army services. 
8. Preservation of certain rights of persons belong ing to Reserve Forces when called up for training, 
muster or army service.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN RESERVE FORCES ACT, 1888.pdf - page 2]
2 
 THE INDIAN RESERVE FORCES ACT, 1888 
 
ACT NO. 4 OF  1888 1 
[2nd March, 1888.]  
An Act to regulate 2[the] Indian Reserve Forces. 
WHEREAS  it is expedient to provide for the Government, dis cipline and regulation of 2[the] Indian 
Reserve Fortes; It is hereby enacted as follows: — 
1. Title and commencement.— (1) This Act may be called the Indian Reserve Forces Act,  
1888; and  
(2) It shall come into force on such day 3 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint in this behalf.  
4[2. Division of Reserve Forces into Regular and Sup plementary Reserves. —The Indian 
Reserve Forces shall consist of the Regular Reserve  and the Supplementary Reserve.]  
3.  Locality of service of Reserves .— 5*** A person belonging to the 6[Indian Reserve Forces] shall 
be liable to serve beyond the limits of 7[India] as well as within those limits. 
8*   *   *    *   * 
4. Power to make rules for regulation of Reserve Fo rces. —9[(1)] The Central Government 
may 10 [by notification in the Official Gazette,] make rul es and orders for the government, discipline and 
regulation of the Indian Reserve Forces.  
10 [( 2) Every rule and every order made under sub-section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which  may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more succe ssive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the se ssion 
immediately following the session or the successive  sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in mating an y 
modification in the rule or order or both Houses ag ree that the rule or order should not be made, the rule 
or order shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment sh all be without prejudice to the validity of anythin g 
previously done under that rule or order.] 
5. Liability of Reserve Forces to military l
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN RESERVE FORCES ACT, 1888.pdf - page 2]
 anythin g 
previously done under that rule or order.] 
5. Liability of Reserve Forces to military law.— Subject to 11 ***  such rules and orders as 
may be made under section 4, a person belonging to the Indian Reserve Forces shall, as an officer, or 
soldier, as the case may be, be subject to military  law in the same manner and to the same extent as a  
person belonging to 12 [the Regular Army].  
                                                   
1. The Act has been extended to and brought into fo rce in Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963. s.  2 and the First 
Schedule (w.e.f. 1-7-1965): Lakshadweep by Reg. 8 o f 1965. s. 3 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 1-10-1967) an d to 
Pondicherry by Reg. 7 of 1963, s. 3 and the First S chedule  (w.e.f. 1-10-1963). 
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “Her Majesty’s”.  
3. The Act came into force on the 26 th  may, 1888, see  Gazette of India of same date, Pt. I, p. 239  
4. Subs. by Act 12 of 1931, s. 2, for section 2. 
5. The brackets and figure “( 1)” omitted, by s. 3, ibid . 
6. Subs. by s. 3, ibid ., for “Active Reserve”. 
7. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1 956, for “the territories comprised within Part A S tates and Part C Sates”. 
8. Sub-section ( 2) omitted by Act 12 of 1931, s. 3. 
9. S. 4 renumbered as sub-section ( 1) thereof by Act 20 of 1983, s. 2 and Schedule (w.e .f. 15-3-1984). 
10. Ins. by s. 2 and Schedule, ibid (w.e.f. 15-3-1984). 
11. The words and figure “the provision of section 3 with respect to persons belonging to the Garrison  Reserve and to” omitted 
by Act 12 of 1931, s. 4. 
12. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “Her Majesty’s Indi an Forces” 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN RESERVE FORCES ACT, 1888.pdf - page 3]
3 
 6. Punishment of certain offences by persons belong ing to Reserve Forces.— (1) If a person 
belonging to the Indian Reserve Forces— 
(a) when required by or in pursuance of any rule or ord er under this Act to attend at any place, fails 
without reasonable excuse to attend in accordance w ith such requirement, or  
(b) fails without reasonable excuse to comply with any such rule or order, or 
(c) fraudulently obtains any pay or other sum contrary to any such rule or order, he shall be liable—  
(i) on conviction by a court-martial, to such punishmen t other than death, transportation or 
imprisonment for a term exceeding one year as such Court is by the  1[Army Act, 1950 (46 of 
1950)] empowered to award, or 
(ii ) on conviction by  2[a Presidency Magistrate or] a Magistrate of the fir st class, to 
imprisonment for-a term which may extend, in the ca se of a first offence under this section, to six 
months, and, in the ease of any subsequent offence thereunder, to one year. 
(2) Where a person belonging to the Indian Reserve Fo rces is required by or in pursuance of any rule 
or order under this Act to attend at any place, a c ertificate purporting to be signed by an officer ap pointed 
by such a rule or order in this behalf, and stating  that the person so required to attend failed to do  so in 
accordance with such requirement, shall, without pr oof of the signature or appointment of such officer , he 
evidence of the matters stated therein. 
(3) Any person charged with an offence under this secti on may be taken into and kept in either 
military or civil custody, or partly into and in on e description of custody and partly into and in the  other, 
or be transferred from one description of custody t o the other.  
3[7. Reinstatement in civil employ of persons belonging to Reserve Forces on termination of 
periods of trailing, muster or Army service.— (1) If a person belonging to the Indian Reserve Force s is, 
during the period of his employment under an empl
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN RESERVE FORCES ACT, 1888.pdf - page 3]
erson belonging to the Indian Reserve Force s is, 
during the period of his employment under an employ er, called up for training, muster or army service in 
pursuance of his liability under any rule or order under this Act, it shall be the duty of every such 
employer to reinstate the person in his employment on the termination of the period of his training, 
muster or army service in an occupation and under c onditions not less favourable to him than those whi ch 
would have been applicable to him had his employmen t not been so interrupted: 
Provided that if the employer refuses to reinstate such person or denies his liability to reinstate su ch 
person, or if for any reason reinstatement of such person is represented by the employer to be 
impracticable, either party may refer the matter to  the authority prescribed in this behalf by rules m ade 
under this Act, and that authority shall, after con sidering all matters which may be put before it and  after 
making such further inquiry into the matter as may be prescribed in the said rules, pass an order— 
(a) exempting the employer from the provisions of thi s section, or 
(b) requiring the employer to re-employ such person o n such terms as the authority thinks suitable, 
or 
(c) requiring the employer to pay to such person by w ay of compensation for failure or inability to 
re-employ, a sum not exceeding an amount equal to s ix months’ remuneration at the rate at which his 
last remuneration was payable to him by the employe r. 
(2) If any employer fails to obey the order of any su ch authority as is referred to in the                           
proviso to sub-section ( 1), he shall be punishable with fine which may exten d to one thousand             
rupees, and the court by which an employer is convi cted under this section shall order him (if he                       
has not already been so required by the said author ity) to pay to the person whom he has                                  
failed to re-emp
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN RESERVE FORCES ACT, 1888.pdf - page 3]
said author ity) to pay to the person whom he has                                  
failed to re-employ a sum equal to six months remun eration at the rate at which his last remuneration          
                                                   
1. Subs. by Act 42 of 1953, s. 4 and the Third Sche dule, for “Indian Army Act, 1911”. 
2. Ins. by Act 12 of 1931, s. 5. 
3. Ins. by Act 3 of 1958, s. 2. Section 7 was rep. by s . 6, ibid . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN RESERVE FORCES ACT, 1888.pdf - page 4]
4 
 was payable to him by the employer, and any amount so required to be paid either by the said authority  or 
by the court shall be recoverable as if it were a f ine imposed by such court. 
(3) In any proceeding under this section it shall be a defence for an employer to prove that the person 
formerly employed did not apply to the employer for  reinstatement within a period of two months from 
the termination of the period of his training, must er or army service. 
(4) The duty imposed by sub-section ( 1) upon an employer to reinstate in his employment a  person 
such as is described in that sub-section shall atta ch to an employer who, before such person is actual ly 
called up for training, muster or army service, ter minates his employment in circumstances such as to 
indicate an intention to evade the duty imposed by that sub-section, and such intention shall be presu med 
until the contrary is proved, if the termination ta kes place after the issue of orders calling him up for 
training, muster or army service under this Act. 
8. Preservation of certain rights of persons belong ing to Reserve Forces when called up for 
training, muster or army service.— When any person belonging to the Indian Reserve For ces and called 
up for training, muster or army service in pursuanc e of his liability under any rule or order under th is Act 
has any rights under any provident fund or superann uation fund or other scheme for the benefit of 
employees maintained in connection with the employm ent he relinquishes, he shall continue, so long as 
he is engaged in training, muster or army service a nd if he is reinstated, until such reinstatement un der the 
provisions of this Act, to have in respect of such fund or scheme, such rights as may be prescribed by  
rules made under this Act.]  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TOLLS ACT, 1851.pdf - page 1]
1 THE INDIAN TOLLS ACT, 1851  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
PREAMBLE  
SECTIONS  
1.  [Repealed. ]. 
1A. Extent.  
2. Power to cause levy of tolls on roads and bridges within certain rates, and to appoint collectors. 
Collectors’ responsibilities.  
3. Their powers for recovery of toll.  
Release of seized property on tender of dues.  
4. Exemptions from payment of toll.  
5. Assistance of collectors by Police -officers.  
6. Penalty for offences under Act. Compensation to person aggrieved. Saving of his right to  sue. 
7. Exhibition of table of tolls, and statement of penalties.  
8. Application of proceeds of tolls.  
SCHEDULE .—[Repealed. ].
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TOLLS ACT, 1851.pdf - page 2]
2 THE INDIAN TOLLS ACT, 18511 
ACT NO. 8 OF 1851  
[4th July , 1851 .] 
An Act for enabling Government to levy Tolls on Public Roads and Bridges . 
Preamble. —WHEREAS  it is expedient to en able Government to levy tolls upon roa ds and bri dges; it 
is enacted as follows: — 
1. [Repea l of Acts ].—Rep. by the Repealing Act , 1870 (14 of 1870), s. 1 and the Schedule , Part II. 
2[1A. Extent. —This Act extends to the territories administered on the fourth of July,  eight een 
hundred and fifty -one, by the Gov ernor of the Presidency of Fort William in Bengal, the Lieutenant -
Gover nor of  North -Western Provinces of Benga l and the Governor of the Presi dency of Fort St. George in 
Council.]  
2. Power to cause levy of tolls on roads and bridges within certain rates, and to appoint 
collectors. Collec tors’ responsibilities. —3[The State Government] may cause such rates of toll, 4*** as 
5[it thinks fit], to be levied upon any road or bridge which has been, or shall hereafter be, made or 
repaired 6[at the expense of the C entral or any State Government] ; and may place the collection of such 
tolls under the management of such persons as may appear to 7[it] proper: and all persons employed in the 
                                                      
1. Short title given by the Indian Short Titles Act, 1897 (14 of 1897).  
This Act should be read with the Indian Tolls Act, 1864 (15 of 1864), and the  Indian Tolls Act, 1888 (8 of 1888).  
This Act has been amended in Assam by Assam Act 3 of 1931 and Act 1 of 1932; C. P. by C.P. Act 8 of 1932, Madras by 
Madras Act 6 of 1938, Act 14 of 1942 and Act 26 of 1950.  
This Act is deemed to be in force throughout t he territories administered by the Lieutenant -Governor of the Punjab on the 5th 
September, 1888 and to have been in force, from the 21st August 1857, in the territories for the time being administered as p art of 
the Punjab.  
It has been extended under s. 3 of Act 15 of 1 864 to Ajmer and Merwara, see Gazett
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TOLLS ACT, 1851.pdf - page 2]
f 
the Punjab.  
It has been extended under s. 3 of Act 15 of 1 864 to Ajmer and Merwara, see Gazette of India, 1889, Pt. II, p. 562.  
It has been declared to be in force in the C.P. and the Sambalpur District by the C. P. Laws Act, 1875 (20 of 1875), s. 3; in  
the Sonthal Parganas by the Sonthal Parganas S ettlement Regulation, 1872 (3 of 1872), s. 3 . 
It has been decla red, by notification under s. 3 (a) of the Scheduled Districts Act, 1874 (14 of 1874), to be in force in the 
following Scheduled Districts, namely: —  
The Districts of Hazaribagh,  
Lohardaga (now  the Ranchi District,  
see Calcutta Gazette, 1899, Pt. I, p. 44),  
 and Manbhum, and Pargana Dhalbhum and  
Kolhan in the District of Singbhum.  . . See Gazette of India,   1881, Pt. I, p. 504.  
The District of Lahaul  . . . . . Ditto    1886, Pt. I, p. 301.  
It has been extended by notification under s. 5 of the last mentioned Act to the Scheduled District of Coorg , see Gazette of 
India, 1878, Pt. I, p. 45; to the Scheduled Districts in Ganjam and Vizagapatam, see ibid., 1899, Pt. I, p. 720; to the Ducharti an d 
Guditeru Muttahs, Yellavaram taluk, East Godavari Agency , see Notification No. 110, dated 22nd  April, 1927, Fort St. George 
Gazette, 1927, Pt. I, p. 661, and to the Distri ct of Darjeeling, see Calcutta Gazette, 1934, Pt. I, p. 179.  
It has been repealed i n the Presidency of Bombay, to which it originally applied by the Bombay Tolls Act 1875 (Bom. Act 3 
of 1875), s. 1 and has also been amended in Assam by Assam Acts 3 of 1931 and 1 of 1932; C.P. by C. P. Act 8 of 1932; and 
Madras by Madras Acts 6 of 1938 an d 14 of 1942.  
It has been repealed in Mysore by Mysore Act 29 of 1958.  
The Act has been extended to the whole of Madhya Pradesh by M.P. Act 23 of 1958 and to the Union territory of 
Pondicherry by Act 26 of 1968, s. 3 and the Schedule.  
The Act has been amen ded in its application to Uttar Pradesh by U.P. Act 5 of 1957, Andhra Pradesh by A.P. Act 17 of 
1975 and West Ben
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TOLLS ACT, 1851.pdf - page 2]
lication to Uttar Pradesh by U.P. Act 5 of 1957, Andhra Pradesh by A.P. Act 17 of 
1975 and West Bengal by W.B. Act 18 of 1978.  
2. Ins. by the A.O. 1937.  
3. Subs. by  ibid., for “The Governor of the Presidency of Fort William in Bengal, the Lieutenant -Governor of the North -Western 
Provinces of Bengal and the Governor of the Presidency of Fort St. George in Council ”. The words “and the Governor of the 
Presidency of Bombay in Council ” had been rep. by Act 8 of 1888, s. 5.  
The authority of the Provincial Government in any Province of India not specified in s. 1A to which this Act and the Indian 
Tolls Act, 1864 (15 of 1864), may be or have been extended, is to be the same as if it had been originally specified in s. 2.  See 
the Indian Tolls Act, 1888 (8 of 1888), s. 2( 1). 
4. The words “not exceeding the rates mentioned in the Schedule annexed to this Act” omitted by Act 38 of 1920, s. 2 and 
the First Schedule.  
5. Subs. by the A.O. 1937,  for “they respectively think fit”.  
6. Subs., ibid., for “at the expense of the Govt.”.  
7. Subs., ibid., for “them”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TOLLS ACT, 1851.pdf - page 3]
3 management and collection of such tolls shall be liable to the same responsibilities as would belong to 
them if em ployed in the collection of the land revenue.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Orissa  
Amendment of section 2. —In section  2 of the Indian Tolls Act, 1851(8 of 1851) in its application to 
the State of Orissa, for the words “at the expense of the Central or any State Government”, the words “at 
the expense of the Central or any State Government or any Corpora tion, Statutory Bod y, Company, F irm 
or person authorized by the State Government for this purpose” shall be substituted.  
[Vide the Orissa Act 7 of 1999, s. 2]  
3. Their powers for recovery of toll. —In case of non -payment of any such toll on demand, the 
officers appointed to collect the same may seize any of the carriages or animals on which it is chargeable, 
or any part of their burden of sufficient value to defray the toll; and, if any toll remains undischarged for 
twenty -four hours, with the cost arising from such seizure, the case shall be brought before the officer 
appointed to su perintend the collection of the said toll, who may sell the property seized for discharge of 
the toll, and all expenses occasioned by such non -payment, seizure and sale, and cause any balance tha t 
may remain to be returned, on demand, to the owner of the property; and the said officer, on receipt of the 
property, shall forthwith issue a notice that, at noon of the next day, exclusive of Sunday, or any closed 
holiday, he will sell the property by a uction:  
Release of seized property on tender of dues. —Provided that, if, at any time before the sale has 
actually begun, the person whose property, has been seized shall ten der the amount of all the expenses 
incurred, and of double the toll payable by him,  the said officer shall forthwith release the property 
seized.  
4. Exemptions from payment of toll. —No tolls shall be paid for the passage 1*** of Police -officers 
on duty, or of any person or property
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TOLLS ACT, 1851.pdf - page 3]
 tolls shall be paid for the passage 1*** of Police -officers 
on duty, or of any person or property in their custody, but no other exemption from payment of  the toll 
levied under this Act shall be allowed.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Orissa  
Amendment of  section 4 .—In section 4 of the  Indian Tolls Act, 1851 (8 of 1851), in its application 
to the State of Orissa, after the words “shall be paid for the passage of” the word s “the State Government 
Vehicles on Government duty and” shall be inserted.  
[Vide the Orissa Act 13 of 1987, s. 2]  
5. Assistance of collectors by Police -officers.—All Police -officers shall be bound to assist the toll -
collectors, when required, in the execu tion of this Act; and, for that purpose, shall have the same power 
which they have in the exercise of their common police -duties.  
6. Penalty for offences under Act. Compensation to person aggrieved. Saving of his right to 
sue.—Every person, other than the persons appointed to collect the tolls under this Act, who shall levy or 
demand any toll on any public road or bridge, or for passing through any bazar situated thereon, and also 
every person who shall unlawfully and extortionately demand, or take any othe r or higher toll than the 
lawful toll, or under colour of this Act seize or sell any property knowing such seizure or sale to be to  
lawful, or in any manner unlawfully extort money or any valuable thing from any person under colour of 
this Act, shall be li able on conviction before a Magistrate to imprisonment for any term not exceeding six 
calendar months, or to fine not exceeding two hundred rupees, any part of which fine may be awar ded by 
the Magistrate to the person aggrieved; but this remedy shall not be deemed to bar or affect his right to 
have redress by suit in the Civil Court 2***. 
7. Exhibition of table of tolls, and statement of penalties. —A table of the tolls authorized to be 
taken at any toll -gate or station shall be put up in a conspicuous place near su
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TOLLS ACT, 1851.pdf - page 3]
 authorized to be 
taken at any toll -gate or station shall be put up in a conspicuous place near such gate or station legibly 
                                                      
1. The words “of troops and military stores and equipages on their march or” rep. by Act 2 of 1901, s. 8 and the Schedule.  
2. The words “of the Zillah” rep. by Act 12 of 1876, s. 1 and the Schedule, Part. I.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TOLLS ACT, 1851.pdf - page 4]
4 written or printed in English words and figures, and also in those of the verna cular language of the 
district,  to which shall be annexed, written or printed in like manner, a statement of the penalties for 
refusing to pay the tolls and for taking any lawful toll.  
8. Application of proceeds of tolls. —The tolls levied under this Act shall be deemed public revenue 
1***. 
[SCHEDULE .] Rep. by the Devolution Act , 1920 (38 of 1920), s. 2 and the First Schedule . 
 
_________  
                                                      
1. The words “but the net proceeds thereof shall be applied wholly to the construction, repair and maintenance roads and bridg es 
within the presidency in which they are levied” omitted by the A.O. 1937.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TOLLS ACT, 1864.pdf - page 1]
1 THE INDIAN TOLLS ACT, 1864  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
Preamble.  
SECTIONS  
1. [Omitted .]. 
2. Collectors of tolls may compound for to lls leviable under Act 8 of 1851 or this Act . 
3. Power to extend Act . 
4. [Repealed. ].  
[SCHEDULE ].—[Omitted .].
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TOLLS ACT, 1864.pdf - page 2]
2 THE INDIAN TOLLS ACT, 18641 
ACT NO. 15 OF 1864  
[24th March , 1864. ] 
An Act to amend Act 8 of 1851 (for enabling Government to  levy Tolls on Public Roads and 
Bridges).  
Preamble .—WHEREAS  by Act 8 of 1851 ( for enabling Government to levy Tolls on Public Roads and  
Bridges ) authority was given for the levy of certain rates of toll 2***; It is enacted as follows: — 
1. [Schedule of Act  8 of 1851 repealed,  and another Schedule substituted ].—Omitted  by the Devolution 
Act, 1920 (38 of 1920), s. 2 and the First Schedule  (w.e.f . 14-9-1920) . 
2. Collectors of tolls may compound for to lls leviable under Act 8 of 1851 or this Act .—Any person 
entrusted with the management of the collection of tolls3 under Act 8 of 1851 may in his discretion compound 
for any period not exceeding one year with any person for a certain sum to be paid by such person for himself 
or for any vehicle or animal kept by him, in lieu of the rates of toll  4[authorised to be levied under the said 
Act 8 of 1851 ]. 
3. Power to extend Act .—The State Government may extend this  5Act to any place in which the said   
Act 8 of 1851 is in force; and the State Government of any place in  which the said Act 8 of 1851 is not in 
force may extend the said Act 8 of 1851 and this Act to such place.6  
4. [Interpretation -clause.  Local Government ].—Rep. by the  A.O.1937.  
[SCHEDULE ].—Omitted  by the Devolution Act , 1920 (38 of 1920), s. 2 and the First Schedule             
(w.e.f . 14-9-1920) . 
                                                      
1. Short title given by the Indian S hort Titles Act, 1897 (14 of 1897).  
This Act has been declared to be in force in the Santhal Parganas by the Santhal Parganas Settlement Regulation, 1872                               
(3 of 1872), s. 3, in the C. P. and the Sambalpur District by the C. P. Laws Act, 1875 (20 of 1875).  
It has been declared by notification under s. 3( a) of the Scheduled Districts Act, 1874 (14 of 1874), to be in forc
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TOLLS ACT, 1864.pdf - page 2]
ared by notification under s. 3( a) of the Scheduled Districts Act, 1874 (14 of 1874), to be in force in the 
following Schedul ed Districts, namely: —  
The Districts of Hazarib agh, Lohardaga (now  
the Ranchi District, see Calcutta Gazette, 1899, Pt. I,  
p. 44), and Manbhum, and Pargana Dhalbhum and the  
Kolhan in the District of Singbhum .   . .   see Gazette of  India ,  1881, Pt. I, p. 504.  
The District of Lahaul .   .  . .   Ditto    1886, Pt. I, p. 301.  
It has been extended, by notification under s. 5 of the last -mentioned Act, to the Scheduled District of Coorg See Gazette of 
India, 1878, Pt. I, p. 45.  
The Act has been extended to Aj mer-Merwara along with Act 8 of 1851, see Gazette of India, 1889, Pt. II, p. 562; to the 
Scheduled Districts in Vizagapatam and Ganjam, see Fort St. George Gazette, 1899, Pt. I, p.1486, and ibid. 1900, Pt. I, p. 1101, 
respectively; and to the District of D arjeeling, see Calcutta Gazette, 1934, Pt. I. p. 179  
The Act has been extended to the Union territory of Pondicherry by Act 26 of 1968, s. 3 and the Schedule.  
The Act is to be deemed to be and to have been in force in the Punjab, from the 24th March, 1864, see the Indian Tolls            
Act, 1888 (8 of 1888), s. 1 and tolls levied or purporting to have been levied under the Act before the passing of Act 8 of 1 888, are 
to be  deemed to have been lawfully levied —see s. 3, ibid. 
The Act has been repea led in Mysore by Mysore Act 29 of 1958.  
The Act has been amended  in Andhra Pradesh by Andhra Pradesh Act 17 of 1975.  
2. Certain words omitted by Act 38 of 1920, s.  2 and the First Schedule  (w.e.f . 14-9-1920).  
3. The Indian Tolls Act, 1851.  
4. Subs. by Act 38 of 1920, s. 2 and the First Schedule, for “specified in the Schedule to the said Act 8 of 1851 or in the Sche dule to 
this Act ”. 
5. The Act now regulating tolls in the Presidency of Bombay is the Tolls o n Roads and  Bridges Act, 1875 (Bom.  3 of 1875).  That Act 
repealed Act 8 of 1851 in t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TOLLS ACT, 1864.pdf - page 2]
the Tolls o n Roads and  Bridges Act, 1875 (Bom.  3 of 1875).  That Act 
repealed Act 8 of 1851 in the Bombay Presidency, see s.1, and declared that Act 15 of 1864 should be deemed to have been 
extended thereto as from the 30th July , 1864, see s. 2. 
6. Act 8 of 1851 and this Act have been extended to Oudh ( see Gazette of India, 1865, Pt.  I, p. 777), the C.P.  (see ibid ., Pt.  I, 1871,      
p. 611) and  to the District of Lakhimpur ( see Assam Gazette , 1935, Pt.  II, p.  1025). 
As to the authority of the Provincial Government in any part of the Provinces, not specified in s. 2 of Act 8 of 1851, to whi ch that 
Act or this Act may be or have been extended see the Indian Tolls Act, 1888 (8 of 1888), s. 2( 1). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 1]
 
1 
 THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Local extent.  
3. Definitions.  
 
ORDERS AUTHORI SING THE CONSTRUCTION OF TRAMWAYS  
4. Application for and consent necessary to making of order.  
5. Consent of local or road -authority not necessary in certain cases.  
6. Procedure for making order.  
7. Contents of order.  
8. Further order.  
9. Power to authori se joint work by local authorities.  
10. Cessation of powers given by an order.  
 
CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF TRAMWAYS  
11. Mode of formation of tramway.  
12. Inspection of tramway before opening.  
13. Agreement between road -authority and promoter as to repair of roadway.  
 
TRAFFIC ON TRAMWAYS  
14. Rights of promoters and the public over tramways.  
15. Tolls leviable by promoter or lessee.  
16. Carriage of dangerous or offensive goods.  
LICENSES  TO USE TRAMWAYS  
17. Grant to third parties of licenses to use tramway in certain events.  
18. Licensee to give to promoter or lessee an ac count of traffic.  
 
DISCONTINUANCE OF TRAMWAYS  
19. Cessation of powers of promoter and lessee on discontinuance of tramway.  
20. Powers of road -authority on cessation of powers of promoter.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 2]
 
2 
 SECTIONS  
INSOLVENCY OF PROMOTER  
21. Proceedings in case of insolvency of promoter.  
PURCHASE OF TRAMWAYS  
22.  Future purchase of undertaking by local authority.  
WORKING OF TRAMWAYS OWNED BY LOCAL  AUTHORITIES  
23. Lease of, or working of, tramway by local authority.  
RULES  
24. Power to make rules.  
25. Power to impose penalty by rule.  
26. Procedure for making, and publication of, rules.  
OFFENCES  
27. Penalty for failure of promoter, lessee or licensee to  comply with act or order.  
28. Penalty for obstructing promoter in exercise of his powers.  
29. Penalty for interfering with tramway.  
30. Penalty for using tramway with carriage having flange -wheels.  
31. Penalty for evading payment of proper toll.  
32. Penalty for taking or sending dangerous or offensive goods without giving notice.  
33. Penalty for licensee not giving to promoter or lessee an account of traffic or giving false account.  
34. Saving of prosecutions under other laws.  
 
SETTLEMENT OF DIFFERENC ES 
35. Differences between promoters or lessees and authorities.  
RECOVERY OF TOLLS  
36. Recovery of moneys due from promoters and, in certain cases, from lessees.  
37. Recovery of tolls from licensees.  
38. Recovery of tolls from passengers.  
SAVINGS  
39. Promoter to have right of user only.  
40. Saving of power over roads traversed by tramways.  
41. Saving of power of local authority and police to regulate traffic on roads.  
SUPPLEMENTAL  PROVISIONS  
42. Promoters, lessees and licensees to be responsible for al l injuries.  
43. Want of funds not a sufficient reason for default.  
44. Power to exempt from municipal taxation.  
45. Application by local authorities of local funds to tramways.  
46. Extension of Act to existing tramways.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 3]
 
3 
 SECTIONS  
47. Prohibition of construction of tramways except under this Act.  
48. Transfer of control on exclusion of local area from circle of local authority.  
49. [Repealed .]. 
50. Powers of Government exercisable from time to time.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 4]
 
4 
  
 
THE INDIAN TRAMWAY S ACT, 1886  
ACT NO. 11 OF 1886  
[12th March , 1886.]  
An Act to facilitate the construction and to regulate the working of tramways.  
WHEREAS  it is expedient to facilitate the construction and to regulate the working of tramways; It is 
hereby enacted as follows: —  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Indian Tramways Act, 1886; and  
(2) It shall come into fo rce at once.  
2. Local extent. —(1) It ext ends in the first instance to 1[the whole of India except 2[the territories 
which, immediately before the 1st November, 1956, were comprised in Part B States] and the territories 
which were on the 12th March, 1886, r espectively], administered by the Governor of Fort Saint George in 
Council, the Governor of Bombay in Council and the Lieutenant -Governor of Bengal.  
3[(2) This Act may by notification in the Official Gazette be extended to the whole or any part of the 
said territories by the State Government concerned. ] 
3. Definitions. —In this Act, unless there is something repugnant in the subject or context, —  
(1) “local authority ” means a municipal committee, district board, body of port commissioners or 
other authority legally entitled to , or entrusted by 4[the Central Government or any State Government] 
with, the control or management of a municipal or local fund:  
(2) “road” means the way of a road, street, thoroughfare, passage or place along or across which a 
tramway authori sed under this Act is, or is intended to be, laid, and includes the surface -soil and                  
sub-soil of a road, and the footway, berms, drains  and ditches of a road, and any bridge, culvert or 
causeway forming part of -a road:  
(3) “road-authority ”, in relation to a road, means —  
(a) if a local authority maintains and repairs the road, then that authority;  
(b) if a local authority does not mainta in and repair the road, and the road is neither vested in 
Government nor maintaine
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 4]
 does not mainta in and repair the road, and the road is neither vested in 
Government nor maintained and repaired by 4 [5*** Government], then the person in whom the 
road is vested; and  
(c) if a local authority does not maintain and repair the road, and the  road is  vested in 
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “all the Provinces of India excep t the territories”.  
2. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956, for “Part B States”.  
3. Subs. by the A. O. 1937, for sub -section  2. 
This Act has been extended to the whole of the Bombay Presidency except the city of Bombay, see Bombay Gazette,  
1887, Pt. I, p. 899 and to the city of Madras, see Fort St. George Gazette, 1886, Pt. I, p. 750 and to Pondicherry by  Reg.7 of   
1963. s. 3 and the First Schedule  w. e. f. 1 -10-1963. It has also been partially extended to Berar by the Berar Laws Act,  
1941  (4 of 1941). For separate Acts on the subject of tramways in —  
Bengal, see the Bengal Tramways Act, 1883 (Ben. 3 of 1883);  
Calcutta, see the Calcutta Tramways (Electric Traction) Act, 1900 (Ben. 4 of 1900), and the Calcutta Tramways Act,  
1880 (Ben. 1 of 1880);  
Bombay, see the Bombay Tramways Act, 1874 (Bo m. 1 of 1874).  
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “the Govt.”  
5. The words “the Central Government or any Provincial” omitted by the A.O. 1950.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 5]
 
5 
 Government or maintained and repaired by  1[2*** Government], then 3[the Government for whose 
purposes a road is so vested or by which the road is maintained and repaired, as the case may be]:  
(4) “circle ”, in relation to a local authority or road -authority, means the area within th e control of 
that authority:  
4[(5) “tramway ” means a tramway having one, two or more rails, and includes —  
(a) any part of a tramway, or any siding, turnout, connection, line or track belonging to a 
tramway;  
(b) any electrical equipment of a tramway; and  
(c) any electric supply -line transmitting power from a generating station or sub station to a 
tramway or from a generating station to a sub -station from which power is transmitted to a 
tramway:]  
(6) “order ” means an order authori sing the construction of a tramway under this Act, and includes a 
further order substituted for, or amending, extending or varying, that order:  
(7) “promoter ” means a local authority or person in whose favour an order has been made, and 
includes a local authority or person on whom the rights and liabilities conferred and imposed on the 
promoter by this Act and by the order and any rules made under this Act as to the construction, 
maintenance and use of the tramway, have devolved : 
(8) “undertaking ” includes all moveable and immoveable property of the promoter suitable to and 
used by him for the purposes of the tramway:  
(9) “carriage ”, in the case of a tramway on which steam -power or any other mechanical power 5[or 
electrical power] is used, includes an engine worked on the tramway for the purpose of producing 5[or 
utilising] that power:  
(10)  “toll” includes any charge leviable in respect of the use of a tramway:  
(11) “lessee ” means a person to whom a lease has been granted of the right of user of a tramway and 
of demanding and taking the authori sed tolls:  
(12) “District Magistrate ” includes an officer empowered by the 6[Government] by name or by 
virtue of 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 5]
 “District Magistrate ” includes an officer empowered by the 6[Government] by name or by 
virtue of his office to discharge within any local area all or any of the functions of a District Magistrate 
under this Act:  
(13) “District Court ” means a principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction, and includes a High 
Court having ordinary original civil jurisdiction:  
(14) “Collector ” means the chief officer in charge of the revenue -administration of a district, 
and includes an officer empowered by the 6[Government] by name or by vir tue of his office to 
discharge within any local area the functions of a Collector under this Act: 7*** 
(15) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made by the  6[Government] under this Act: 8[and]  
9[(16) “Government ”, in relation to a tramway which is wholly within a municipal                                
area or which is declared not to be a  railway under clause ( 20) of article 366 of the                      
                                                      
1. Subs. by A.O. 1937, for “the Govt”  
2. The words “the Central Government or any Provincial” omitted by the A.O. 1950.  
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “the L.G.”  
4. Subs. by Act 5 of 1911, s. 2, for cl ause ( 5). 
5. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. 
6. Subs. by the A. O.1937, for “L. G.”.  
7. The word “and” om itted, ibid. 
8. Ins., ibid. 
9. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for clause ( 16) which was  inserted  by the A.O. 1937 . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 6]
 
6 
 Constitution, means the State Government and, in relation to any other tramway, means the Central 
Government.]]  
ORDERS AUTHORI SING THE CONSTRUCTION OF TRAMWAYS  
4. Application for and consent necessary to making of order. —(1) The 1[Government] may 
make an order authorizing the construction of a tramway in a circle on application made —  
(a) by the local authority of the circle with the consent of the road -authority of any road or part 
of a road which is to be traversed by the tramway and of which the local authority is not itself the 
road-authority; or  
(b) by any person with the consent of the local authority of the circle, and of the road -authority of 
any road or part of a road which is to be traversed by the tramway and of which the local authority is 
not the road -authority . 
2*             *             *             *             * 
(2) A local authority shall not make an application for an order, or be deemed to consent to an 
application being made by any person for an order, unless the making of the application or the giving of 
the consent has been approved by the local authority in manner prescribed.  
5. Consent of local or road -authority not necessary in certain cases. —When i t is proposed 
to lay a tramway in two or more circles, and a local authority or road -authority having control in either or 
any of the circles does not consent thereto, or attaches conditions to its consent, the  1[Government] may, 
nevertheless, make an order authori sing the construction of the tramway in the circle, or by the order 
impose on the promoter any conditions which it deems fit, if, utter considering the reasons of the 
authority for withholding its consent or attaching the conditions thereto, i t is satisfied that the construction 
of the tramway in the circle is expedient, or, as the case may be, that the conditions attached by the 
authority to its consent ought not to be imposed.  
6. Procedure for making order. —(1) The 1[Government] on 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 6]
 to its consent ought not to be imposed.  
6. Procedure for making order. —(1) The 1[Government] on receiving an application shall consider 
it, and, if satisfied as to the propriety of proceeding thereon, publish in the Official Gazette, and in such 
other manner as it deems sufficient for giving information to persons interested, a draft of a proposed 
order author izing the construction of the tramway.  
(2) A notice shall be published with the draft stating that any objection or suggestion which any 
person may desire to make with respect to the proposed o rder will, if submitted to the  1[Government] on 
or before a dat e to be specified in the notice, be received and considered.  
(3) If, after considering any objections or suggestions which may have been made with respect to the 
draft on or before the date so specified, the 1[Government] is of opinion that the application  should be 
granted, with or without addition or modification, or subject or not to any restriction or condition, it may 
make an order accordingly.  
(4) Every order authori sing the construction of a tramway shall be published in the Official Gazette in 
Engli sh, and in the other prescribed language or languages, if any; and that publication shall be 
conclusive proof that the order has been made as required by this section.  
7. Contents of order. —(1) An order made under section 6 shall empower the promoter there in 
specified to construct and maintain the tramway therein described in the manner therein provided, and 
shall specify the time within which the tramway shall be commenced and the time within which it shall be 
completed and opened for public traffic.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O.  1937, for “L. G.”.  
2. Proviso omitted,  ibid. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 7]
 
7 
 (2) The order may also provide, in manner consistent with this Act, for all or any of the following, 
among other matters, that is to say: —  
(a) a period before the expiration of which the tramway shall not be commenced, and the 
conditions  subject to which the local authority, when it is not itself the promoter, may, within that 
period elect to be substituted in the place of the promoter in respect of the undertaking or of so much 
thereof as is within its circle; and the limits of time with in which, and the terms upon which, the local 
authority may, after the tramway has been constructed, require the promoter to sell to it the 
undertaking or so much thereof as is within its circle;  
(b)  the acquisition by the promoter of land for the purpose s of the tramway, and the disposal by 
him of land which has been acquired but is no longer required for those  purposes;  
(c) the conditions subject to which roads may be opened and broken up for the purposes of the 
construction o r maintenance of the tramway  or any part thereof, and the method of, and materials to 
be used in, the reinstating of the roads, and the approval of t he method and materials by the 
1[Government] or the road -authority before the commencement of the work;  
(d) the conditions on which the  tramway may be constructed over a bridge or across a railway or 
tramway when the carriage -way over the bridge is to form part of the tramway or when the tramway 
is to cross a railway or another tramway on the level;  
2[(e) the space which shall ordinarily intervene between the outside of the carriage -way on either 
side of a road where  on the tramway is to be constructed, and —  
(i) in the case of a tramway having one rail, the rail of the tramway, or  
(ii) in the case of a tramway having two or more rails, the nearest rail of the tramway,  
and the conditions on which a smaller space may be permitted ;] 
(f) the gauge of the tramway, the rails to be used, and the mode in which, and the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 7]
be permitted ;] 
(f) the gauge of the tramway, the rails to be used, and the mode in which, and the level at which, 
they shall be laid and maintained; and the adoption and application by the promoter of such 
improvements in the rails, and in their situation, and in the sub -structure upon which they rest, as the 
1[Government] may from time to time require;  
(g) the portion of the road or roads traversed by the tramway to be kept in repair by the promoter; 
the maintenance by the promoter to the satisfaction of the 1[Government], o r the road -authority, or 
both, of that portion of the road or roads; and the liability of the promoter, on the requisition of the  
1[Government], from time to time to adopt and apply such improvements in the tramway as the  
1[Government] may consider necessary or desirable for the safety or convenience of the public, and to 
alter the position or level of the tramway to suit future alterations in the road or roads;  
(h) the application of material excavated by the promoter in the construction or maintena nce of 
the tramway;  
(i) the provision of such crossings, passing -places, sidings, junctions and other works, in 
addition to those specified in or authori sed by the order, as may from time to time be necessary or 
convenient to the efficient working of the t ramway;  
(j) the powers which may from time to time be exercised  by the  1[Government], the local 
authority, the road -authority or any person in respect of sewers, drains, telegraph -lines, gas -pipes, 
water -pipes or other things in or on land occupied by the tramway; the notice (if any) to be given of 
the intended exercise of those powers; the manner in which  the powers shall be exercised; and the 
extent to which the tramway and the traffic thereon may be interfered with in the exercise thereof;  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “L.G.”.  
2. Subs. by Act 5 of 1911, s. 4, for clause (e). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 7]
the A.O. 1937, for “L.G.”.  
2. Subs. by Act 5 of 1911, s. 4, for clause (e). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 8]
 
8 
 (k) the conditions subject to which the promoter may from time to time interfere with, or alter or 
require the alteration of the position of, drains (not being sewers or main drains), telegraph -lines, gas -
pipes, water -pipes or other things as aforesaid;  
(l) the provision of a temporary tramway in place of a part of a tramway which has been 
removed, or of which the use has been discontinued by reason of the execution of any work affecting 
a road along which the part of the tramway was laid, or by reason of the use of the road being 
interrupted by floods or other cause;  
(m)  the motive power to be used on the tramway, and the conditions on which steam -power or 
any other mechanical power  1[or electrical power] may be used;  
(n) the nature,  dimensions, fittings, appliances and apparatus of the carriages to be used on the 
tramway, and the inspection and examination thereof by officers of the  2[Government] or the local 
authority, and the liability of the promoter or lessee, on the requisition of the  2[Government], from 
time to time, to adopt and apply such improve ments in the carriages, and in the fittings, appliances 
and apparatus, as the  2[Government] may consider necessary or desirable for the safety or 
convenience of the public;  
(o) the tr affic which may be carried on the tramway, the traffic which the promoter or lessee shall 
be bound to carry, and the traffic which he may refuse to carry; the tolls to be leviable by the 
promoter or lessee, and the periodical revision thereof by the  2[Gove rnment]; and the regulation of the 
traffic and of the levy of the tolls;  
(p) the use of the tramway free of toll by the local authority, with its own carriages, for specified 
purposes, during specified hours, with power to the local authority to make such sidings and other 
works as may be necessary for communication between its premises and the tramway;  
(q) the conditions subject to which the promoter may transfer the undertaking, or any
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 8]
the tramway;  
(q) the conditions subject to which the promoter may transfer the undertaking, or any part 
thereof, by sale, mortgage, lease, exchange or otherwise; and the  conditions subject to which the local 
authority may be the transferee;  
(r) the performance by the  2[Government] or by the local authority or road -authority of any work 
required by the Act or the order to be done by the promoter; and  
(s) the penalty to be incurred by the promoter or lessee for failure to observe any condition or 
direction contained in ,the order, and the application of the penalty when recovered.  
(3) The 2[Government] may, in providing in the order for the acquisition of land for the purposes of a 
tramway of which the promoter is not a company, direct that land may be acquired for the promoter under 
the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 18703 (10 of 1870), in the same manner and on the same 
conditions as it might be acquired for the purposes of the tramway if a company were the promoter.  
(4) The order shall imply the condition —  
(a) in the case of a tramway of which a local authority is the promoter, that a lease thereof shall be 
granted only in manner by this Act provided; and  
(b) in the case of a tramway of which a local authority is not the promoter, that a lease thereof shall 
be only of the right of user and of demanding and taking the authorized tolls, and shall not confer or 
impose on the lessee any of the powers or duties of  the promoter in respect of the construction or 
maintenance of the tramway.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 1911, s. 5.  
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “L.G.”.  
3. The relevant provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (1 of 1894) to be referred to.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 9]
 
9 
 8. Further order. —(1) The 1[Government] may, on the application of promoter, revoke, amend, 
extend or vary the order by a further order.  
(2) An application for a further order shall be made in the same manner and subject to the same 
conditions as an application for an order.  
(3) The 1[Government] may, in its discretion, either grant or reject the application.  
(4) If it grants the application, it shall make the furt her order in the same manner as an order, except 
that no addition to, or modification of, the rights, powers and authorities asked for in the application, or 
restriction or condition with respect thereto, shall be made or imposed by the further order witho ut the 
consent in writing of the promoter.  
9. Power to authori se joint work by local authorities. —(1) Subject to, and in accordance 
with, t he provisions of this Act, the 1[Government] may, on a joint application, or on two or more 
separate applications, make an order empowering two or more local authorities, respectively, jointly to 
construct the whole, or separately to construct parts, of a tramway, and jointly or separately to own the 
whole or parts thereof.  
(2) All the provisions of this Act which rela te to the construction of tramways shall extend and apply 
to the construction of the whole and the separate parts of the tramway, and the form of the order may be 
adapted to the circumstances of the ease.  
10. Cessation of powers given by an order. —(1) If a promoter authori sed by an order to construct a 
tramway —  
(a) does not within the time specified in the order substantially commence the construction of the 
tramway, or  
(b) having commenced the construction, suspends it without a reason su fficient in the opinion of 
the 1[Government] to warrant the suspension, or  
(c) does not within the time specified in the order complete the tramway and open it for public 
traffic,  
the following consequences shall ensue: —  
(i) the powers given by the order to the promo
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 9]
raffic,  
the following consequences shall ensue: —  
(i) the powers given by the order to the promoter for constructing the tramway and otherwise in 
relation thereto shall, unless the  1[Government], by special direction in writing, prolongs the time or 
condones the suspension, cease to be exercised except as to so much of the tramway as is then 
completed;  
(ii) as to so much of the tramway as is then completed, the  1[Government] may either permit, or 
refuse to permit, the powers given by the order to continue;  
(iii) if the  1[Government] refuses to permit the powers to continue, then so much of the tramway 
as is then completed may be dealt with, under the provisions of this Act relating to the discontinuance 
of tramways, as a tramway of the working whereof the discon tinuance has been proved to the 
satisfaction of the  1[Government].  
(2) A notification published  by the  1[Government] in the Official Gazette to the effect that on a date 
specified in the notification the construction of a tramway had not been substantially commenced or a 
tramway had not been completed and opened for public traffic, or that the const ruction of a tramway had 
been suspended without sufficient reason, shall, for the purposes of this section, be conclusive proof of 
the matter stated therein.  
CONSTRUCTION  AND MAINTENANCE  OF TRAMWAYS  
11. Mode of formation of tramway. —A tramway shall be constructed and maintained in the manner 
provided by the order.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “L.G.”  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 10]
 
10 
 12. Inspection of tramway before opening. —A tramway, or portion of extension of, or 
addition to, a tramway, shall not be opened for public traffic  1[until it has been inspected and certified t o 
be fit for such traffic 2[by an engineer appointed by Government]].  
13. Agreement between road -authority and promoter as to repair of roadway. —Subject to the 
provisions of any order for the time being in force with respect to the matters mentioned in sec tion 7,      
sub-section ( 2), clause ( g), the road -authority and the promoter may from time to time enter into 
agreements as to the keeping in repair of the whole or a part of a road traversed by a tramway, and as to 
the proportion to be paid by either of them of the expense of keeping the road or part in repair.  
 
TRAFFIC ON TRAMWAYS  
14. Rights of promoters and the public over tramways. —(1) The promoter of a tramway shall, 
subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2) and to the other provisions of this Act and of the order, have 
the exclusive use of the tramway for carriages with flange -wheels or other wheels suitable to run on the 
rail described in the order as the rail to be used on the tramway:  
 
Provided that nothing in this Act or in the order or any rul e made under this Act shall affect the right 
of any person authori sed to use a tramway or railway to pass across a tramway constructed under this Act 
with carriages having wheels suitable to run on the rail thereof.  
(2) The public shall have a right to pas s along or across any part of a road along or across which a 
tramway is constructed, whether on or off the tramway, with carriages not having flange -wheels or other 
wheels suitable to run on the rail of the tramway:  
Provided —  
(a) that this sub -section shall not apply where the tramway is constructed on land the right to the 
exclusive possession of which has been acquired by the promoter; and  
(b) that the  3[Government] may by an order authorize the construction of a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 10]
d by the promoter; and  
(b) that the  3[Government] may by an order authorize the construction of a tramway on any part of 
a road with rai ls raised above the surface of the road, if it is satisfied that the convenience of the public 
will not be injuriously affected thereby.  
15. Tolls leviable by promoter or lessee .—(1) The promoter or lessee may demand and take, in 
respect of the tramway, to lls not exceeding the limits specified in or determinable under the order, or, if 
the order contains no provision in this behalf, then such sums as may from time to time be fixed by the 
promoter or lessee with the previous sanction of the 1[Government].  
(2) A list of all the tolls authorized to be levied shall be exhibited, in such languages as the District 
Magistrate may direct, in a conspicuous place inside and outside each of the carriages used upon the 
tramway.  
16. Carriage of dangerous or offensive goods.—(1) A person shall not be entitled to carry or to 
require to be carried, on a tramway constructed under this Act, any goods of a dangerous or offensive 
nature.  
(2) A person taking such goods with him on the tramway shall, before entering the carriag e, give 
notice of their nature to the servant of the promoter or lessee in charge of the carriage.  
(3) A person sending such goods by the tramway shall distinctly mark their nature on the outside of 
the package containing them, or otherwise give notice the reof in writing to the servant of the promoter or 
lessee with whom he leaves them for the purpose of their being sent by the tramway.  
(4) Any servant of the promoter or lessee may refuse to carry upon the tramway a parcel which 
he suspects to contain goods  of a dangerous or offensive nature and, if any such parcel has been  
                                                      
1. Subs., by A.O . 1937, for “until an engineer a ppointed in this behalf by the L.G. has inspected it and certified it to be fit for    
such traffic”.  
2. Subs. by the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 10]
lf by the L.G. has inspected it and certified it to be fit for    
such traffic”.  
2. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for certain words.  
3. Subs. by the A. O. 1937, for “L. G.”.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 11]
 
11 
 received for the purpose of being carried upon the tramway, may stop the transit thereof until he is 
satisfied as to the nature of its contents.  
(5) Where a servant of the promoter or les see refuses under sub -section ( 4) to carry a parcel which has 
been received for the purpose of being carried upon the tramway, he shall, as soon as may be, give notice 
of his refusal to the consignor or consignee if he refuses at a time when neither of them is present.  
LICENSES TO USE TRAMWAYS  
17. Grant to third parties of licenses to use tramway in certain events. —If, at any time after a 
tramway or part of a tramway has been for three years opened for public traffic in a circle, the local 
authority of the circle represents in writing to  the 1[Government] that the public is deprived of the full 
benefit of the tramw ay or of the part thereof, the 1[Government] may, if after considering any statement 
which the promoter or lessee or both may desire to make, and after such further enquiry as i t deems 
necessary, it is satisfied as to the truth of the representation, grant a license to any person to use the 
tramway conformably to this Act, and to the order and the rules made under this Act, subject to the 
following provisions, namely: —  
(a) the license shall be for a period not less than one year or more than three years from the date of 
the license, but the  1[Government] may in its discretion renew it;  
(b) the license shall be to use the whole of the tramway for the time being opened for public 
traffic, or such part or parts of the tramway as the  1[Government], having regard to the cause for 
granting the license, thinks fit;  
(c) the license shall specify the number of carriages which the licensee shall run upon the 
tramway, the mode in which, and  times at which, the carriages shall be run, the tolls to be paid to the 
promoter or lessee by the licensee for the use of the tramway, and the tolls, being those for the time 
being leviable by the prom
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 11]
nsee for the use of the tramway, and the tolls, being those for the time 
being leviable by the promoter or lessee, which the licensee may demand and take  for the use of his 
carriages;  
(d) the licensee and his officers and servants shall permit one person, duly authorized for that 
purpose by the promoter or lessee, to travel free of toll in or upon each carriage of the licensee run 
upon the tramway for the whole or any part of a journey;  
(e) any provision of this Act,  or of the order or rules made under this Act, relating to the functions 
of a servant of a promoter or lessee shall be construed, so far as may be, as referring to a servant of 
the licensee; and  
(f) the 1[Government] may revoke, alter or modify the license for any cause sufficient in its 
opinion to warrant the revocation, alteration or modification thereof.  
18. Licensee to give to promoter or lessee an account of traffic. —A licensee shall, on 
demand, give to an officer or servant authori sed in that behalf by the promoter or lessee an exact account 
in writing, signed by the licensee, of the number of passengers, or number or quantity of goods, conveyed 
by any and every carriage used by him on the t ramway.  
 
DISCONTINUANCE OF TRAMWAYS  
19. Cessation of powers of promoter and lessee on discontinuance of tramway. —If                   
it is proved to the satisfaction of the  1[Government], at any time after the opening of a tramway for                     
public traffic, that the working of the tramway, or any part thereof, has been practically                       
discontinued, for the space of three months, without a reason sufficient, in the opinion of the  
1[Government], to warrant t he discontinuance, the  1[Government ], if it thinks fit, may,                                        
by  notification in the Official Gazette, declare that the powers of the promoter and of the lessee, if   
                                                      
1 Subs. by the A. O. 1937, for
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 11]
 lessee, if   
                                                      
1 Subs. by the A. O. 1937, for “L. G.”,  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 12]
 
12 
 any, in respect of the tramway or the part thereof  of which the working has been so discontinued, 
shall, from the date of the notification, be at an end; and thereupon the said powers shall cease and 
determine, except in so far as they may be purchased by a local authority in manner by this Act 
provided.  
20. Powers of road -authority on cessation of powers of promoter. —(1) Where a notification 
has been published under section 19, the road -authority may, at any time after the expiration of two 
months from the date of the notification, remove the tramway or p art of the tramway of which the 
working has been so discontinued, and use the materials thereof in reinstating the road.  
(2) The promoter shall pay to the road -authority the cost incurred by that authority in removing the 
tramway or the part thereof and in  reinstating the road.  
(3) The cost shall be certified by an officer of the road -authority, and his certificate,  countersigned by 
the District Magistrate, shall be conclusive proof as to the cost incurred.  
(4) If the promoter does not pay the amount so cer tified within one month after the delivery to 
him of the certificate or of a copy thereof, the road -authority may, without any previous notice to the 
promoter and without prejudice to any other remedy which it may have for the recovery of the 
amount, sell and dispose of such materials of the tramway or part thereof removed as it has not used 
in reinstating the road, either by public auction or by private sale, and for such sum or sums, and to 
such person or persons, as it thinks fit, and may, out of the pro ceeds of the sale, pay and reimburse 
itself the amount of the cost aforesaid and of the expenses of the sale, and shall pay over the residue 
(if any) of the proceeds of the sale to the promoter.  
 
INSOLVENCY OF PROMOTER  
21. Proceedings in case of insolvency  of promoter. —(1) If, at any time after the opening of a 
tramway in a circle for public traffic, it appears 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 12]
er. —(1) If, at any time after the opening of a 
tramway in a circle for public traffic, it appears to the road -authority or local authority of the circle 
that the promoter of the tramway is insolvent, so that he is unable to maintain the tramway, or to 
work it with advantage to the public, and either of those authorities makes a representation to that 
effect to the 1[Government], the 1[Government] may, if after considering any statement which the 
promoter may desire to make, and after such further enquiry as it deems necessary, it is satisfied as to 
the truth of the representation, declare, by notification in the Official Gazette, that the powers of the 
promoter shall, at the expiration of six months from the publication of the notification, be at a n end; 
and the powers of the promoter shall cease and determine at the expiration of that period, except in 
so far as they may be purchased by a local authority in manner by this Act provided.  
(2) Where a notification has been published under sub -section ( 1), the road -authority may, at any 
time after the expiration of six months from the date thereof, remove the tramway in the same 
manner, and subject to the same provisions as to the payment of the cost of the removal and to the 
same remedy for recovery of the cost, in every respect as in cases of removal under section 20.  
 
PURCHASE OF TRAMWAYS  
22. Future purchase of undertaking by local authority. —(1) Where the promoter of a 
tramway in a circle is not the local authority, the local authority, with the previ ous sanction of the 
1[Government], may —  
(a) within such limits of time as may be specified in this behalf in the order, or  
(b) if a time was not specified in the order, then within six months after the expiration of a period 
of twenty -one years from the date of the order, and within six months after the expiration of every 
subsequent period of seven years, or  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 12]
eriod of seven years, or  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O.  1937, for “L. G.”.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 13]
 
13 
 (c) within two months after the publication of a notification under section 19 or within six months 
after the publication of a notification under se ction 21,  
by notice in writing, require the promoter to sell to the local authority his undertaking or the part 
thereof which is within the circle of the local authority; and thereupon the promoter shall sell the 
same upon the terms specified in the order,  or, if the terms were not specified in the order, then 
upon the terms of paying the then value of the undertaking or of the part thereof, exclusive of any 
allowance for past or future profits of the undertaking or any compensation for compulsory sale or 
other consideration whatsoever.  
(2) A requisition shall not be made under sub -section ( 1) unless the making thereof has been 
approved by the local authority in manner prescribed.  
(3) When a sale has been made under this section, all the rights, powers and a uthorities of the 
promoter in respect of the undertaking or part thereof sold, or, where a notification has been 
published under section 19 or section 21, all the rights, powers and authorities of the promoter 
previous to the publication of the notificatio n in respect of the undertaking or part thereof sold, 
shall be transferred to the authority to whom the undertaking or part has been sold, and shall vest 
in, and may be exercised by, that authority in the same manner as if the tramway had been 
constructed by it under an order made under this Act.  
(4) Subject to, and in accordance with, the preceding provisions of this section, two or more local 
authorities may jointly purchase an undertaking or so much thereof as is within there circles.  
WORKING  OF TRAMWAYS  OWNED  BY LOCAL  AUTHORITIES  
23. Lease of, or working of, tramway by local authority. — (1) When a local authority has 
under the authority of an order completed a tramway, or has under the provisions of this Act or of 
an order acquired possession of a tramway, it may, by 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 13]
r has under the provisions of this Act or of 
an order acquired possession of a tramway, it may, by a lease to be approved by the 
1[Government], let to any person the right of user of the tramway and of demanding and taking the 
authorized tolls. 
(2) On the determination of a lease the local authority may from time to time let the right for such 
further term and on such conditions as the 1[Government] may approve.  
(3) Every lease  made under this section shall imply a condition of re -entry if at any time after the 
making thereof it is proved to the satisfaction of the 1[Government] that the lessee has practically 
discontinued the working of the tramway leased, or of any part thereo f, for the space of one month 
without a reason sufficient, in the opinion of the 1[Government], to warrant the discontinuance.  
(4) Notice of the intention of the local authority to make a lease shall be given in manner prescribed.  
(5) If the local authorit y cannot by means of a lease obtain what it deems to be a fair rent for the 
tramway, it may itself, with the previous sanction of the 1[Government] and for such term as the 
1[Government] directs, place and run carriages upon the tramway, and demand and tak e the authori sed 
tolls in respect of the use of the carriages.  
RULES  
24. Power to make rules. —(1) In addition to any other power to make rules expressly or by 
implication conferred by this Act, the 1[Government] may make rules consistent with this Act —  
(a) as to the form in which an application for an order shall be made;  
(b) as to the costs to be paid by an applicant in respect of an order, and the time when, and the place 
where, those costs shall be paid;  
(c) as to the payment of money or lodgment of securities, by way of deposit, by the applicant for an 
order before the order is published under section 6, sub -section ( 4), or a further order is made under 
section 8; the investment of money so paid; the disposal of interest or dividends from time to
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 13]
nder 
section 8; the investment of money so paid; the disposal of interest or dividends from time to tim e 
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O.  1937, for “L. G.”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 14]
 
14 
 accruing due on money or securities so paid, lodged or invested; the application of the money or 
securities or the produce thereof to the discharge of any liability incurred by the promoter; and the 
forfeiture, repayment or return of the money or securit ies; 
(d) as to the plans and sections of any works to be deposited by applicants for orders or by 
promoters;  
(e) for regulating the use of steam -power or any other mechanical power 1[or electrical power] on a 
tramway;  
(f) as to any matter specified in section 7, sub -section ( 2), clauses ( c), (d), (e), (j) and ( k), as a 
matter which may be provided for in an order, when that matter has not been so provided for, or has 
not, in the opinion of the 2[Government], been effectually so provided for;  
(g) as to t he periodical submission, by promoters, lessees and licensees, of accounts of traffic and 
receipts to the 1[Government] or as that Government directs, and as to the forms in which those 
accounts are to be submitted;  
(h) as to the accidents of which report is to be made to the 1[Government] or as that Government 
directs;  
(i) as to any matter respecting which rules may be made under this section by a local authority or a 
promoter or lessee; and  
(j) generally, as to any other matter or thing in respect of whic h it may seem to the 1[Government] 
to be expedient to make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) A local authority may, from time to time, with the previous sanction of the 1[Government], 
make rules consistent with this Act and with the orde r and any rules made by the 1[Government] 
under this Act, for regulating —  
(a) the rate of speed to be observed in travelling upon a tramway within the circle of the local 
authority;  
(b) the use of animal power on the tramway;  
(c) the distances at which carriages using the tramway are to be allowed to follow one after the 
other;  
(d) the stopping of carriages using the tramway, and the notice to be given to the pu
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 14]
 the 
other;  
(d) the stopping of carriages using the tramway, and the notice to be given to the public of their 
approach;  
(e) the manner in which carriages using the tramway after sunset and b efore sunrise are to be 
lighted;  
(f) the traffic on roads along or across which the tramway is laid;  
(g) the number of passengers which may be carried in any carriage;  
(h) the licensing and control of drivers, conductors and other persons having charge of the carriages 
of the promoter or lessee or a licensee; and  
(i) generally, the mode of use of the tramway.  
 3*             *             *             *             * 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 1911, s. 6.  
2. Subs. by the A.O.  1937, for “L. G.”.  
3. Proviso omitted by the A. O. 1950.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 15]
 
15 
 (3) The promoter or lessee of a tramway may, from time to time, with the previous sanction of the 
1[Government], make rules2 consistent with this Act and with the order and any rules made under this 
Act—  
(a) for preventing the commission of any nuisance in or  upon any carriage, or in or against any 
premises, belonging to him; and  
(b) for regulating the travelling in any carriage belonging to him.  
(4) The 1[Government] may cancel any rule made by a local authority or by a promoter or lessee under 
this section.  
25. Power to impose penalty by rule. — The authority making any rule under section 24 may direct 
that a breach of it shall be punishable with fine which may extend —  
(a) if the authority making the rule is the  1[Government], to two hundred rupees, and  
(b) if that authority is a local authority or a promoter or lessee, to twenty rupees; and when the 
breach is a continuing breach, with a further fine which may extend —  
(c) if the authority making the rule is the  1[Government], to fifty rupees, and  
(d) if that  authority is a local authority of a promoter or lessee, to five rupees, for every day after 
the first during which the breach continues.  
26. Procedure for making, and publication of, rules. —(1) Every authority having power to make 
rules under any section of this Act shall, before making the rules, publish a draft of the proposed rules for 
the information of persons likely to be affected thereby.  
(2) The publication shall be made, in the case of rules made by the  1[Government], in such manner as 
may in its opinion be sufficient for giving information to persons interested, and, in the case of rules made 
by a local authority or by a promoter or lessee, in manner prescribed.  
(3) There shall be published with the draft a notice specifying a date, not earlier th an the expiration of 
one month after the date of publication, at or after which the draft will be taken into consideration.  
(4) The authority shall receive
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 15]
ion, at or after which the draft will be taken into consideration.  
(4) The authority shall receive and consider any objection or suggestion which may be made by any 
person with respect to the draft b efore the date so specified.  
(5) The publication in the Official Gazette of a rule purporting to be made under this Act shall be 
conclusive proof that it has been duly made.  
OFFENCES  
27. Penalty for failure of promoter, lessee or licensee to comply with act or order. —If a 
promoter —  
(a) constructs or maintains a tramway otherwise than in accordance with the order, or  
(b) opens the tramway for traffic or permits it to be so opened, before it has been inspected and 
certified in manner required by section 12 , or 
(c) fails to observe any requirement or condition of the order for neglect or breach whereof no 
penalty has been expressly provided in the order,  
or if a promoter, lessee or licensee runs a carriage on a tramway otherwise than in accordance with the 
order,  
he shall (without prejudice to the enforcement or specific performance of the requirements  of this Act 
or of the order, or to any other remedy which may be obtained against him in a Court of Civil Judicature), 
on complaint made by the 1[Government] or by the local authority or road -authority or by the District 
Magistrate or, with the previous sanction of the District Magistrate, by any person injuriously affected by 
the act or omission, be punished with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, an d in the case of a 
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “L.G.”.  
2. For an instance, see Mad. R. and O.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 16]
 
16 
 continuing offence to a further fine which may extend to fifty rupees for every day after the first during 
which the offence continues to be committed.  
28. Penalty for obstructing promoter in exercise of his powers. —If any person without  lawful 
excuse, the burden of proving which shall lie upon him, wilfully obstructs any person acting under the 
authority of the promoter in the lawful exercise of his powers in constructing or maintaining a tramway, 
or injures or destroys any mark made for  the purpose of setting out the line of the tramway, he shall be 
punished with fine which may extend to fifty rupees.  
29. Penalty for interfering with tramway. —If any person without lawful excuse, the burden of 
proving which shall lie upon him, wilfully do es any of the following things, namely: —  
(a) interferes with, removes or alters any part of a tramway constructed under this Act, or of the 
works connected therewith, or  
(b) places or throws upon or across any such tramway any wood, stone, refuse or other  
thing, or  
(c) does anything in such a manner as to obstruct any carriage using any such tramway, 
or 
(d) abets within the meaning of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) the doing of, or attempts to 
do, anything mentioned in clause ( a), clause ( b) or clause (c), 
he shall (without prejudice to any other remedy which may be obtained against him in a Court of Civil 
Judicature) be punished with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees.  
30. Penalty for using tramway with carriage having flange -wheels.—If any pe rson, 
except under a lease from, or by agreement with, the promoter, or under license from the  1[Government] 
granted under this Act, uses on a tramway, otherwise than as permitted by section 14, a carriage having 
flange -wheels or other wheels suitable to r un on the rail of the tramway, he shall be punished with fine 
which may extend to two hundred rupees.  
31. Penalty for evading payment  of proper toll. —(1) If any person travel
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 16]
 to two hundred rupees.  
31. Penalty for evading payment  of proper toll. —(1) If any person travelling or having travelled in 
a carriage of the promoter or lessee or of a licensee evades or attempts to evade payment of toll, or if any 
person having paid toll for a certain distance wilfully proceeds in any such carriage beyond that distance 
and does not pay the additional toll for the additional distance or attempts to evade payment thereof, or if 
any person wilfully refuses or neglects on arriving at the point to which he has paid toll to quit the 
carriage, he shall be punished with fine which may extend to ten rupees.  
(2) When a person commits an offence under this section and refuses on demand of a servant of the 
promoter, lessee or licensee to give his name and residence, or gives a name or residence which the 
servant has reason to believe to be false, he may be arrested and taken to the nearest police -station by the 
servant o r any person whom the servant may call to his aid.  
(3) When the person is taken to the police -station he shall with the least possible delay be forwarded 
to the nearest Magistrate, unless his true name and residence are ascertained, in which case he shall be 
released on his executing a bond for his appearance before a Magistrate if so required.  
32. Penalty for taking or sending dangerous or offensive goods without giving notice. — If any 
person takes or sends by a tramway any goods of a dangerous or offensiv e nature without giving 
the notice required by section 16, he shall be punished with fine which may extend to fifty rupees.  
33. Penalty for licensee not giving to promoter or lessee an account of traffic or giving 
false account. — (1) If a licensee fails on  demand to give the account mentioned in section 18, or, 
with intent to evade the payment of tolls, gives a false account when he is called upon to give an 
account under that section, he shall be punished with fine which may extend to fifty rupees.  
      
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 16]
ccount under that section, he shall be punished with fine which may extend to fifty rupees.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A. O. 1937, for “L. G.”.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 17]
 
17 
 (2) The  fine shall be in addition to any tolls payable by the licensee to the promoter or lessee in respect 
of the passengers or goods conveyed by the carriage or carriages used by the licensee on the tramway.  
34. Saving of prosecutions under other laws. —Nothing  in this Act shall prevent a person 
from being prosecuted under any other law for an act or omission which constitutes an offence 
against this Act or the rules made under it, or from being liable under that other law to any other 
or higher punishment or pen alty than that provided by this Act or the rules made under it:  
Provided that a person shall not be punished twice for the same offence.  
SETTLEMENT OF DIFFERENCES  
35. Differences between promoters or lessees and authorities. —(1) If any difference arises 
between the promoter or lessee on the one hand and the  1[Government], or the local authority, or the road -
authority, or a person having the charge of any sewers, drains, telegraph -lines, gas -pipes, water -pipes or 
other things in or on land occupied by the tramway, on the other hand, with respect to any interference or 
control exercised or claimed to be exercised by, or on behalf of, either party by virtue of this or any other 
Act, or of the order or the rules made under this Act, or with respect to the prop riety of, or the mode of, 
the execution of any work, or with respect to any compensation to be made by or to the promoter or 
lessee, or on the question whether any work is such as ought reasonably to satisfy the 1[Government] or 
the road -authority or both,  or with respect to any other subject or thing regulated by, or comprised in, this 
Act or the order or the rules made under this Act, and not otherwise expressly provided for therein, the 
matter in difference shall, except where the parties elect to procee d under section 523 of the Code of Civil 
Procedure ,2 (14 of 1882) be settled, on the application of either party, by a referee.  
(2) Where the difference is 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 17]
f 1882) be settled, on the application of either party, by a referee.  
(2) Where the difference is —  
(a) between the promoter or lessee on the one hand and the  1[Government], either as such or as the  
road-authority, on the other, or  
(b) between the promoter on the one hand and the local authority on the other, with respect to the 
sum to be paid by the local authority for an undertaking or part of an undertaking which that authority 
has required the pr omoter to sell under section 22,  
the referee shall be the District Court within the jurisdiction of which the tramway is situate, or, where the 
tramway is within the jurisdiction of more than one District Court, the District Court within the 
jurisdiction o f which the greater part of the tramway is situate.  
(3)  In other cases the referee shall be appointed by the  1[Government].  
(4) Except where the referee is the District Court, the powers and procedure of the referee may be 
prescribed.  
(5) In the case of a  difference between a promoter on the one hand and a local authority on the other, 
with respect to the sum to be paid by the local authority for an undertaking or part of an undertaking 
which that authority has required the promoter to sell under section 2 2, an appeal shall lie to the High 
Court from the award of the referee as from an original decree of the District Court.  
(6) In the case of every other difference the award of the referee shall be final.  
RECOVERY OF TOLLS  
36. Recovery of moneys due from promoters and, in certain cases, from lessees. —Any of the 
following moneys, namely, any rent due to a local authority from a lessee, any penalty recoverable from a 
promoter or lessee under an order, any sum payable by a promoter or lessee under an award of  a referee, 
the cost of the performance under this Act by the 1[Government] or by a local authority or road -authority 
of any work required by this Act or by an order to be done by a promoter, and the cost incurred by a road -
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 17]
work required by this Act or by an order to be done by a promoter, and the cost incurred by a road -
authority in removing a tramway and reinstating a road under this Act, may, without prejudice to any 
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A. O.1937, for “L. G.”.  
2. The relevant provisions of the Arbitration Act, 1940 (10 of 1940) to be referred to.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 18]
 
18 
 other remedy that the authority to which the money is due may have by suit or otherwise, be recovered by 
that authority, on application made in this behalf to the Collector, as if the sum  due were an arrear of 
land-revenue due by the promoter or lessee or his surety (if any):  
Provided that nothing in this section shall authorize the arrest of the promoter or lessee or his surety in 
execution of any process issued by the Collector.  
37. Reco very of tolls from licensees. —(1) If a licensee fails to pay on demand the tolls due for 
the use of a tramway, the promoter or lessee to whom the tolls are due may, without prejudice to the 
remedy which he may have by suit, apply to a Magistrate to recover  the amount of the tolls, and the 
Magistrate may, after giving notice to the licensee, if possible, and allowing him an opportunity of being 
heard, proceed to recover the amount by distress and the sale of any carriages or other moveable property 
of the li censee which may be found on the tramway or on premises connected therewith.  
(2) When a licensee has failed to pay on demand the tolls due from him, the promoter or lessee to 
whom the tolls are due may seize any carriage or other moveable property of the l icensee on the tramway 
or on premises connected therewith, and detain the same for forty -eight hours unless the tolls are sooner 
paid.  
(3) When application is made to a Magistrate under sub -section ( 1), he may make an interim order of 
distraint pending his  final decision.  
38. Recovery of tolls from passengers. —Any toll due to a promoter, lessee or licensee from a 
passenger may be recovered either by suit or, on application to a Magistrate having jurisdiction within 
any local area in which any part of the tr amway is laid, by distress and sale of any moveable property 
belonging to the passenger within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Magistrate.  
SAVINGS  
39. Promoter to have right of user only. —(1) Notwithstanding anything
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 18]
f the Magistrate.  
SAVINGS  
39. Promoter to have right of user only. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, or i n 
an order or any rule made under this Act, a promoter shall not acquire any right other than that of user 
only over a road along or across which he lays a tramway, nor shall anything contained in this Act, or in 
an order or any rule made under this Act, e xempt the promoter of a tramway, or any other person using 
the tramway, from the payment of such charges as may lawfully be levied in respect of the use of a road 
or bridge along or across which the tramway is laid.  
(2) The State Government may, if it thin ks fit, fix at which a promoter, lessee or licensee may 
compound for the charges payable in respect of the use of a road or bridge.  
40. Saving of power over roads traversed by tramways. —(1) Nothing in this Act, or in an order or 
any rule made under this Ac t, shall take away or abridge any power which a road -authority, local 
authority or other person has by law to break up, widen, alter, divert or improve a road, railroad or 
tramway along or across which a tramway is laid.  
(2) The road -authority, local authority or other person executing any work referred to in                                
sub-section ( 1) shall not be liable to pay to a promoter, lessee or licensee any compensation for injury 
done to a tramway by the execution  of the work or for loss of traffic occasioned by the reasonable use of 
any power lawfully exercised for the execution thereof.  
41. Saving of power of local authority and police to regulate traffic on roads. —Nothing in 
this Act, or in an order or any rule made under this Act, shall affect the powers of a local Authority or of a 
Magistrate or police -officer to regulate the passage of traffic along or across a road along or across which 
a tramway is laid; and the authority Magistrate or officer aforesaid may exercise its or his powers as well 
on as off the tramway and with respect as
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 18]
 officer aforesaid may exercise its or his powers as well 
on as off the tramway and with respect as well to the traffic of a promoter, lessee or licensee as to the 
traffic of other persons.  
SUPPLEMENTAL  PROVISIONS  
42. Promoters, lessees and licensees to be responsible for all in juries.—A promoter, 
lessee or licensee shall be answerable for all injuries happening through his act or default, or 
through the act or default of any person in his employment, by reason or in consequence of any 
of his carriages or works, and shall save ha rmless all authorities and persons collectively and 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 19]
 
19 
 individually, and their officers and servants, from all damages and costs in respect of injuries so 
happening.  
43. Want of funds not sufficient reason for default. —For the  purposes of this Act want of fun ds 
shall not be deemed to be a sufficient reason for the suspension of the construction, or the discontinuance 
of the working, of a tramway by a promoter or lessee.  
44. Power to exempt from municipal taxation. —When  a tramway is constructed under this 
Act w ithin the limits of a municipality, the State Government may exempt the  animals, plant, 
rolling -stock, yards, workshops, engine -sheds, 1[electrical generating stations or sub -stations] and 
depots of the promoter, lessee or licensee, for such period as it thinks fit, from all or any municipal taxes 
leviable within those limits.  
45. Application by local authorities of local funds to tramways. —(1) The fund to or with the 
control or management of which the local authority of a municipality, cantonment or distr ict is entitled or 
entrusted shall, notwithstanding anything in any enactment respecting the purposes to which that fund 
may be applied be applicable, subject to the control of the  2[appropriate Government], to the payment of 
expenses incidental to the exe rcise of the powers and functions which may be vested in or exercised by a 
local authority under this Act.  
(2) The fund shall also be applicable, with the previous sanction of the  2[appropriate 
Government], to a guarantee of the payment of interest on money to be applied, with the concurrence in 
writing of the local authority, within the limits of the local area under its control, to any of the purposes to 
which the fund might be appl ied by the local authority under  subsection ( 1). 
3[(3) In this section, “the appropriate Government” means the Government, Central or State, whose 
executive authority extends over the local authority in question .] 
46. Extension of Act to existing tramways. — The 2[Government] may, w
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 19]
ocal authority in question .] 
46. Extension of Act to existing tramways. — The 2[Government] may, with the consent of the local 
authority and road -authority and of the promoter and his lessee (if any), extend any part of this Act, or 
any rules made under this Act, either with or without  modification, to the whole or any part of a tramway 
constructed, or authori sed by the 2[Government] to be constructed, before the passing of this Act, and 
may withdraw any part of the Act or any rules so extended.  
47. Prohibition of construction of tramwa ys except under this Act. — (1) A tramway of 
which the construction has not been authori sed by the  2[Government] before the passing of this Act shall 
not, after the passing of this Act, be constructed for public traffic in any place to which this Act extend s, 
except in pursuance of an order made under this Act.  
(2) A person constructing a tramway in contravention of sub -section ( 1) of this section,  
or after the passing of this Act maintaining or using for public traffic, otherwise than in 
pursuance of an order made under this Act, a tramway which was not constructed, or authori sed 
the 2[Government] to be constructed, before the passing of this Act,  
shall be liable, on the complaint of the  2[Government] or local authority, to double the penalty to 
which a p romoter acting otherwise than in accordance with an order is liable under section 27.  
48. Transfer of control on exclusion of local area from circle of local authority. — If at any time a 
local area comprising a tramway to which this Act or any part thereof  or any rule thereunder applies 
ceases to be included in the circle of a local authority, the functions of that authority under this Act or the 
part thereof or the rule thereunder, and under the order (if any), shall, in respect of that local area, devolve  
on the 2[Government] or, if that Government so directs, on the local authority of the circle in which the 
tramway has been included.  
49
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 19]
nment so directs, on the local authority of the circle in which the 
tramway has been included.  
49. [Explanation and amendment of section 54 of Railway Act. ] Rep. by the Indian Railways Act, 1890 
(9 of 1890), s. 2 and the First Schedule . 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 1911, s. 7. 
2. Subs. by the A. O.1937, for “L.G.”.  
3. Ins., ibid. 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRAMWAYS ACT, 1886.pdf - page 20]
 
20 
 50. Powers of Government exercisable from time to time. —All powers conferred by this Act on 
1[any Government] may be exercised from time to time as occasion requires . 
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O.1937, for “any L.G.”.   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TREASURE-TROVE ACT, 1878.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE INDIAN TREASURE -TROVE ACT, 1878  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
PREAMBLE   
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
 Extent.  
2. [Repealed. ]. 
3. Interpretation -clause.  
 “Treasure .” 
 “Collector .” 
 “Owner .” 
PROCEDURE ON FINDING  TREASURE  
4. Notice by finder of treasure.  
5. Notification requiring claimants to appear.  
6. Forfeiture of right on failure to appear.  
7. Matters to be enquired into and determined by the Collector.  
8. Time to be allowed for suit by person claiming the treasure.  
9. When treasure may be declared ownerless . 
 Appeal against such declaration.  
10. Proceedings subsequent to declaration.  
11. When no other person claims as owner of place , treasure to be given to finder . 
12. When only one such person claims and his claim is n ot disputed , treasure to be divided, and 
shares to be delivered to parties.  
13. In case of dispute as to ownership of place, proceedings to be stayed.  
14. Settlement of such dispute.  
15. and division thereupon.  
16. Power to acquire the treasure on behalf o f Government.  
17. Decision of Collector final, and no suit to lie against him for acts done bona fide.   
18. Collector to exercise powers of Civil Court.  
19. Power to make rules.  
PENALTIES  
20. Penalty on finder failing to give notice, etc.  
21. Penalty on ow ner abetting offence under section 20.   
SCHEDULE. — [Repealed .]. 
 
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TREASURE-TROVE ACT, 1878.pdf - page 2]
2 
 THE INDIAN TREASURE -TROVE ACT, 1878  
ACT NO. 6 OF 18781 
[13th Februar y, 1878.]  
An Act to amend the law relating to Treasure -trove.  
Prea mble.—Whereas it is expedient to amend the law relating to treasure -trove; It is hereby enacted 
as follows: —  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title. —This  Act may be called the Indian Treasure -trove Act, 1878 . 
Extent.—It extends to the whole of India except 2[the territories which, imme diately before the 1st 
November,  1956, were comprised in Part B States ]. 
3*   *   *   *               * 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
In the principal Act, —In section 1, — 
(i) to the second paragraph the  following proviso shall be added , namely: — 
 “Provided that on the commencement of the Indian Treasure -trove (Extension to Hyderabad and 
Saurashtra area of Bombay State) Act, 1957 (Bom. XXXIII of 1958), this Act shall also extend to and 
be in force in, the Hyderabad and Saurashtra area of  the State of Bombay.” ; 
(ii) against the proviso so inserted the marginal note “commencement in certain areas” shall be 
inserted;  
[Vide Bombay Act XXXIII of 1958, s. 3]  
2. [Repeal of enactments .] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1891 (12 of 1891), s. 2 and the 
First Schedule . 
  
                                                      
1. This Act has been declared to be in force in —  
Sonthal Parganas by the Sonthal Parganas Settlement Regulation (Reg. 3 of 1872), s. 3;  
Khondmals District by the Khondmals Laws Regulation, 1936 (Reg. 4 of 1936), s. 3 and Sch .; and  
Angul District by the Angul Laws Regulation, 1936 (Reg. 5 of 1936), s. 3 and Sch.  
It has also been declared, by notification under s. 3(a) of the Scheduled Districts Act, 1874 (14 of 187 4), to be in 
force in the Scheduled Districts of Hazaribagh, Lohardaga and Manbhum, and Pargana Dhalbhum and the Kolhan in 
the District of Singbhum —see Gazette of India, 1881, Pt. I, p. 504 (The District of Lohardaga included at that time 
the present Distr ict of Palam 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TREASURE-TROVE ACT, 1878.pdf - page 2]
881, Pt. I, p. 504 (The District of Lohardaga included at that time 
the present Distr ict of Palam au, which was separated in 1894;  Lohardaga is now called the Ranchi District; see 
Calcutta Gazette, 1899, Pt. I. P. 44.)  
It has been extended to and brought i nto force in Dadra and Nagar Hav eli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and Sch. I 
(w.e.f. 1 -7-1965), to Goa, Daman and Diu by Reg. 11 of 1963, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1965) and Sch. and to the whole of the 
Union Territory of Lakshadweep by Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 and Sch. with modification (w.e.f. 1 -10-1967).  
The Act came into force in Pondicherry vide Reg. 7 of 1963, s. 3 and Sch. I.  
The Act has been repealed in its application to Bellary District by Mysore Act 14 of 1955.  
Amended in —  
Bihar by Bihar Act 22 of 1947.  
Madras by Madras Act 36 of 1949.  
Punjab by Punjab Act 24 of 1960.  
Andhra Pradesh by Andhra Pradesh Act 15 of 1972.  
2. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956, for “Part B States ”. 
3. The words  “And it shall come into force at once.” rep. by Act 10 of 1914, s. 3 and II Schedule . 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TREASURE-TROVE ACT, 1878.pdf - page 3]
3 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
3. Interpretation -clause.—In this Act— 
Treasure. —“treasure ” means anything of any value hidden in the soil, or in anything affixed 
thereto;  
“Collector. ”—“Collector ” means ( 1) any Revenue officer in independent  charge of a 
district, and ( 2) any officer appointed by the State Government to perform the functions 
of a Collector under this Act.  
“Owner.”—When any person is entitled, under any reservation in an instrument of 
transfer of any land or thing affixed there to, to treasure in such land or thing, he shall, for the 
purposes of this Act, be deemed to be the owner of such land or thing.  
PROCEDURE ON FINDING TREASURE  
4. Notice by finder of treasure. —Whenever  any treasure exceeding in amount or value ten rupees is 
found, the finder shall, as soon as practicable, give to the Collector notice in writing —  
(a) of the nature and amount or approximate value of such treasure;  
(b) of the place in which it was found;  
(c) of the date of the finding;  
and either deposit the treasure in the nearest Government treasury, or give the Collector such 
security as the Collector thinks fit, to produce the treasure at such time and place as he may 
from time to time require.  
5. Notification requiring claimants to appear.—On receiving a notice under section 4, the 
Collector shall, after making such enquiry (if any) as he thinks fit, take the following steps 
(namely): —  
(a) he shall publish a notification in such manner as the State Government from time to 
time prescribes in this behalf, to the effect that, on a certain date (mentioning it ) certain 
treasure (mentioning its nature, amount and approximate value) was found in a certain place 
(mentioning it); and requiring all persons claiming the treasure, or any part thereof, to appear 
personally or by agent before the Collector on a day and at a place therein mentioned, such 
day not being earlier than four months, or later than  six months, after the date of the 
publication
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TREASURE-TROVE ACT, 1878.pdf - page 3]
ay not being earlier than four months, or later than  six months, after the date of the 
publication of such notification;  
(b) when the p lace in which the treasure appears to the Collector to have been found was at 
the date of the finding in the possession of some person other than the finder, the Collector 
shall also serve on such person a special notice in writing to the same effect.  
6. Forfeiture of right on failure to appear. —Any person having any right to such treasure 
or any p art thereof, as owner of the place in which it was  found or otherwise, and not appearing 
as required by the notification issued under section 5, shall forfeit such right.  
7. Matters to be enquired into and determined by the Collector. —On the day notified under 
section 5, the Collector shall cause the treasure to be produced before hi m, and shall enquire as to 
and determine —  
(a) the person by whom, the place in which, and the circumstances under which, such treasure 
was found; and  
(b) as far as is possible the person by whom, and the circumstances under which, such treasure 
was hidden.  
8. Time to be allowed for suit by person claiming the treasure. —If, upon an enquiry made  
under section 7, the Collector sees reason  to believe that the treasure  was hidden  within  one hundred 
years  before the date of the finding,  by a person appeari ng as required by the said notification and 
claiming such treasure, or by some other person under whom such person claims, the Collector shall 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TREASURE-TROVE ACT, 1878.pdf - page 4]
4 
 make an order adjourning the hea ring of the case for such period as he deems  sufficient, to allow of a 
suit being  instituted in the Civil Court by the claimant, to establish his right.  
9. When treasure may be declared ownerless. —If upon such enquiry  the Collector sees no reason 
to believe that the treasure was so hidden; or  
if, where a period is fixed under section 8 , no suit is instituted as aforesaid within such period to the 
knowledge of the Collector; or  
if such suit is instituted within such period, and the plaintif f's claim is finally rejected;  
the Collector may declare the treasure  to be ownerless.  
Appeal against such declaration. —Any person aggrieved by a declaration made under this  
section may appeal against the  same within two months from the date thereof to the Chief 
Controlling Revenue authority.1 
Subject to such appeal, every such declaration shall be  final and conclusive.  
10. Proceedings subsequent to declaration. —When a declaration has been made in respect 
of any treasure under section 9, such treasure shall, in accordance with the provisions hereinafter 
contained, either be delivered to the finder t hereof, or be divided between him a nd the owner of 
the place in which it has been found in manner hereinafter provided.  
11. When no other person claims as owner of place, treasure to be given to finder. —When 
a declaration  has been made in respect of any treasure as aforesaid, and no person other than the 
finder of such treasure has appeared as required by the notification published under section 5 and 
claimed a share of the treasure as owner of the place in which it has be en found, the Collector shall 
deliver such treasure to the finder thereof.  
12. When only one such person claims and his claim is not disputed, treasure to be divided , 
and shar es to be delivered to parties. —When a declaration has been made as aforesaid in respect of 
any treasure, and only one perso n other than the finder of such trea
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TREASURE-TROVE ACT, 1878.pdf - page 4]
de as aforesaid in respect of 
any treasure, and only one perso n other than the finder of such treasure has so appeared and claimed, 
and the claim of such person is not disputed by the finder, the Collector shall  proceed  to div ide the 
treasure  between the finder and the person so claiming according  to the following rule (namely) :—  
If the finder and the person so claiming have not entered into any agreement then in force 
as to the disposal of the treasure, three -fourths of the t reasure shall be allotted to such finder 
and the residue to such person. If such finder and such person have entered into any such 
agreement, the treasure shall be disposed of in accordance therewith:  
Provided that the Collector may in any case, if he thin ks fit, instead of dividing any treasure as 
directed by this section, —  
(a) allot to either party the whole or more than his share of such treasure, on such party 
paying to the Collector for the other party such sum of money as the Collector may fix a s the  
equivale nt of the share of such other party, or of the excess so allotted, as the case may be; or  
(b) sell such treasure or any portion thereof by public auction and divide the sale -proceeds 
between the parties according to the rule hereinbefore prescribed:  
Provided also, that when the Collector has by his declaration under section 9 rejected any 
claim made under this Act by any person other than the said finder or person claiming as owner 
of the place in which the treasure was found, such divisio n shall not be made until after the 
expira tion of two months without an appeal having been presented under section 9  by the person 
whose claim has been so rejected, or, when an appeal has been so presented, after such appeal 
has been dismissed.  
                                                      
1. For definition of Chief Controlling Revenue authorit y, see the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897 ), s. 3 (10). 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TREASURE-TROVE ACT, 1878.pdf - page 4]
ee the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897 ), s. 3 (10). 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TREASURE-TROVE ACT, 1878.pdf - page 5]
5 
 When the Co llector has made a division under this section, he shall deliver to the parties the 
portions of such treasure, or the money in lieu thereof, to which they are respectively entitled 
under such division.  
13. In case of dispute as to ownership of place, proce edings to be stayed. —When a 
declaration has been made as aforesaid in respect of any treasure, and two or more persons have 
appeared as aforesaid and each of them claimed as owner of the place where such treasure was found, 
or the right of any person who h as so appeared and claimed is disputed by the finder of such treasure, 
the Collector shall retain such treasure and shall make an order staying his proceedings with a view 
to the matter being enquired into and determined by a Civil Court.  
14. Settlement of  such dispute. —Any person who has so appeared and claimed may, within one 
month from the date of such order, institute a suit in the Civil Court to obtain a decree declaring his right; 
and in every such suit the finder of the treasure and all persons dispu ting such claim before the Collector 
shall be made defendants.  
15. And division thereupon. —If any such suit is instituted and the plaintiff's claim is finally 
established therein, the Collector shall, subject to the provisions of section 12, divide the tre asure between 
him and the finder.  
If no such suit is instituted as aforesaid, or if the claims of the plaintiffs in all such suits are finally 
rejected, the Collector shall deliver the treasure to the finder.  
16. Power to acquire the treasure on behalf of Government. —The Collector may, at any time after 
making a declaration under section 9, and before delivering or dividing the treasure as hereinbefore 
provided, declare by writing under his hand his intention to acquire on behalf of the Government the 
treas ure, or any specified portion thereof, by payment to the persons entitled  thereto of a sum equal to the 
value of the materials of such treasure or portion
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TREASURE-TROVE ACT, 1878.pdf - page 5]
 persons entitled  thereto of a sum equal to the 
value of the materials of such treasure or portion, together with one-fifth of such value, and may pla ce 
such sum in deposit in his treasury to the cred it of such persons; and thereupon such treasure or portion 
shall be deemed to be the property of Govern ment, and the money so deposited shall be dealt with, as fa r 
as is may be, as if it were such treasure or portion.  
17. Decision of Collector final, and no suit to lie against him for acts done bona fide. —No 
decision passed or act done by the Collector under this Act shall be called in question by any Civil Court,  
and no suit or other proceeding shall lie against him for anything done in good faith in exercise of the 
powers hereby conferred.  
18. Collector to exercise powers of Civil Court. —A Collector making any enquiry under this Act 
may exercise any power conferred  by the Code of Civil Procedure1 (14 of 1882) on a Civil  Court for the 
trial of suits.  
19. Power  to make rules. —2[The State Government may, from time to time, make  rules consistent  
with this Act, t o regulate proceedings hereunder . 
Such rules shall, on being published in the Official Gazette, have  the force of law. ] 
3[(2) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may 
be after it is made, before the State Legislature.]  
PENALTIES  
20. Penalty on finder failing to give notice, etc. —If the  finder of any treasure fails to give the 
notice, or does not either make the deposit or give the security, required by section 4,  or alters or 
attempts to alter such treasure so as to conceal its identity, the share of such treasure, or the money 
in lieu thereof to which he would otherwise be entitled, shall vest in Govern ment,  
and he sha ll, on conviction before a Magistrate, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.  
                                                      
1. See now
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TREASURE-TROVE ACT, 1878.pdf - page 5]
ear, or with fine, or with both.  
                                                      
1. See now the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908).  
2. Subs. by Act 4 of 2005, s. 2 and the Schedule  (w.e.f. 11 -01-2005)  
3. Ins. by ibid., s. 2 and the Schedule . (w.e.f. 11 -01-2005)  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TREASURE-TROVE ACT, 1878.pdf - page 6]
6 
 21. Penalty on owner abetting offence under section 20. —If the owner of the place in which any 
treasur e is found abets, within the meaning of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), any offence under 
section 20, the share of such treasure, or the money in lieu thereof to which he would  otherwise be 
entitled, shall vest in Government,  
and he shall, on convictio n before a Magistrate, be punished with imprisonment which may extend to 
six months, or with fine, or with both.  
Maharashtra  
after section 21, the following section be inserted, namely: — 
“22. Repeal and savings .—The Hyderabad Treasure -Trove Act, 1322F (Hyd. III of 1322F ), and 
the Indian Treasure -trove Act, 1878, as modified and applied by the State of Saurashtra (Application 
of Central and Bombay Acts) Ordinance, 1948 (San. Ord. XXV of 1948), are hereby repealed:  
Provided that, notwithstanding such rep eal, anything done or action taken (including any notice 
or security given, any forfeiture, determination, declaration, delivery, division, acquisition or order 
made, all rights, obligations and liabilities acquired, accrued or incurred, penalties imposed,  and all 
proceedings and appeals pending before the Collector, Chief Controlling Revenue Authority, 
Talukdar, Subedar, Board of Revenue or other authority, and all powers conferred therefor) by or 
under the provisions of any law so repealed shall be deemed  to be done, taken given, made, acquired, 
accrued, incurred, imposed, pending or conferred, under the provisions of this Act, as if this Act had 
then been in force; and accordingly all such proceedings and appeals pending before any such 
authority as afore said shall stand transferred, where necessary, to the corresponding authority under 
this Act; and if no such authority exists or if there be a doubt as to the corresponding authority, to 
such authority as the State Government may designate, and shall be co ntinued and disposed of before 
such authority in accordance with th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TREASURE-TROVE ACT, 1878.pdf - page 6]
 may designate, and shall be co ntinued and disposed of before 
such authority in accordance with the provisions of this Act,” . 
[Vide Bombay Act XXXIII of 1958, s. 3] . 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TREASURE-TROVE ACT, 1878.pdf - page 7]
7 
 SCHEDUL E.—Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1891 (12 of 1891), s. 2 and I Schedule . 
_________  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
PREAMBLE  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
Commencement.  
Local extent.  
Savings.  
2. Repeal of enactments.  
3. Interpretation -clause.  
“trust”. “author of the trust”:  
“trustee”: “beneficiary”:  
“trust -property”: “beneficial interest”:  
“instrument of trust”: “breach of trust”:  
“registered”: “notice”:  
 Expressions defined in Act 9 of 1872.  
CHAPTER II  
OF THE CREATION  OF TRUSTS  
4. Lawful purpose.  
5. Trust of immoveable property.  
Trust of moveable property.  
6. Creation of trust.  
7. Who may create trusts.  
8. Subject of trust.  
9. Who may be beneficiary.  
Disclaimer by beneficiary.  
10. Who may be trustee.  
 No one bound to accept trust.  
 Acceptance of tru st.  
Disclaimer of trust.  
CHAPTER III  
OF THE DUTIES  AND  LIABILITIES  OF TRUSTEES  
11. Trustee to execute trust.  
12. Trustee to inform himself of state of trust -property.  
13. Trustee to protect title to trust -property.  
14. Trustee not to set up title adverse to beneficiary.  
15. Care required from trustee.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 2]
2 
 SECTIONS  
16. Conversion of perishable property.  
17. Trustee to be impartial.  
18. Trustee to prevent waste.  
19. Accounts and information.  
20. Investment of trust -money.  
20A.  Power to purchase redeemable stock at a premium.  
21. Mortgage of land pledged to Government under Act 26 of 1871.  
 Deposit in Government Savings Bank.  
22. Sale by trustee directed to sell within specified time.  
23. Liability for breach of trust.  
24. No set -off allowed to trustee.  
25. Non-liability for predecessor ’s default.  
26. Non-liability for co -trustee ’s default.  
Joining in receipt for conformity.  
27. Several liability of co -trustees.  
Contribution as between co -trustees.  
28. Non-liability of trustee paying without notice of transfer by beneficiary.  
29. Liability of trustee where beneficiary ’s interest is forfeited to the Government.  
30. Indemnity of trustees.  
CHAPTER IV  
OF THE RIGHTS  AND POWERS OF TRUSTEES  
31. Right to title -deed.  
32. Right to reimbursement of expenses.  
 Right to be recouped for erroneous over -payment.  
33. Right to indemnity from gainer by breach of trust.  
34. Right to apply to Court for opinion in management of trust -property.  
35. Right to settlement of accounts.  
36. General authority of trustee.  
37. Power to sell in  lots, and either by public auction or private contract.  
38. Power to sell under special conditions.  
 Power to buy -in and re -sell. 
 Time allowed for selling trust -property.  
39. Power to convey.  
40. Power to vary investments.  
41. Power to apply property of minors, etc., for their maintenance, etc.  
42. Power to give receipts.  
43. Power to compound, etc.  
44. Power to several trustees of whom one disclaims or dies.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 3]
3 
 SECTIONS.  
45. Suspension of trustee ’s powers by decree.  
CHAPTER V  
OF THE DISABILITIES  OF TRUSTEES  
46. Trustee cannot renounce after acceptance.  
47. Trustee cannot delegate.  
48. Co-trustees cannot act singly.  
49. Control of discretionary power.  
50. Trustee may not charge for services.  
51. Trustee may not use trust -property for his own profit.  
52. Trustee for sale or his agent may not buy.  
53. Trustee may not buy beneficiary ’s interest without permission.  
 Trustee for purchase.  
54. Co-trustees may not lend to one of themselves.  
CHAPTER VI  
OF THE RIGHTS  AND LIABILITIES  OF THE BENEFICIARY  
55. Rights to rents and profits.  
56. Right to specific execution.  
Right to transfer of possession.  
57. Right to inspect and take copies of instrument of trust, accounts, etc.  
58. Right to transfer beneficial interest.  
59. Right to sue for execution of trust.  
60. Right to proper trustees.  
61. Right to compel to any act of duty.  
62. Wrongful purchase by trustee.  
63. Following trust -property —  
 into the hands of third persons;  
 into that into which it has been converted.  
64. Saving of rights of certain transferees.  
65. Acquisition by trustee of trust -property wrongfully converted.  
66. Right in case of blended property.  
67. Wrongful employment by partner -trustee of trust property for partnership purposes.  
68. Liability of beneficiary joining in breach of trust.  
69. Rights  and liabilities of beneficiary ’s transferee.  
CHAPTER VII  
OF VACATING  THE OFFICE  OF TRUSTEE  
70. Office how vacated.  
71. Discharge o f trustee.  
72. Petition to be discharged from trust.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 4]
4 
 SECTIONS . 
73. Appointment of new trustees on death, etc.  
74. Appointment  by Court.  
 Rule for selecting new trustees.  
75. Vesting of trust -property in new trustees.  
Powers of new trustees.  
76. Survival of trust.  
CHAPTER VIII  
OF THE EXTINCTION  OF TRUSTS  
77. Trust how extinguished.  
78. Revocation of trust.  
79. Revocation not to defeat what trustees have duly done.  
CHAPTER IX  
OF CERTAIN  OBLIGATIONS  IN THE NATURE  OF TRUSTS  
80. Where obligation in nature of trust is created.  
81. [Repealed. ]. 
82. [Repealed. ]. 
83. Trust incapable of execution or executed without exhausting trust -property.  
84. Transfer for illegal purpose.  
85. Bequest for illegal purpose.  
Bequest of which revocation is prevented by coercion.  
86. Transfer pursuant to rescindable contract.  
87. Debtor becoming creditor ’s representative.  
88. Advantage gained by fiduciary.  
89. Advantage gained by exercise of undue influence.  
90. Advantage gained by qualified owner.  
91. Property acquired with notice of existing contract.  
92. Purchase by person contracting to buy property to be held on trust.  
93. Advantage secretly gained by one of several compounding creditors.  
94. [Repealed. ]. 
95. Obligor ’s duties, liabilities and disabilities.  
96. Saving of rights of bona fide purchasers.  
THE SCHEDULE.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 5]
5 
 THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882  
ACT NO. 2 OF 18821  
[13th January , 1882.]  
An Act to define and amend the law relating to Private Trusts and Trustees.  
Preamble. —WHEREAS  it is expedient to define and amend the law relating to private trusts and 
trustees; It is hereby enacted as fol lows : —  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title. —This Act may be called the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 . 
Commencement. —and it shall come into force on the first day of March, 1882.  
Local extent .—2[It extends to 3[the whole of India 4*** and] the Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands 5***; but the Central Government may, from time to time, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, extend it to 6[the, Andaman and Nicobar Islands] or to any part thereof.]  
Savings.—But nothing herein contained affects the rules of Muhammadan law as to waqf, or the 
mutual relations of the members of an undivided family as determined by any customary or personal 
law, or applies to public or private religious or charitable endowments, o r to trusts to distribute 
prizes taken in war among the captors; and nothing in the Second Chapter of this Act applies to 
trusts created before the said day.  
2. Repeal of enactments. —The Statute  and Acts mentioned in the Schedule hereto annexed shall, to 
the extent mentioned in the said Schedule, be repealed, in the territories to which this Act for the time 
being extends.  
3. Interpretation -clause—“trust”:—A “trust” is an obligation annexed to the ownership of 
property, and arising out of a confidence repo sed in and accepted by the owner, or declared and accepted 
by him, for the benefit of another, or of another and the owner:  
“author of the trust ”: “trustee”: “beneficiary ”: “trust -property ”: “beneficial interest ”: 
“instrument of trust ”:—the person who repo ses or declares the confidence is called the “author of the 
trust”: the person who accepts the confidence is called the “trustee ”: the person for whose benefit the 
confidence is accepted is
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 5]
the confidence is called the “trustee ”: the person for whose benefit the 
confidence is accepted is called the “beneficiary ”: the subject -matter of the trust is  called “trust-property ” 
or “trust-money ”: the “beneficial interest ” or “interest ” of the beneficiary is his right against the trustee 
as owner of the trust -property; and the instrument, if any, by which the trust is declared is called the 
“instrument of tr ust”: 
“breach of trust ”:—a breach of any duty imposed on a trustee, as such, by any law for the time 
being in force, is called a “breach of trust ”: 
                                                      
1. For Report of the Indian Law Commission on the Private Trusts Bill which they were instructed to consider among others, see 
Gazette of India, 1880, Supplement, p. 104; and for Report of the Select Committee, see Gazette of India, 1880, Pt. V, 
Supplement, 1 881, p. 766; for further Report of the Select Committee, see ibid., Supplement, 1882, p. 67; for Proceedings in 
Council, see ibid., Supplement, 1881, p. 687; and ibid., Supplement, 1882, p. 68.  
The Act has been extended to Berar by Act 4 of 1941; Dadra and  Nagar Haveli by Regulation 6 of 1963, s. 2 and Sch. I; 
Pondicherry by Regulation 7 of 1963, s. 3 and Sch. I; Goa, Daman and Diu by Regulation 11 of 1963, s. 3 and Sch. and 
Sikkim by Notifn. No. S.O. 642  E, dt. 24 -8-1984 (w.e.f. 1 -9-1984).  
2. Subs. by the A.O.  1948, for the first sentence.  
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “all the Provinces of India, except ”.  
4. The words “except the state of Jammu & Kashmir” omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 & 96 and the            
Schedule. V. (w.e.f. 31 -10-2019) . 
5. The words “and Panth Piploda ” omitted by the A.O. 1950.  
6. Subs., ibid., for “either or both of the said Provinces ”. 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 6]
6 
 “registered ”:—and in this Act, unless there be something repugnant in the subject or context,  
“registered ” means registered under the law for the registration of documents for the time being in force:  
“notice”:—a person is said to have “notice ” of a fact either when he actually knows that fact , or 
when, but for wilful  abstention from inquiry or gross negligence, he would have known it, or when 
information of the fact is given to or obtained by his agent, under the circumstances mentioned in the 
Indian Contract Act, 1872 (9 of 1872), section 229;  
Expressions defined in Act 9 of 1872: —and all expressions used herein and defined in the Indian 
Contract Act, 1872 (9 of 1872), shall be deemed to have the meanings respectively attributed to them by 
that Act.  
CHAPTER II  
OF THE CREATION  OF TRUSTS  
4. Lawful purpose. —A trust may be created for any lawful purpose. The purpose of a trust is 
lawful unless it is (a) forbidden by law, or (b) is of such a nature that, if permitted, it would 
defeat the provisions of any law, or (c) is fraudulent, or (d) involves or implies injury to the 
person or property of another, or (e) the Court regards it as immoral or opposed to public policy.  
Every trust of which the purpose is unlawful is void. And where a trust is created for two purposes, of 
which one is lawful  and the other unlawful, and the two purposes cannot be separated, the whole trust is 
void.  
Explanation. —In this section the expression “law” includes, where the trust -property is immoveable 
and situate in a foreign country, the law of such country.  
Illustrations  
(a) A conveys property to B in trust to apply the profits to the nurture of female foundlings to be trained up as prostitutes. 
The trust is void.  
(b) A bequeaths property to B in trust to employ it in carrying on a smuggling business, and out of the profits thereof to 
support A ’s children. The trust is void.  
(c) A, while in insolvent circumstances, transfers property to B 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 6]
 ’s children. The trust is void.  
(c) A, while in insolvent circumstances, transfers property to B in trust for A during his life, and after his death for B. A is 
declared an insolvent. The trust for A is invalid as against hi s creditors.  
5. Trust of immoveable property. —No trust in relation to immoveable property is valid 
unless declared by a non -testamentary instrument in writing signed by the author of the trust or 
the trustee and registered, or by the will of the author of the trust or of the trustee.  
Trust of moveable property. —No trust in relation to moveable property is valid unless 
declared as aforesaid, or unless the ownership of the property is transferred to the trustee.  
These rules do not apply where they would opera te so as to effectuate a fraud.  
6. Creation of trust. —Subject  to the provisions of section 5, a trust is created when the author of the 
trust indicates with reasonable certainty by any words or acts (a) an intention on his part to create thereby 
a trust, (b) the purpose of the trust, (c) the beneficiary, and (d) the trust -property, and (unless the trust is 
declared by will or the author of the trust is himself to be the trustee) transfers the trust -property to the 
trustee.  
Illustrations  
(a) A bequeaths certain property to B, “having the fullest confidence that he will dispose of it for the benefit of C ”. This 
creates a trust so far as regards A and C.  
(b) A bequeaths certain property to B “hoping he will continue it in the family ”. This does not create a trust, as the 
beneficiary is not indicated with reasonable certainty.  
(c) A bequeaths certain property to B, requesting him to distribute it amongst such members of C ’s family as B should 
think most deserving. This does not create a trust, for  the beneficiaries are not indicated with reasonable certainty.  
(d) A bequeaths certain property to B, desiring him to divide the bulk of it among C ’s children. This does not create a trust, 
for the trust -pro
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 6]
 him to divide the bulk of it among C ’s children. This does not create a trust, 
for the trust -property  is not indicated with sufficient certainty . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 7]
7 
 (e) A bequeaths a shop and stock -in-trade to  B, on condition that he pays A ’s debts and a legacy to C. This is  a condition, 
not a trust for A ’s creditors and C.  
7. Who may create trusts. —A trust may be created —  
(a) by every person competent to contract1, and , 
(b) with the permission of a principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction, by or on behalf of a 
minor;  but subject in each case to the law for the time being in force as to the 
circumstances and extent in and to which the author of the trust may d ispose of the     
trust -property.  
8. Subject of trust. —The subject -matter of a trust must be property transferable to the 
beneficiary.  
It must not be a merely beneficial interest under a subsisting trust.  
9. Who may be beneficiary. —Every  person capable of holding property may be a 
beneficiary.  
Disclaimer by beneficiary. —A proposed beneficiary may renounce his interest under the 
trust by disclaimer addressed to the trustee, or by setting up, with notice of the trust, a claim 
inconsistent therewith.  
10. Who m ay be trustee. —Every  person capable of holding property may be a trustee; but, 
where the trust involves the exercise of discretion, he cannot execute it unless he is competent to 
contract.  
No one bound to accept trust. —No one is bound to accept a trust.  
Acceptance of trust. —A trust is accepted by any words or acts of the trustee indicating with 
reasonable certainty such acceptance.  
Disclaimer of trust. —Instead  of accepting a trust, the intended trustee may, within a 
reasonable period, disclaim it, and suc h disclaimer shall prevent the trust -property from 
vesting in him . 
A disclaimer by one of two or more co -trustees vests the trust -property in the other or 
others, and makes him or them sole trustee or trustees from the date of the creation of the trust.  
Illustrations  
(a) A bequeaths certain  property to B and C, his executors, as trustees for D. B and C prove A ’s will. This is in itself an 
ac
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 7]
erty to B and C, his executors, as trustees for D. B and C prove A ’s will. This is in itself an 
acceptance of the trust, and B and C hold the property in trust for D.  
(b) A transfers  certain property to B in trust to sell it and to pay out of the proceeds A ’s debts. B accepts the trust and sells 
the property. So far as regards B, a trust of the proceeds is created for A ’s creditors.  
(c) A bequeaths a lakh of rupees to B upon certain t rusts and appoints him his executor. B severs the lakh from the general 
assets and appropriates it to the specific purpose. This is an acceptance of the trust . 
CHAPTER III  
OF THE DUTIES  AND LIABILITIES  OF TRUSTEES  
11. Trustee to execute trust. —The trustee is bound to fulfil the purpose of the trust, and to 
obey the directions of the author of the trust given at the time of its creation, except as modified 
by the consent of all the beneficiaries being competent to contract.  
Where the beneficiary is incompete nt to contract, his consent may, for the purposes of this 
section, be given by a principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction.  
Nothing in this section shall be deemed to require a trustee to obey any direction when to 
do so would be impracticable, illega l or manifestly injurious to the beneficiaries.  
                                                      
1. See s.11 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 (9 of 1872).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 8]
8 
 Explanation. —Unless  a contrary intention be expressed, the purpose of a trust for the 
payment of debts shall be deemed to be (a) to pay only the debts of the author of the trust 
existing and recoverable at th e date of the instrument of trust, or, when such instrument is a 
will, at the date of his death, and (b) in the case of debts not bearing interest, to make such 
payment without interest.  
Illustrations  
(a) A, a trustee, is simply authori sed to sell certain land by public auction. He cannot sell the land by private contract.  
(b) A, a trustee of certain land for X, Y and Z, is authori sed to sell the land to B for a specified sum. X, Y and Z, being 
competent to contract, consent that A may sell the land to C for a less sum. A may sell the land accordingly.  
(c) A, a trustee for B and her children, is directed by the author of the trust to l end, on B ’s request, trust -property to B ’s 
husband, C, on the security of his bond. C becomes insolvent and B requests A to make the loan. A may refuse to make it.  
12. Trustee to inform himself of state of trust -property. —A trustee is bound to acquaint 
himself, as soon as possible, with the nature and circumstances of the trust -property; to obtain, 
where necessary, a transfer of the trust -property to himself; and (subject to the provisions of the 
instrument of trust) to get in trust -moneys invested on insuf ficient or hazardous security.  
Illustrations  
(a) The trust -property is a debt outstanding on personal security. The instrument of trust gives the trustee no discretionary 
power to leave the debt so outstanding. The trustee ’s duty is to recover the debt without unnecessary  delay.  
(b) The trust -property is money in the hands of one of two co -trustees. No discretionary power is given by the instrument of 
trust. The other co -trustee must not allow the former to retain the money for a longer period than the c ircumstances of the case 
required.  
13. Trustee to protect title to trust
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 8]
longer period than the c ircumstances of the case 
required.  
13. Trustee to protect title to trust -property. —A trustee is bound to maintain and defend 
all such suits, and (subject to the provisions of the instrument of trust) to take such other steps 
as, regard being had to the nat ure and amount or value of the trust -property, may be reasonably 
requisite for the preservation of the trust -property and the assertion or protection of the title 
thereto.  
Illustration  
The trust -property is immoveable property which has been given to the author of the trust by an unregistered instrument. 
Subject to the provisions of the Indian Registration Act, 18771 (3 of 1877), the trustee ’s duty is to cause the instrument to be 
registered.  
14. Trustee not to set up title adverse to beneficiary. —The trustee must not for himself 
or another se t-up or aid any title to the tru st-property adverse to the interest of the beneficiary.  
15. Care  required from trustee. —A trustee is bound to deal with the trust -property as  
carefully as a man of ordinary prudence would deal with such property if it were his own; and, in the 
absence of a contract to the contrary, a trustee so dealing is not responsible for the loss, destruction or 
deterioration of the trust -property.  
Illustrations  
(a) A, living in Calcutta, is a trustee for B, living in Bombay. A remits trust -funds to B by bills drawn by a 
person of undoubted credit in favour of the trustee as such, and payable at Bombay. The bills are dishonoured. A is 
not bound to make good the loss.  
(b) A, a trustee of leasehold property, directs the tenant to pay the rents on account of the trust to a banker, B, then 
in credit. The rents are accordingly paid to B, and A leaves the money with B only till wanted. Before the money is 
drawn out, B become s insolvent. A, having had no reason to believe that B was in insolvent circumstances, is not bound 
to make good the loss.  
(c) A, a trustee of two debts for B, releases
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 8]
 circumstances, is not bound 
to make good the loss.  
(c) A, a trustee of two debts for B, releases one and compounds the other, in good faith, and reasonably 
believing that it is for B ’s interest to do so. A is not bound to make good any loss caused thereby to B.  
                                                      
1. See now the Indian Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 9]
9 
 (d) A, a trustee directed to sell the trust -property by auction, sells the same, but does not advertise the sale and 
otherwise fails in reasonable diligence in inviting competiti on. A is bound to make good the loss caused thereby to the 
beneficiary.  
(e) A, a trustee for B, in execution of his trust, sells the trust -property, but from want of due diligence on his 
part fails to receive part of the purchase -money. A is bound to make good the loss thereby caused to B.  
(f) A, a trustee for B of a policy of insurance, has funds in hand for payment of the premiums. A neglects to 
pay the premiums, and the policy is consequently forfeited. A is bound to make good the loss to B.  
(g) A bequea ths certain moneys to B and C as trustees, and authori ses them to continue trust -moneys upon the 
personal security of a certain firm in which A had himself invested them. A dies, and a change takes place in the 
firm. B and C must not permit the moneys to r emain upon the personal security of the new firm.  
(h) A, a trustee for B, allows the trust to be executed solely by his co -trustee, C. C misapplies the trust -property. A is 
personally answerable for the loss resulting to B.  
16. Conversion of perishable property. —Where the trust is created for the benefit of several 
persons in succession, and the trust -property is of a wasting nature or a future or reversionary 
interest, the trustee is bound, unless an intention to the contrary may be inferred from the 
instrument of trust, to convert the property into property of a permanent and immediately profitable 
character.  
Illustrations  
(a) A bequeaths to B all his property in trust for C during his life, and on his death for D, and on D ’s death 
for E. A ’s property c onsists of three leasehold houses, and there is nothing in A ’s will to show that he intended the 
houses to be enjoyed in specie. B should sell the houses, and invest the proceeds in accordance with section 20.  
(b) A bequeaths to B his three
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 9]
 the houses, and invest the proceeds in accordance with section 20.  
(b) A bequeaths to B his three leasehold houses in Calcutta and all the furniture therein in trust for C during his 
life, and on his death for D, and on D ’s death for E. Here an intention that the houses and furniture should be 
enjoyed in specie appears clearly, and B should not sell them.  
17. Trustee to be impartial. —Where there are more beneficiaries than one, the trustee is bound 
to be impartial, and must not execute the trust for the advantage of one at the expense of another.  
Where the trustee has a discretionary power, nothing in this sectio n shall be deemed to 
authorize the Court to control the exercise reasonably and in good faith of such discretion.  
Illustration  
A, a trustee for B, C and D, is empowered to choose between several specified modes of investing the trust -
property. A in good fa ith chooses one of these modes. The Court will not interfere, although the result of the 
choice may be to vary the relative rights of B, C and D.  
18. Trustee to prevent waste. —Where the trust is created for the benefit of several persons in 
succession and one of them is in possession of the trust -property, if he commits, or threatens  to commit, 
any act which is destructive or permanently injurious thereto, the trustee is bound to take measures to 
prevent such act.  
19.  Accounts and information. —A trustee is  bound (a) to keep clear and  accurate accounts of the 
trust- property, and (b), at all reasonable times, at the request of the beneficiary, to furnish him with full 
and accurate information as to the amount and state of the trust -property.  
1[20. Investment  of trust -money.—Where  the trust -property consists of money and cannot be 
applied immediately or at an early date to the purposes of the trust, the trustee  shall, subject to any 
direction contained in the instrument of trust , invest the money in any of the  securities  or class of 
securities expressly  aut
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 9]
rument of trust , invest the money in any of the  securities  or class of 
securities expressly  authorised by the instrument of trust or as specified by the Central 
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette : 
Provided that where  there is a person competent to contract and entitled in possession to  
receive the income  of the trust -property for his life, or for any greater estate, no investment 
in any of the securities or class of securities mentioned above shall be made without his 
consent in writing . 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 34 of 2016, s. 2, for s. 20 (w.e.f. 17 -4-2017).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 10]
10 
 Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the expression “securities” shall have the 
same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( h) of section 2 of the  Securities Contracts 
(Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956).]  
1[20A. Power to purchase redeemable stock at a premium. —(1) A trustee may invest in any o f the 
securities mentioned or referred to in section 20, notwithstanding that the same may be redeemable and 
that the price exceeds the redemption value: 
2*   *   *   *   * 
(2) A trustee may retain until redemption any redeemable stock, fund or security wh ich may have 
been purchased in accordance with this section.]  
21. Mortgage of land pledged to Government under Act 26 of 1871. Deposit in Government 
Savings Bank. —Nothing in section 20 shall apply to investments made before this Act comes into 
force, or sh all be deemed to preclude an investment on a mortgage of immoveable property already 
pledged as security for an advance under the Land Improvement Act, 18713, or, in case the                       
trust-money does not exceed three thousand rupees, a deposit thereof in a Government Savings Bank.  
22. Sale by trustee directed to sell within specified time. —Where a trustee directed to sell within  a 
specified time extends such time, the burden of provin g, as between himself and the beneficiary, that the 
latter is not prejudiced by the extension lies upon the trustee, unless the extension has been authori sed by 
a principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction.  
Illustration  
A bequeaths property to B, direc ting him with all convenient speed and within five years to sell it, and apply the proceeds 
for the benefit of C. In the exercise of reasonable discretion, B postpones the sale for six years. The sale is not thereby r endered 
invalid, but C, alleging that h e has been injured by the postponement, institutes a suit against B to obtain compensation. In such 
suit the burden of proving that C has not been injured lies on B.  
23. Li
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 10]
in compensation. In such 
suit the burden of proving that C has not been injured lies on B.  
23. Liability for breach of trust. —Where  the trustee commits a breach of trust, he is liab le to 
make good the loss which the trust -property or the beneficiary has thereby sustained, unless the 
beneficiary has by fraud induced the trustee to commit the breach, or the beneficiary, being 
competent to contract, has himself, without coercion or undu e influence having been brought to bear 
on him, concurred in the breach, or subsequently acquiesced therein, with full knowledge of the 
facts of the case and of his rights as against the trustee.  
A trustee committing a breach of trust is not liable to pay interest except in the following cases: —  
(a) where he has actually received interest;  
(b) where the breach consists in unreasonable delay in paying trust -money to the beneficiary;  
(c) where the trustee ought to have received interest, but has not done so;  
(d) where he may be fairly presumed to have received interest;  
He is liable, in case ( a), to account for the interest actually received, and, in cases ( b), (c) and 
(d), to account for simple interest at the rate of six per cent. per annum, unless the Court otherwise 
directs.  
  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 1916, s. 3.  
2. The proviso omitted by Act 34 of 2016, s. 3 (w.e.f. 17 -4-2017).  
3. See now the Land Improvement Loans Act, 1883 (19 of 1883).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 11]
11 
 (e) where  the breach consists in failure to invest trust -money and to accumulate the interest or 
dividends thereon, he is liable to account for compound interest (with half -yearly rests) at the same 
rate; 
(f) where the breach con sists in the employment of trust -property or the proceeds thereof in 
trade or business, he is liable to account, at the option of the beneficiary, either for compound 
interest (with half -yearly rests) at the same rate, or for the net profits made by such e mployment.  
Illustrations  
(a) A trustee improperly leaves trust -property outstanding, and it is consequently lost: he is liable to make good the property 
lost, but he is not liable to pay interest thereon.  
(b) A bequeaths a house to B in trust to sell it and pay the proceeds to C. B neglects to sell the house for a great length of 
time, whereby the house is deteriorated and its market -price falls. B is answerable to C for the loss.  
(c) A trustee is guilty of unreasonable delay in investing trust -money in a ccordance with section 20, or in paying it to the 
beneficiary. The trustee is liable to pay interest thereon for the period of the delay.  
(d) The duty of the trustee is to invest trust -money in any of the securities mentioned in section 20, clause (a), (b), (c) or (d). 
Instead of so doing, he retains the money in his hands. He is liable, at the option of the beneficiary, to be charged either with the 
amount of the principal money and interest, or with the amount of such securities as he might have purchased  with the trust -
money when the investment should have been made, and the intermediate dividends and interest thereon.  
(e) The instrument of trust directs the trustee to invest trust -money either in any of such securities or on mortgage of 
immoveable proper ty. The trustee does neither. He is liable for the principal money and interest.  
(f) The instrument of trust directs the trustee to invest trust -money in any of such securities and to accum
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 11]
nstrument of trust directs the trustee to invest trust -money in any of such securities and to accumulate the dividends 
thereon. The trustee disregards the direction. He is liable, at the option of the beneficiary, to be charged either with the amount of 
the principal money and compound interest, or with the amount of such securities as he might have purchased with the trust -
money when the investment should have been ma de, together with the amount of the accumulation which would have arisen from 
a proper investment of the intermediate devidends.  
(g) Trust -property is invested in one of the securities mentioned in section 20, clause (a), (b), (c) or (d). The trustee sells  
such security for some purpose not authori sed by the terms of the instrument of trust. He is liable, at the option of the beneficiary, 
either to replace the security with the intermediate dividends and interest thereon, or to account for the proceeds of t he sale with 
interest thereon.  
(h) The trust -property consists of land. The trustee sells the land to a purchaser for a consideration without notice of the 
trust. The trustee is liable, at the option of the beneficiary, to purchase other land of equal valu e to be settled upon the like trust, 
or to be charged with the proceeds of the sale with interest.  
24. No set -off allowed to trustee. —A trustee who is liable for a loss occasioned by a 
breach of trust in respect of one portion of the trust -property cannot set-off against his 
liability a gain which has accrued to another portion of the trust -property through another 
and distinct breach of trust.  
25. Non-liability for predecessor ’s default. —Where  a trustee succeeds another, he is not, as such, 
liable for the acts or defaults of his predecessor.  
26. Non -liability for co -trustee’s default. —Subject  to the provisions of sections 13 and 
15, one trustee is not, as such, liable for a breach of trust committed by his co -trustee:  
Provided that, in the absence of a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 11]
uch, liable for a breach of trust committed by his co -trustee:  
Provided that, in the absence of an exp ress declaration to the contrary in the instrument of trust, a 
trustee is so liable —  
(a) where he has delivered trust -property to his co -trustee without seeing to its proper 
application;  
(b) where he allows his co -trustee to receive trust -property and fails to make due 
enquiry as to the co -trustee ’s dealings therewith, or allows him to retain it longer than the 
circumstances of the case reasonably require;  
(c) where he becomes aware of a breach of trust committed or intended by his co -trustee, and 
eithe r actively conceals it or does not within a reasonable time take proper steps to protect the 
beneficiary ’s interest.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 12]
12 
 Joining in receipt for conformity. —A co-trustee who joins in signing a receipt for trust -
property and proves that he has not received the s ame is not answerable, by reason of such 
signature only, for loss or misapplication of the property by his co -trustee.  
Illustration  
A bequeaths certain property to B and C, and directs .them to sell it and invest the proceeds for the benefit of D. 
B and C accordingly sell the property, and the purchase -money is received by B and retained in his hands. C pays no 
attention to the matter for two years and then calls on B to make the investment. B is unable to do so, becomes 
insolvent, and the purchase -money is  lost. C may be compelled to make good the amount.  
27. Several liability of co -trustees. —Where  co-trustees jointly commit a breach of trust, 
or where one of them by his neglect enables the other to commit a breach of trust, each is 
liable to the beneficiary for the whole of the loss occasioned by such breach.  
Contribution as between co -trustees. —But as between the trustees themselves, if one be 
less guilty than another and has had to refund the loss, the former may compel the latter, or 
his legal representative to the extent of the assets he has received, to make good such loss; 
and if all be equally guilty, any one or more of the trustees who has had to refund the loss 
may compel the others to contribute.  
Nothing in this section shall be deemed to  authori se a trustee who has been guilty of 
fraud to institute a suit to compel contribution.  
28. Non -liability of trustee paying without notice of transfer by beneficiary. —When  
any beneficiary ’s interest becomes vested in another person, and the trustee, not having notice 
of the vesting, pays or delivers trust -property to the person who would have been entitled 
thereto in the absence of such vesting, the trustee is not liable for the property so paid or 
delivered.  
29. Liability of trustee where beneficiary ’s interest is forfeited
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 12]
roperty so paid or 
delivered.  
29. Liability of trustee where beneficiary ’s interest is forfeited to the Government. —When  the 
beneficiary ’s interest is forfeited or awarded by legal adjudication 1[to the Government],  the trustee is 
bound to hold the trust -property to the extent of such interest for the benefit of  such person in such 
manner as 2[the State Government] may direct in this behalf.  
30. Indemnity of trustees. —Subject to the provisions of the instrument of trust and of 
sections 23 and 26, trustees shall be respectively chargeable only for such moneys, sto cks, 
funds and securities as they respectively actually receive, and shall not be answerable the one 
for the other of them, nor for any banker, broker or other person in whose hands any                    
trust -property may be placed, nor for the insuffici ency or deficiency of any stocks, funds or 
securities, nor otherwise for involuntary losses.  
CHAPTER IV  
OF THE RIGHTS AND POWERS OF TRUSTEES  
31. Right to title -deed.—A trustee is entitled to have in his possession the instrument of trust and all 
the docume nts of title (if any) relating solely to the trust -property.  
32. Right to reimbursement of expenses. —Every  trustee may reimburse himself, or  pay 
or discharge out of the trust -property, all expenses properly incurred in or about the execution 
of the trust, or the reali sation, preservation or benefit of the trust -property, or the protection 
or support of the beneficiary.  
If he pays such expenses  out of his own pocket he has a first charge upon the trust -property 
for such expenses and interest thereon; but such charge (unless the expenses have been incurred 
with the sanction of a principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction) shall be enforced on ly by 
prohibiting and disposition of the trust -property without previous payment of such expenses and 
interest.  
                                                      
1. The words “to Government” successively a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 12]
 
                                                      
1. The words “to Government” successively amended by  the A.O. 1937 and the A.O. 1950 to read as above.  
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “the Government”.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 13]
13 
 If the trust -property fail, the trustee is entitled to recover from the beneficiary per sonally 
on whose behalf he acted, and at whose request, expressed or implied, he made the payment, 
the amount of such expenses.  
Right to be recouped for erroneous over -payment. —Where  a trustee has by mistake made 
an over -payment to the beneficiary, he may reimburse the trust -property out of the beneficiary ’s 
interest. If such interest fail, the trustee is entitled to recover from the beneficiary personally the 
amount of such over -payment.  
33. Right to indemnity from gainer by breach of trust. —A person other than a trus tee 
who has gained an advantage from a brea ch of trust must indemnify the trustee to the extent 
of the amount actually received by such person under the breach; and where he is a 
beneficiary the trustee has a charge on his interest for such amount.  
Nothing in this section shall be deemed to entitle  a trustee to be indemnified who has, in committing 
the breach of trust, been guilty of fraud.  
34. Right to apply to Court for opinion in management of trust -property. —Any trustee 
may, without instituting a suit, apply by petition to a principal Civil Court of original 
jurisdiction for its opinion, advice or direction on any present questions respecting the 
management or administration of the trust -property other than questions of detail, diffi culty or 
importance, not proper in the opinion of the Court  for summary disposal.  
A copy of such petition shall be served upon, and the hearing thereof may be attended by, 
such of the persons interested in the application as the Court thinks fit.  
The trustee stating in good faith the facts in such petition and act ing upon the opinion, advice 
or direction given by the Court shall be deemed, so far as regards his own responsibility, to have 
discharged his duty as such trustee in the subject -matter of the application.  
The costs of every application under this section shall be in the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 13]
ect -matter of the application.  
The costs of every application under this section shall be in the discretion of the Court to which it is 
made.  
35. Right to settlement of accounts. —When the  duties of a trustee, as such, are completed, 
he is entitled to have the accounts of his administration of the trust -property examined and settled; 
and, where nothing is due to the beneficiary under the trust, to an acknowledgment in writing to 
that effect.  
36. General authority of trustee. —In addition to the  powers expressly conferred by this 
Act and by the instrument of trust, and subject to the restr ictions, if any, contained in such 
instrument, and to the provisions of section 17, a trustee may do all acts which are reasonable 
and proper for the reali sation, protection or benefit of the trust -property, and for the protection 
or support of a beneficia ry who is not competent to contract.  
1*                *                *                *                * 
Except with the permission of a principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction, no trustee shall 
lease trust -property for a term exceeding twenty -one years from the date of executing the lease, 
nor without reserving the best yearly rent that can be reasonably obtained.  
37. Power to sell in lots, and either by public auction or private contract. —Where the 
trustee is empowered to sell any trust -property, he may sell the same subject to prior charges or 
not, and either together or in lots, by public auction or private contract, and either at one time or 
at several times, unless the instrument of trust otherwise directs.  
38. Power to sell under sp ecial conditions. Power to buy -in and re -sell.—The trustee 
making any such sale may insert such reasonable stipulations either as to title or evidence of title, 
or otherwise, in any conditions of sale or contract for sale, as he thinks fit; and may also bu y-in 
the property or any part thereof at any sale by auction, and rescind or vary any con
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 13]
y also bu y-in 
the property or any part thereof at any sale by auction, and rescind or vary any contract for sale, 
                                                      
1. Second paragraph rep. by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and I Schedule.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 14]
14 
 and re -sell the property so bought in, or as to which the contract is so rescinded, without being 
responsible to the beneficiary for any loss occasione d thereby.  
Time allowed for selling trust -property. —Where  a trustee is directed to sell trust -property or to 
invest trust -money in the purchase of property, he may exercise a reasonable discretion as to the time  of 
effecting the sale or purchase.  
Illustrations  
(a) A bequeaths property to B, directing him to sell it with all convenient speed and pay the proceeds to C. This does not 
render an immediate sale imperative.  
(b) A bequeaths property to B, directing him to sell it at such time and in such m anner as he shall think fit and 
invest the proceeds for the benefit of C. This does not authori se B, as between him and C, to postpone the sale to an 
indefinite period.  
39. Power to convey. —For the purpose of completing any such sale, the trustee shall hav e power to 
convey or otherwise dispose of the property sold in such manner as may be necessary.  
40. Power to vary investments. —A trustee may, at his discretion, call in any trust -property 
invested in any security and invest the same on any of the securitie s mentioned or referred to in 
section 20, and from time to time vary any such investments for others of the same nature:  
Provided that, where there is a person competent to contract and entitled at the time to 
receive the income of the trust -property for his life, or for any greater estate, no such change of 
investment shall be made without his consent in writing.  
41. Power to apply property of minors, etc., for their maintenance, etc. —Where  any 
property  is held by a trustee in trust for a minor, such trus tee may, at his discretion, pay to the 
guardians (if any) of such minor, or otherwise apply for or towards his maintenance or education 
or advancement in life, or the reasonable expenses of his religious worship, marriage or funeral,  
the whole or any part of the inc
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 14]
easonable expenses of his religious worship, marriage or funeral,  
the whole or any part of the income to which he may be entitled in respect of such property; and such 
trustee shall accumulate all the residue of such income by way of compound interest, by investing the 
same and the resulting income thereof from time to time in any of the secu rities mentioned or referred to 
in section 20, for the benefit of the person who shall ultimately become entitled to the property from 
which such accumulations have arisen:  
Provided that such trustee may, at any time, if he thinks fit, apply the whole or any part of such 
accumulations as if the same were part of the income arising in the then current year.  
Where the income of the trust -property is insufficient for the minor ’s maintenance or education or 
advancement in life, or the reasonable expenses of hi s religious worship, marriage or funeral, the trustee 
may, with the permission of a principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction, but not otherwise, apply the 
whole or any part of such property for or towards such maintenance, education, advancement or e xpenses.  
Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the provisions of any local law for the time being in 
force relating to the persons and property of minors.  
42. Power to give receipts. —Any trustees or trustee may give a receipt in  writing for any  
money, securities or other moveable property payable, transferable or deliverable to them or him 
by reason, or in the exercise, of any trust or power; and, in the absence of fraud, such receipt shall 
discharge the person paying, transferring or delivering  the same therefrom, and from seeing to the 
application thereof, or being accountable for any loss or misapplication thereof.  
43. Power to compound, etc. —Two or more trustees acting together may, if and as they think fit —  
(a) accept any composition or any  security for any debt or for any property claimed;  
(b) allow any time for paymen
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 14]
mposition or any  security for any debt or for any property claimed;  
(b) allow any time for payment of any debt;  
(c) compromise, compound, abandon, submit to arbitration or otherwise settle any debt, account, 
claim or thing whatever relating to the trust; and  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 15]
15 
 (d) for any o f those purposes, enter into, give, execute and do such agreements, instruments 
of composition or arrangement, releases and other things as to them seem expedient, without 
being responsible for any loss occasioned by any act or thing so done by them in goo d faith.  
The powers conferred by this section on two or more trustees acting together may be 
exercised by a sole acting trustee when by the instrument of trust, if any, a sole trustee is 
authorized to execute the trusts and powers thereof.  
This section app lies only if and as far as a contrary intention is not expressed in the 
instrument of trust, if any, and shall have effect subject to the terms of that instrument and to the 
provisions therein contained.  
This section applies only to trusts created after th is Act comes into force.  
44. Power to several trustees of whom one disclaims or dies. —When an authority to deal 
with the trust -property is given to several trustees and one of them disclaims or dies, the authority 
may be exercised by the continuing trustee s, unless from the terms of the instrument of trust it is 
apparent that the authority is to be exercised by a number in excess of the number of the remaining 
trustees.  
45. Suspension of trustee ’s powers by decree. —Where  a decree has been made in a  suit 
for the execution of a trust, the trustee must not exercise any of his powers except in conformity with such 
decree, or with the sanction of the Court by which the decree has been made, or, where an appeal against 
the decree is pending, of the Appellate Court . 
CHAPTER V  
OF THE DISABILITIES  OF TRUSTEES  
46. Trustee cannot renounce after acceptance. —A trustee who has accepted 
the trust cannot afterwards renounce it except (a) with the permission of a principal 
Civil Court of original jurisdiction, or (b) if the beneficiary is competent to 
contract, with his consent, or (c) by virtue of a special power in the instrument of 
trust.  
47. Trustee cannot dele
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 15]
 consent, or (c) by virtue of a special power in the instrument of 
trust.  
47. Trustee cannot delegate. —A trustee cannot delegate his office or any of his 
duties either to a co -trustee or to a stranger, u nless (a) the instrument of trust so 
provides,  or (b) the delegation is in the regular course of business, or (c) the delegation 
is necessary, or (d) the beneficiary, being competent to contract, consents to the 
delegation.  
Explanation. —The appointment of an attorney or proxy to do an act merely 
ministerial and involving no independent discretion is not a delegation within the 
meaning of this section.  
Illustrations  
(a) A bequeaths certain property to B and C on certain trusts to be executed by them or the survivor of them 
or the assigns of such survivor. B dies. C may bequeath the trust -property to D and E upon the trusts of A ’s will.  
(b) A is a trustee of certain proper ty with power to sell the same. A may employ an auctioneer to effect the 
sale.  
(c) A bequeaths to B fifty houses let at monthly rents in trust to collect the rents and pay them to C. B may employ a proper 
person to collect these rents.  
48. Co-trustees cannot act singly. —When there are  more trustees than one, all 
must join in the execution of the trust, except where the instrument of trust otherwise 
provides.  
49. Control of discretionary power. —Where a discretionary power conferred on  a 
trustee is not ex ercised reasonably and in good faith, such power may be controlled by a 
principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 16]
16 
 50. Trustee may not charge for services. —In the  absence of express directions 
to the contrary contained in the instrument of trust or of  a contract to the contrary  
entered into with the beneficiary or the Court at the time of accepting the trust, a 
trustee has no right to remuneration for his trouble, skill and loss of time in 
executing the trust.  
Nothing in this section applies to any Off icial Trustee, Administrator General, Public 
Curator, or person holding a certificate of administration.  
51. Trustee may not use trust -property for his own profit. —A trustee may not  use 
or deal with the trust -property for his own profit or for any other pu rpose unconnected 
with the trust.  
52. Trustee for sale or his agent may not buy. —No trustee whose duty it is to sell 
trust -property, and no agent employed by such trustee for the purpose of  the sale, may, 
directly or indirectly, buy the same or any interest therein, on his own account or as 
agent for a third person.  
53. Trustee may not buy beneficiary ’s interest without permission. —No trustee, and  no 
person who has recently ceased to be a tr ustee, may, without the permission of a principal Civil Court of 
original jurisdiction, buy or become mortgagee or lessee of the trust -property or any part thereof; and 
such permission shall not be given unless the proposed purchase, mortgage or lease is m anifestly for the 
advantage of the beneficiary.  
Trustee for purchase. —And  no trustee whose duty it is to buy or to obtain a mortgage 
or lease of particular property for the beneficiary may buy it, or any part thereof, or obtain a 
mortgage or lease of it, o r any part thereof, for himself.  
54. Co-trustees may not lend to one of themselves. —A trustee or co -trustee whose duty it 
is to invest trust -money on mortgage or personal security must not invest it on a mortgage by, 
or on the personal security of, himself  or one of his co -trustees.  
CHAPTER VI  
OF THE RIGHTS  AND LIABILITIES  OF
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 16]
 security of, himself  or one of his co -trustees.  
CHAPTER VI  
OF THE RIGHTS  AND LIABILITIES  OF THE BENEFICIARY  
55. Rights to rents and profits .—The beneficiary has, subject to the provisions of the 
instrument of trust, a right to the rents and profits of the trust -property.  
56. Right to specific execution. —The beneficiary is entitled to have the intention of the 
author of the trust specifically executed to the extent of the beneficiary ’s interest;  
Right to transfer of possession. —and,  where there is only one beneficiary and he is  
competent to contract, or where there are several beneficiaries and they are competent to 
contract and all of one mind, he or they may require the trustee to transfer the trust -property 
to him or them, or to such person as he or they may direct.  
When prop erty has been transferred or bequeathed for the benefit of a married woman, so 
that she shall not have power to deprive herself of her beneficial interest, nothing in the second 
clause of this section applies to such property during her marriage.  
Illustrations  
Certain Government securities are given to trustees upon trust to accumulate the interest until A attains the age of 24, and 
then to transfer the gross amount to him. A on attaining majority may, as the person exclusively interested in the tr ust-property, 
require the trustees to transfer it immediately to him.  
A bequeaths Rs.10,000 to trustees upon trust to purchase an annuity for B, who has attained his majority and is otherwise 
competent to contract. B may claim the Rs. 10 ,000. 
A transfers c ertain property to B and directs him to sell or invest it for the benefit of C, who is competent to contract. C may 
elect to take the property in its original character.  
57. Right to inspect and take copies of instrument of trust, accounts, etc. —The benefi ciary 
has a right, as against the trustee and all persons claiming under him with notice of the trust, to 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 16]
 all persons claiming under him with notice of the trust, to 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 17]
17 
 inspect and take copies of the instrument of trust, the documents of title relating solely to the 
trust -property, the accounts of the trust -property a nd the vouchers (if any) by which they are 
supported, and the cases submitted and opinions taken by the trustee for his guidance in the 
discharge of his duty.  
58. Right to transfer beneficial interest. —The beneficiary, if competent to contract, may 
transfer his interest, but subject to the law for the time being in force as to the circumstances 
and extent in and to which he may dispose of such interest:  
Provided that when property is transferred or bequeathed for the benefit of a married 
woman, so th at she shall not have power to deprive herself of her beneficial interest, nothing 
in this section shall authori se her to transfer such interest during her marriage.  
59. Right to sue for execution of trust. —Where  no trustees are  appointed or all the 
truste es die, disclaim or are discharged, or where for any other reason the execution of  a 
trust by the trustee is or becomes impracticable, the beneficiary may institute a suit for the execution of 
the trust, and the trust shall, so far as may be possible, be e xecuted by the Court until the appointment of a 
trustee or new trustee.  
60. Right to proper trustees. —The beneficiary has a right (subject to the provisions of 
the instrument of trust) that the trust -property shall be properly protected and held and 
admini stered by proper persons and by a proper number of such persons.  
Explanation I. —The following are not proper persons within the meaning of this section: —  
A person domiciled abroad: an alien enemy: a person having an interest inconsistent with that of the 
beneficiary: a person in insolvent circumstances; and, unless the personal law of the beneficiary allows 
otherwise, a married woman and a minor.  
Explanation II. —When  the administration of the trust involves the receipt and custody of money, the 
number of trustees shou
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 17]
 administration of the trust involves the receipt and custody of money, the 
number of trustees should be two at least.  
Illustrations  
(a) A, one of several beneficiaries, proves that B, the trustee, has improperly disposed of part of the trust -property, or that 
the property is in danger from B ’s being in insolvent circumstances, or that he i s incapacitated from acting as trustee. A may 
obtain a receiver of the trust -property.  
(b) A bequeaths certain jewels to B in trust for C. B dies during A ’s lifetime; then A dies. C is entitled to have the property 
conveyed to a trustee for him.  
(c) A conv eys certain property to four trustees in trust for B. Three of the trustees die. B may institute a suit to have three 
new trustees appointed in the place of the deceased trustees.  
(d) A conveys certain property to three trustees in trust for B. All the tru stees disclaim. B may institute a suit to have three 
trustees appointed in place of the trustees so disclaiming.  
(e) A, a trustee for B, refuses to act, or goes to reside permanently out of 1[India], or is declared an insolvent, or compounds 
with his credi tors, or suffers a co -trustee to commit a breach of trust. B may institute a suit to have A removed and a new trustee 
appointed in his room.  
61. Right to compel to any act of duty. —The beneficiary has a right that his trustee shall be 
compelled to perform any particular act of his duty as such, and restrained from committing any 
contemplated or probable breach of trust.  
Illustrations  
(a) A contracts  with B to pay him monthly Rs.100 for the benefit of C. B writes and signs a letter declaring that he will hold 
in trust for C the money so to be paid. A fails to pay the money in accordance with his contract. C may compel B on a proper 
indemnity to allow C to sue on the contract in B ’s name.  
(b) A is trustee of certain land, with a power to sell the same and pay the proceeds to B and C equally. A is about to 
make an improvident sale of th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 17]
sell the same and pay the proceeds to B and C equally. A is about to 
make an improvident sale of the land. B may sue on behalf of himself and C for an injunction to res train A from making 
the sale.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “the Provinces”.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 18]
18 
 62. Wrongful purchase by trustee. —Where  a trustee has wrongfully bought trust -property, 
the beneficiary has a right to have the property declared subject to the trust or retransferred by the 
trustee, if it remains in his hands unsold, or, if it has been bought from him by any person with 
notice of the trust, by such person. But in such case the beneficiary must repay the purchase -money 
paid by the trustee, with interest, and such other expenses (if any) as he has properly incurred in 
the preservation of the property; and the trustee or purchaser must (a) account for the net profits of 
the property, (b) be charged with an occupation -rent, if he has been in actual possession of the 
property, and (c) allow the beneficiary to deduct a proportionate part of the purchase -money if the 
property has been deteriorated by the acts or omissions of the trustee or purchaser.  
Nothing in this section —  
(a) impairs the rights of lessees and others who, before the institution of a suit to have the 
property declared subject to the trust or retransferred, have contra cted in good faith with the trustee or 
purchaser; or  
(b) entitles the beneficiary to have the property declared subject to the trust or retransferred 
where he, being competent to contract, h as himself, without coercion or undue influence having been 
brough t to bear on him, ratified the sale to the trustee with full knowledge of the facts of the case and 
of his rights as against the trustee.  
63. Following trust -property —into the hands of third persons; —Where trust -property comes 
into the hands of a third per son inconsistently with the trust, the beneficiary may require him to admit 
formally, or may institute a suit for a declaration, that the property is comprised in the trust.  
into that into which it has been converted. —Where the trustee has disposed of trus t-property 
and the money or other property which he has received therefor can be traced in his hands, or the 
hands of his
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 18]
ey or other property which he has received therefor can be traced in his hands, or the 
hands of his legal representative or legatee, the beneficiary has, in respect thereof, rights as nearly as 
may be the same as his rights in respect  of the original trust -property.  
Illustrations  
(a) A, a trustee for B of Rs. 10,000, wrongfully invests the Rs. 10,000 in the purchase of certain land. B is entitled to the 
land.  
(b) A, a trustee, wrongfully purchases land in his own name, partly with his own money, partly with money 
subject to a trust for B. B is entitled to a charge on the land for the amount of the trust -money so misemployed.  
64. Saving of rights of certain transfer ees.—Nothing in section 63 entitles the beneficiary to any 
right in respect of property in the hands of —  
(a) a transferee in good faith for consideration without having notice of the trust, either when the 
purchase -money was paid, or when the conveyance w as executed, or  
(b) a transferee for consideration from such a transferee.  
A judgment -creditor of the trustee attaching and purchasing trust -property is not a transferee for 
consideration within the meaning of this section.  
Nothing in section 63 applies to money, currency notes and negotiable instruments in the hands of a 
bona fide holder to whom they have passed in circulation, or shall be deemed to affect the Indian Contract 
Act, 1872 (9 of 1872), section 108, or the liabil ity of a person to whom a debt or charge is transferred.  
65. Acquisition by -trustee of trust -property wrongfully converted. —Where a trustee wrong fully 
sells or otherwise transfers trust -property and afterwards himself becomes the owner of the property, th e 
property again becomes subject to the trust, notwithstanding any want of notice on the part of intervening 
transferees in good faith for consideration.  
66. Right in case of blended property. —Where the trustee wrongfully mingles the trust -
property with hi s own, the beneficiary is ent
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 18]
ty. —Where the trustee wrongfully mingles the trust -
property with hi s own, the beneficiary is entitled to a charge on the whole fund for the amount due 
to him.  
67. Wrongful employment by partner -trustee of trust -property for partnership purposes. —
If a partner, being a trustee, wrongfully employs trust -property in the busin ess or on the account of 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 19]
19 
 the partnership, no other partner is liable therefor in his personal capacity to the beneficiaries, unless 
he had notice of the breach of trust.  
The partners having such notice are jointly and severally liable for the breach of tru st. 
Illustrations  
(a) A and B are partners. A dies, having bequeathed all his property to B in trust for Z, and appointed B his sole executor. B, 
instead of winding up the affairs of the partnership, retains all the assets in the business. Z may compel him, as partner, to 
account for so much of the profits as are derived from A ’s share of the capital. B is also answerable to Z for the improper 
employment of A ’s assets.  
(b) A, a trader, bequeaths his property to B in trust for C, appoints B his sole executor, and dies. B enters into partnership 
with X and Y in the same trade, and employs A ’s assets in the partnership -business. B gives an indemnity to X and Y against the 
claim s of C. Here X and Y are jointly liable with B to C as having knowingly become parties to the breach of trust committed by 
B. 
68. Liability of beneficiary joining in breach of trust. —Where  one of several beneficiaries —  
(a) joins in committing breach of tr ust, or  
(b) knowingly obtains any advantage therefrom, without the consent of the other beneficiaries, or  
(c) becomes aware of a breach of trust committed or intended to be committed, and either 
actually conceals it, or does not within a reasonable time ta ke proper steps to protect the interests of 
the other beneficiaries, or  
(d) has deceived the trustee and thereby induced him to commit a breach of trust,  
the other beneficiaries are entitled to have all his beneficial interest impounded as against him and 
all who claim under him (otherwise than as transferees for consideration without notice of the 
breach) until the loss caused by the breach has been compensated.  
When property has been transferred or bequeathed for the benefit of a married woman, so that 
she shall not hav
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 19]
ty has been transferred or bequeathed for the benefit of a married woman, so that 
she shall not have power to deprive herself of her beneficial interest, nothing in this section applies 
to such property during her marriage.  
69. Rights and liabilities of beneficiary ’s transferee. —Every  person to whom a beneficiary 
transfers his interest ha s the rights, and is subject to the liabilities, of the beneficiary in respect of such 
interest at the date of the transfer.  
CHAPTER VII  
OF  VA CAT ING   THE  OFFIC E   OF  TRUST EES  
70. Office how vacated. —The office of a trustee is vacated by his death or by h is discharge from his 
office.  
71. Discharge of trustee. —The trustee may be discharged from his office only as follows: —  
(a) by the extinction of the trust;  
(b) by the completion of his duties under the trust;  
(c) by such means as may be prescribed by the instrument of trust;  
(d) by appointment under this Act of a new trustee in his place;  
(e) by consent of himself and the beneficiary, or, where there are more beneficiaries than one, all 
the beneficiaries being competent to contract , or 
(f) by the Court to which a petition for his discharge is presented under this Act.  
72. Petition to be discharged from trust. —Notwithstanding  the provisions of section 11, 
every trustee may apply by petition to a principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction to be 
discharged  from his office; and if the Court finds that there is sufficient reason for such discharge, 
it may discharge him accordingly, and direct his costs to be paid out of the trust -property. But 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 20]
20 
 where there is no such reason, the Court shall not discharge him, unless a proper person can be 
found to take his place.  
73. Appointment of new trustees on death, etc. —Whenever  any person appointed a trustee 
disclaims, or any trustee, either original or substituted, dies, or is for a continuous period of six  months 
absen t from 1[India], or leaves 1[India] for the purpose of residing abroad, or is declared an insolvent, or 
desires to be discharged from the trust, or refuses or becomes, in the opinion of a principal Civil Court of 
original jurisdiction, unfit or personally incapable to act in the trust, or accepts an inconsistent trust, a new 
trustee may be appointed in his place by —  
(a) the person nominated for that purpose by the instrument of trust (if any), or  
(b) if the re be no such person, or no such person able and willing to act, the author of the 
trust if he be alive and competent to contract, or the surviving or continuing trustees or trustee 
for the time being, or legal representative of the last surviving and continuing trustee, or (with 
the consent of the Court ) the retiring trustees, if they all retire simultaneously, or (with the 
like consent) the last retiring trustee.  
Every such appointment shall be by writing under the hand of the person making it. On an 
appointment of a new trustee the number of trustees m ay be increased.  
The Official Trustee may, with his consent and by the order of the Court, be appointed under this 
section, in any case in which only one trustee is to be appointed and such trustee is to be the sole trustee.  
The provisions of this section relative to a trustee who is dead include the case of a person nominated 
trustee in a will but dying before the testator, and those relative to a continuing trustee include a refusing 
or retiring trustee if willing to act in the execution of the power.  
74. Appointment by Court. —Whenever  any such vacancy or disqualification occurs and it is 
found impracti
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 20]
pointment by Court. —Whenever  any such vacancy or disqualification occurs and it is 
found impracticable to appoint a new trustee under section 73, the beneficiary may, without instituting 
a suit, apply by petition to a principal Civil Court of original j urisdiction for the appointment of a 
trustee or a new trustee, and the Court may appoint a trustee or a new trustee accordingly.  
Rule for selecting new trustees. —In appointing new trustees, the Court shall have regard (a) 
to the wishes of the author of the trust as expressed in or to be inferred from the instrument of 
trust; (b) to the wishes of the person, if any, empowered to appoint new trustees; (c) to the question 
whether the appointment will promote or impede the exec ution of the trust; and (d) where there are  
more beneficiaries than one, to the interests of all such beneficiaries.  
75. Vesting of trust -property in new trustees. —Whenever  any new trustee is appointed under 
section  73 or section 74, all the trust -property  for the time being vested  in the surviving or continuing 
trustees or trustee, or in the legal representative of any trustee, shall become vested in such new trustee, 
either solely or jointly with the surviving or continuing trustees or trustee, as the cas e may require.  
Powers of new trustees. —Every  new trustee so appointed, and every trustee appointed by a 
Court either before or after the passing of this Act, shall have the same powers, authorities and 
discretions, and shall in all respects act, as if he h ad been originally nominated a trustee by the 
author of the trust.  
76. Survival of trust. —On the death or discharge of one of several co -trustees, the trust 
survives and the trust -property passes to the others, unless the instrument of trust expressly decl ares 
otherwise.  
CHAPTER VIII  
OF THE EXTINCTION OF TRUSTS  
77. Trust how extinguished. —A trust is extinguished —  
(a) when its purpose is completely fulfilled; or  
                              
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 20]
s extinguished —  
(a) when its purpose is completely fulfilled; or  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “the Provinces”.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 21]
21 
 (b) when its purpose becomes unlawful; or  
(c) when the fulfilment of its purpose becomes impossible by destruction of the trust -property or 
otherwise; or  
(d) when the trust, being revocable, is expressly revoked.  
78.  Revocation of trust. —A trust created by will may be revoked at the pleasure of the testator.  
A trust otherwise created can be r evoked only —  
(a) where all the beneficiaries are competent to contract —by their consent;  
(b) where the trust has been declared by a non -testamentary instrument or by word of 
mouth —in exercise of a power of revocation expressly reserved to the author of the trust; or  
(c) where the trust is for the payment of the debts of the author of the trust, and has not been 
communicated to the creditors —at the pleasure of the author of the trust.  
Illustration  
A conveys property to B in trust to sell the same and pay out of the proceeds the claims of A ’s creditors. A 
reserves no power of revocation. If no communication has been made to the creditors, A may revoke the trust. But if 
the creditors are parties to the arrangement, the trust cannot be revoked without their c onsent.  
79. Revocation not to defeat what trustees have duly done. —No trust can be revoked by the author 
of the trust so as to defeat or prejudice what the trustees may have duly done in execution of the trust.  
CHAPTER IX  
OF  CERTAIN   OBLIGATIONS   IN  THE  NATURE   OF  TRUSTS  
80. Where obligation in nature of trust is created. —An obligation in the nature of a trust is created 
in the following cases.  
81. [Where it does not appear that transferor intended to dispose of beneficial interest .] Rep. by the 
Benami Transactions (Prohibition ) Act, 1988 (45 of 1988), s. 7 (w.e.f. 19-5-1988).  
82. [Transfer to one for consideration paid by another .] Rep. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 19-5-1988).  
83. Trust incapable of execution or executed without exhausting trust -property. —Where 
a trust is incapable of being executed, or where the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 21]
ed without exhausting trust -property. —Where 
a trust is incapable of being executed, or where the trust is completely executed without 
exhausting the trust -property, the trustee, in the absence of a direction to the contrary, must hold 
the trust -property, or so much thereof as is unexhausted, f or the benefit of the author of the trust 
or his legal representative.  
Illustrations  
(a) A conveys certain land to B —  
“upon trust ,” and no trust is declared; or  
“upon trust to be thereafter declared ”, and no such declaration is ever made; or  
upon trusts that are too vague to be executed; or  
upon trusts that become incapable of taking effect; or  
“in trust for C .” and C renounces his interest under the trust.  
In each of these cases B holds the land for the benefit of A.  
(b) A transfers Rs. 10,000 in the four per cents. to B, in trust to pay the interest annually accruing due to C for 
her life. A dies. Then C dies. B holds the fund for the benefit of A ’s legal representative.  
(c) A conveys land to B upon trust to sell it and a pply one moiety of the proceeds for certain charitable purposes, 
and the other for the maintenance of the worship of an idol. B sells the land, but the charitable purposes wholly fail, 
and the maintenance of the worship does not exhaust the second moiety o f the proceeds. B holds the first moiety and 
the part unapplied of the second moiety for the benefit of A or his legal representative.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 22]
22 
 (d) A bequeaths Rs. 10,000 to B, to be laid out in buying land to be conveyed for purposes which either  
wholly or partial ly fail to take effect. B holds for the benefit of A ’s legal representative the undisposed of interest in the money or 
land if purchased.  
84. Transfer for illegal purpose .—Where the owner of property transfers it to another for an illegal 
purpose and such purpose is not carried into execution, or the transferor is not as guilty as the transferee, 
or the effect of permitting the transferee to retain the property might be to defeat the provisions of any 
law, the transferee must hold the property for the benef it of the transferor.  
85. Bequest for illegal purpose. —Where a testator bequeaths certain property upon trust and 
the purpose of the trust appears on the face of the will to be unlawful, or during the testator ’s 
lifetime the legatee agrees with him to appl y the property for an unlawful purpose, the legatee 
must hold the property for the benefit of the testator ’s legal representative.  
Bequest of which revocation is prevented by coercion. —Where  property is bequeathed and the 
revocation of the bequest is preve nted by coercion, the legatee must hold the property for the benefit of 
the testator ’s legal representative.  
86. Transfer pursuant to rescindable contract. —Where  property is transferred in pursuance of a 
contract which is liable to rescission or induced by  fraud or mistake, the transferee must, on receiving 
notice to that effect, hold the property for the benefit of the transferor, subject to repayment by the latter 
of the consideration actually paid.  
87. Debtor becoming creditor ’s representative. —Where a  debtor becomes the executor or other 
legal representative of his creditor, he must hold the debt for the benefit of the persons interested therein.  
88. Advantage gained by fiduciary. —Where  a trustee, executor, partner, agent, director of a 
company, legal ad visor, or other person bound in a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 22]
rustee, executor, partner, agent, director of a 
company, legal ad visor, or other person bound in a fiduciary character to protect the interests of another 
person, by availing himself of his character, gains for himself any pecuniary advantage, or where any 
person so bound enters into any dealings under circumstances in which his own interests are, or may be, 
adverse to those of such other person and thereby gains for himself a pecuniary advantage, he must hold 
for the benefit of such other person the advantage so gained.  
Illustrations  
(a) A, an executor, buys at  an undervalue from B, a legatee, his claim under the will. B is ignorant of the value of the 
bequest. A must hold for the benefit of B the difference between the price and value.  
(b) A, a trustee, uses the trust -property for the purpose of his own business. A  holds for the benefit of his beneficiary the 
profits arising from such user.  
(c) A, a trustee, retires from his trust in consideration of his successor paying him a sum of money. A holds such money for 
the benefit of his beneficiary.  
(d) A, a partner, buys land in his own name with funds belonging to the partnership. A holds such land for the benefit of the 
partnership.  
(e) A, a partner, employed on behalf of himself and his co -partners i s negotiating the terms of a lease, clandestinely 
stipulates with the lessor for payment to himself of a lakh of rupees. A holds the lakh for the benefit of the partnership.  
(f) A and B are partners. A dies. B, instead of winding up the affairs of the partnership, retains all the assets in the business . 
B must account to  A’s legal representative for the profits arising from A ’s share of the capital.  
(g) A, an agent employed to obtain a lease for B, obtains the lease for himself. A holds the lease for the benefit of B.  
(h) A, a guardian, buys up for himself incumbrances on  his ward B ’s estate at an undervalue. A holds for the benefit of B the 
incumbrances so bought, and can only c
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 22]
’s estate at an undervalue. A holds for the benefit of B the 
incumbrances so bought, and can only charge him with what he has actually paid.  
89. Advantage gained by exercise of undue influence. —Where,  by the exercise of undue influence, 
any adva ntage is gained in derogation of the interests of another, the person gaining such advantage 
without consideration, or with notice that such influence has been exercised, must hold the advantage for 
the benefit of the person whose interests have been so pr ejudiced.  
90.  Advantage gained by qualified owner. —Where a tenant for life, co -owner, mortgagee or  other 
qualified owner of any property, by availing himself of his position as such, gains an advantage in 
derogation of the rights of the other persons inte rested in the property, or where any such owner, as 
representing all persons interested in such property, gains any advantage, he must hold, for the benefit of 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 23]
23 
 all persons so interested, the advantage so gained, but subject to repayment by such persons of their due 
share of the expenses properly incurred, and to an indemnity by the same persons against liabilities 
properly contracted, in gaining such advantage.  
Illustrations  
(a) A, the tenant for life of leasehold property, renews the lease in his own name and for his own benefit. A holds the 
renewed lease for the benefit of all those interested in the old lease.  
(b) A village belongs to a Hindu family. A, one of its members, pays nazrana to Government and thereby procures his 
name to be entered as the inamd ar of the village. A holds the village for the benefit of himself and the other members.  
(c) A mortgages land to B, who enters into possession. B allows the Government revenue to fall into arrear with a view to 
the land being put up for sale and his becomi ng himself the purchaser of it. The land is accordingly sold to B. Subject to the 
repayment of the amount due on the mortgage and of his expenses properly incurred as mortgagee, B holds the land for the 
benefit of A.  
91. Property acquired with notice of ex isting contract. —Where a person acquires property 
with notice that another person has entered into an existing contract affecting that property, of 
which specific performance could be enforced, the former must hold the property for the benefit of 
the latte r to the extent necessary to give effect to the contract.  
92. Purchase by person contracting to buy property to be held on trust. —Where  a person 
contracts to buy property to be held on trust for certain beneficiaries and buys the property accordingly, 
he m ust hold the property for their benefit to the extent necessary to give effect to the contract.  
93. Advantage secretly gained by one of several compounding creditors. —Where  creditors 
compound the debts due to them, and one of such creditors, by a secret arrangement with the debtor, gains 
an undue advantage over his co -cred
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 23]
such creditors, by a secret arrangement with the debtor, gains 
an undue advantage over his co -creditors, he must hold for the benefit of such creditors the advantage so 
gained.  
94. [Constructive trusts in cases not expressly provided for ].—Rep. by the Benami 
Transactions (Prohibition ) Act, 1988 (45 of 1988), s. 7 (w.e.f. 19-5-1988).  
95. Obligor’s duties, liabilities and disabilities. —The person holding property in accordance 
with any of the preceding sections of this Chapter must, so far as may be, perform the same duties, 
and is subject, so far as may be, to the same liabilities and disabilities, as if he were a trustee of the 
property for the person for whose benefit he holds it:  
Provided that (a) where he rightfully cultivates the property or employs it in trade or business, he is 
entitled to reasonable remuneration for his trouble, skill and loss of time in such cultivation or 
employment; and (b) where he holds the property by virtue of a contract with the person for whose 
benefit he holds it, or with any one through whom such p erson claims, he may, without the permission of 
the Court, buy or become lessee or mortgagee of the property or any part thereof.  
96. Saving of rights of bona fide  purchasers. —Nothing  contained in this Chapter shall impair the 
rights of transferees in good  faith for consideration, or create an obligation in evasion  of any law for the 
time being in force.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN TRUSTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 24]
24 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 2)  
STATUTE  
 
Year and Chapter  Short Title  Extent of repeal  
29 Car. II, c. 3 . . . .  The Statute of Frauds1 Sections 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11.  
 
 
ACTS OF THE GOVERNOR  GENERAL  IN COUNCIL  
Number and year  Short title  Extent of repeal  
XXVII of 1866 . . .  
 
 
 
 
 
1 of 1877 . . .  
 2The Trustees ’ and 
Mortgages ’ Powers Act, 1866  
 
 
 
 
3The Specific Relief Act, 
1877 Sections 2,  3, 4, 5, 32, 33, 34, 
35, 36 and 37.  
In sections 3*** 43 the word 
“trustee” wherever it occurs; 
and in section 43 the words 
“management or” and “the 
trust -property or”.  
In section 12 the first 
illustration.  
 
 
____________  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
1. Rep. in its application to India.  
2. Rep. 
3. The figures “39, and” by implication the word “and”, rep. by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and the First Sch.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title s, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL  
3. Establishment and composition of the Council.  
4. Mode of election of members.  
5. Term of office of President, Vice -President and members.  
6. Cessation of membership.  
7. Casual vacancies.  
8. Resignation.  
9. Meetings of the Council.  
10. Vacancies in the Council not to invalidate acts, etc.  
11. Appointment of Secretary and other officers or servants.  
12. Executive Committee and other Committees.  
13. Fees and allowances.  
14. Information to be furnished by the Council and publication thereof.  
15. Recognition of veterinary qualifications granted by veterinary institutions in India.  
16. Recognition of veterinary qualifications granted by veterinary institutions in countries with 
which there is a scheme of reciprocity . 
17. Special provisions in certain cases for recognition of veterinary qualifications  granted by 
veterinary institutions in countries with which there is no scheme of reciprocity . 
18. Power to require information as to courses of study and examinations.  
19. Inspection of veterinary institutions and examinations.  
20. Appointment of visitors . 
21. Withdrawal of recognition.  
22. Minimum standards of veterinary education.  
CHAPTER III  
INDIAN VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS REGISTER  
23. Indian veterinary practitioners register.  
24. Registration in the Indian veterinary practitioners register.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 2]
2 
 SECTIONS  
25. Issue of  certificate of registration.  
26. Registration of additional qualifications.  
27. Removal of names from the Indian veterinary practitioners register.  
28. Person enrolled on Indian veterinary practitioners register to notify  change of place of 
residence or practice . 
CHAPTER IV  
PRIVILEGES OF REGISTERED VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS  
29. Privileges of persons, who are enrolled on the Indian veterinary practitioners register.  
30. Right of persons who are enrolled on the Indian veterinary practitioners register.  
CHAPTER V  
DISCIPLIN E 
31. Professional conduct.  
CHAPTER VI  
STATE VETERINARY COUNCILS  
32. Establishment and composition of State Veterinary Councils.  
33. Inter -State agreements.  
34. Composition of Joint State Veterinary Councils.  
35. Incorporation of State Veterinary Councils.  
36. President.  
37. Mode of elections.  
38. Terms of office and causal vacancies.  
39. Resignation.  
40. Executive and other Committees.  
41. Fees and allowances.  
42. Appointment of Registrar and other officers or servants.  
43. Information to be furnished by State Veterinary Council.  
CHAPTER VII  
REGISTRATION  
44. Preparation and maintenance of State veterinary practitioners register.  
45. First preparation of register.  
46. Qualifications for entry on preparation of register.  
47. Scrutiny of applications for registration.  
48. Renewal fees.  
49. Removal from the register.  
50. Restoration to State veterinary register.  
51. Printing of State veterinary register.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 3]
3 
 CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
SECTIONS  
52. Transfer of registration.  
53. Bar  of jurisdiction.  
54. Issue of duplicate certificates.  
55. Penalty for falsely claiming to be registered.  
56. Misuse of titles . 
57. Practice by unregistered persons.  
58. Failure to surrender certificate of registration.  
59. Cognizance of offence.  
60. Bar o f suit and other legal proceedings.  
61. Payme nt of part of fees to Council.  
62. Accounts and audit.  
63. Appointment of Commission of Inquiry.  
64. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
65. Power of State Government to make rules.  
66. Power to make regulations.  
67. Repeal and saving.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.  
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 4]
4 
 THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984  
ACT NO. 52 OF 1984  
 [18th August, 1984.]  
An Act to regulate veterinary practice and to provide, for that purpose, for the establishment  of a 
Veterinary Council of India and State Veterinary Councils and the maintenance of registers 
of the veterinary practitioners and for matters connected therewith.  
WHEREAS  it is expedient to make provision for the regulation of veterinary practice and to provide, 
for that purpose, for the establishment of a Veterinary Council of India and State Veterinary Councils and 
the maintenance of registers of persons qualified to eng age in veterinary practice for the whole of India 
and for matters connected therewith or ancillary thereto;  
AND WHEREAS Parliament has no power to make laws for the States with respect to any of the matters 
aforesaid except as provided in articles 249 and 250 of the Constitution;  
AND WHEREAS in pursuance of clause ( 1) of article 252 of the Constitution, resolutions have been 
passed by all the Houses of the Legislatures of the States of Haryana, Bihar, Orissa, Himachal Pradesh 
and Rajasthan to the effect tha t the matters aforesaid should be regulated in those States by Parliament by 
law;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -fifth Year of the Republic of India as fo llows:— 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short titles, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Indian Veterinary 
Council Act, 1984.  
(2) It extends, in the first instance, to the whole of the States of Haryana, Bihar, Orissa, Himachal 
Pradesh and Rajasthan and to all Union territories1; and it shall also extend to such other States as m ay 
adopt this Act by resolution passed in that behalf in pursuance of clause ( 1) of article 252 of the 
Constitution.  
(3) It shall come into force in a State or Union territory to which it extends, or may become ex tended 
in future, on such date  as the Centr al Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appo
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 4]
 future, on such date  as the Centr al Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint 
and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act or for different States or Union 
territories.  
2. Definitions. — In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “Council” means the Veterinary Council of India established under section 3;  
(b) “member” means a member of the Council;  
(c) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(d) “President” means the President of the Council;  
(e) “recognised veterinary qualification ” means any of the veterinary qualifications included in 
the First Schedule or the Second Schedule;  
(f) “register” means a register maintained under this Act;  
(g) “registered veterinary practitioner ” means a person whose  name is for the time being duly 
registered in a register;  
(h) “regulation ” means a regulation made under this Act;  
                                                           
1. Extended to the Union territory of J ammu and Kashmir and Union territory of Ladakh by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth 
Schedule (w.e.f. 31 -10-2019).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 5]
5 
 (i) “State Veterinary Council ” means a Veterinary Council established under section 32 and 
includes a Joint State Veterinary Council established in accordance with an agreement under section 
33; 
(j) “veterinary institution ” means any University or other institution within or without In dia 
which grants degrees, diplomas or licences in veterinary science and animal husbandry;  
(k) “veterinary medicine ” means modern scientific veterinary medicine in all its branches and 
includes veterinary surgery and obstetrics;  
(l) “Vice -President” means the Vice -President of the Council.  
CHAPTER II  
INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL  
3. Establishment and composition of the Council. —(1) With effect from such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be established 
a Council to be called the Veterinary Council of India.  
(2) The Council shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a 
common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both mov able and immovable, and to 
contract and shall by the said name sue or be sued.  
(3) The Council shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(a) five members to be nominated by the Central Government from amongst Directors of Animal 
Husbandry (by whatev er name called) of those State s to which this Act extends;  
(b) four members to be nominated by the Central Government from amongst the heads of 
veterinary institutions in the States to which this Act extends;  
(c) one member to be nominated by the Indian Co uncil of Agricultural Research;  
(d) the Animal Husbandry Commissioner, Government of India, ex officio ; 
(e) one member to be nominated by the Central Government to represent the Ministry of the 
Central Government dealing with animal husbandry;  
(f) one memb er to be nominated by the Indian Veterinary Association;  
(g) eleven members to be elected from amongst themselves by persons enrol
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 5]
 Veterinary Association;  
(g) eleven members to be elected from amongst themselves by persons enrolled in the Indian 
veterinary practitioners register;  
(h) one member to be nominated by the Central Government from amongst the  Presidents of the 
State Veterinary Councils of those States to which this Act extends;  
(i) one member to be nominated by the Central Government from amongst the Presidents of the 
State Veterinary Associations of those States to which this Act extends;  
(j) Secretary, Veterinary Council of India, ex officio . 
(4) The President and Vice -President shall be elected by the members from amongst themselves in 
such manner as may be provided by regulations.  
(5) Whenever there is a vacancy in the office of the President, the Vice -President shall discharge the 
functions of the President.  
(6) The names of persons nominated or elected as members shall be notified by the Central 
Government in the Official Gazette.  
(7) A person shall not be qualified for nomination or election to the Council unless he holds a 
recognised veterinary qualification . 
4. Mode of election of members. —(1) An election under clause ( g) of sub -section ( 3) of section 3 
shall be conducted by the Ce ntral Government in accordance with such rules as may be made by it in this 
behalf and any rule so made may provide that pending the preparation of the Indian veterinary 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 6]
6 
 practitioners register in accordance with the provisions of this Act, the members refe rred to in that clause 
may be nominated by the Central Government instead of being elected as provided therein.  
(2) Where any dispute arises regarding any election to the Council, it shall be referred to the Central 
Government for its decision which shall be final.  
5. Term of office of Presiden t, Vice -President and members. —(1) The President or Vice -President 
shall hold office for a term not exceeding three years and not extending beyond the expiry of his term as a 
member.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of t his section, a member, other than an ex officio  member, shall hold 
office for a term of three years from the date of his election or nomination to the Council or until his 
successor shall have been duly elected or nom inated, whichever is longer.  
(3) Member s of the Council shall be eligible for re -nomination or re -election.  
(4) Where the term of three years is about to expire in respect of any member, a successor may be 
nominated or elected at any time within three months before the said term expires, but, h e shall not 
assume office until the said term has expired.  
6. Cessation of membership. —(1) A member shall be deemed to have vacated his of fice— 
(a) if he is absent without excuse, sufficient  in the opinion of the Council, from three consecutive 
meetings of the Council;  
(b) if he ceases to hold the post from which he has been nominated;  
(c) in the case of a member elected under clause ( g) of sub-section ( 3) of section 3, if he ceases to 
be a p erson enrolled in the register;  
(d) if he has been convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude and punishable with 
imprisonment;  
(e) if he is an undischarged insolvent;  
(f) if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court.  
(2) On the occurrence of a vacancy referred to in sub -section ( 1), the President shall forthwith report 
the fact of such vacancy to th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 6]
ferred to in sub -section ( 1), the President shall forthwith report 
the fact of such vacancy to the Central Government and thereafter that Government may, subject to the 
proviso to section 7, take necess ary steps to fill such v acancy.  
7. Casual vacancies. —A casual vacancy in the Council shall be filled by nomination or election, as 
the case may be, and the person nominated or elected to fill the vacancy shall hold office only for the 
remainder of the term for which the member wh ose place he takes was nominated or elected:  
Provided that no such casual vacancy occurring within three months of the date of expiry of the 
normal term of office of a nominated or an elected member need be filled under this section.  
8. Resignation. —(1) The President or Vice -President may at any time resign his office by notice in 
writing addressed to the Council and delivered to the Secretary and the resignation shall take effect from 
the date on which it is accepted by the Council or on the expiry of nine ty days from the date of receipt of 
the resignation by the Secretary, whichever is earlier.  
(2) A member may at any time resign his office by notice in writing addressed to the President and 
every such resignation shall take effect from the date on which i t is accepted by the President or on the 
expiry of ninety days from the date of receipt of the resignation by the P resident, whichever is earlier.  
9. Meetings of the Council. —(1) The Council shall meet at least twice in a year at such time and 
place as may  be appointed by the Council.  
(2) The quorum necessary for the transaction of business at a meeting o f the Council shall be nine.  
(3) The President when present shall preside at every meeting of the Council and in his absence the 
Vice -President and in the absence of both any other member elected by the members present from 
amongst themselves shall preside at such meeting.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 6]
eside at such meeting.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 7]
7 
 (4) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all questions which come up before any meeting of the 
Council shall be decided by a majority of the members present and voting.  
(5) In the case of an equality of votes, the President shall have a casting vote.  
(6) Subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 1) to ( 5), the Council shall observe such rules of 
procedure in regard to transaction of bus iness at its meetings as may be provided by regulations.  
10. Vacancies in the Council not to invalidate acts, etc. —No act or proceeding of the Council shall 
be invalid by reason only of the existence of a vacancy in the council or on account of any defect or 
irregularity in its constitution.  
11. Appointment of Secretary and other officers or servants. —(1) The Council may, with the 
previous sanction of the Central Government, appoint a Secretary (who shall also act as Treasurer unless 
the Council appoints an y other person as Treasurer) and may appoint such other officers and employees 
as it may deem necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) The terms and conditions of service of the Secretary, other officers and employees appointed by 
the Council s hall be such as may be provided by regulations.  
(3) The Secretary, officers and other employees of the Council shall be deemed to the public servants 
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
(4) All orders and decisions and other instruments of the Council shall be authenticated by the 
signature of the Secretary or any other officer of the Council duly autho rised by it in this behalf.  
12. Executive Committee and other Committees. —(1) The Council  shall appoint from among its 
members an Executive Committee and may constitute other Committees for such general or specific 
purposes as the Council considers necessary and may co -opt any person or persons specially qualified to 
advise on any matter to an y Committee other than the Executive Committee.  
(2) A C
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 7]
y qualified to 
advise on any matter to an y Committee other than the Executive Committee.  
(2) A Committee constituted under this section shall meet at such time and at such places and shall 
observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as may be provided 
by regulations.  
13. Fees and a llowances. —The President and other members and the members of the Committees 
(other than the members of the Council) shall be paid such fees and allowances for attending the meetings 
of the Council and the Committees as may be  provided by regulations.  
14. Information to be furnished by the C ouncil and publication thereof. —(1) The Council shall 
furnish such reports, copies of its minutes, abstract of its accounts and other information to the Central 
Government as that Government  may require.  
(2) The Central Government may publish in such manner as it may think fit any report, copy, abstract 
or other information furnished to it under this section.  
15. Recognition of veterinary qualifications granted by ve terinary institutions in I ndia.—(1) The 
veterinary qualifications granted by any veterinary institution in India which are included in the First 
Schedule shall be recognised veterinary qualifications for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Any veterinary institution in India which grants a veterinary qualification not included in the First 
Schedule may apply to the Central Government to have such qualification recognised and the Central 
Government, after consulting the Council, may, by not ification in the Official Gazette, amend the First 
Schedule so as to include such qualification therein and any such notification may also direct that an entry 
shall be made in the last column of the First Schedule against such veterinary qualification dec laring that 
it shall be a recognised veterinary qualification only when granted after a specified date.  
16. Recognition of veterinary qualifications granted by veterinary instit
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 7]
 after a specified date.  
16. Recognition of veterinary qualifications granted by veterinary institutions in countries with 
which th ere is a scheme of reciprocity. —(1) The veteri nary qualifications granted by veterinary 
institutions outside India which are included in the Second Schedule shall be recognised veterinary 
qualifications for the purposes of this Act.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 8]
8 
 (2) The Council may enter into negotiations with the authority in any  country outside India which by 
the law of such country is entrusted with the maintenance of a register of veterinary practitioners, for the 
setting of a scheme of reciprocity for the recognition of veterinary qualifications, and in pursuance of any 
such s cheme, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the Second 
Schedule so as to include therein the veterinary qualification which the Council has decided should be 
recognised, and any such notification may also direct that a n entry shall be made in the last column of the 
Second Schedule against such veterinary qualification declaring that it shall be a recognised veterinary 
qualification only when granted after a specified date.  
(3) The Central Government, after consultation with the Council, may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, amend the Second Schedule by directing that an entry be made therein in respect of any 
veterinary qualification declaring that it shall be a recognised veterinary qualification only when grant ed 
before a specified date.  
(4) Where the Council has refused to recommend any veterinary qualification which has been 
proposed for recognition by any authority referred to in sub -section ( 2) and the authority applies to the 
Central Government in this beha lf, the Central Government, after considering such application and after 
obtaining from the Council a report, if any, as to the reasons for any such refusal, may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, amend the Second Schedule so as to include such qual ification the rein and the 
provisions of sub -section ( 2) shall apply to such notification.  
17. Special provisions in certain cases for recognition of veterinary qualifications granted by 
veterinary institutions in countries with which the re is no scheme of reciprocity. —(1) The Central 
Government, after consultation with the Council, may, by notification 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 8]
eciprocity. —(1) The Central 
Government, after consultation with the Council, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that 
the veterniary qualifications granted by veterinary institutions in any country outside India in respect of 
which a sche me of reciprocity for the recognition of veterinary qualifications is not in force shall be 
recognised veterinary qualification for the purposes of this Act or shall be so only when granted after a 
specified date:  
Provided that veterinary practice by perso ns possessing such qualifications — 
(a) shall be permitted only if such persons are enrolled as veterinary practitioners in accordance 
with the law regulating the registration of veterinary practitioners for the time being in force in that 
country;  
(b) shal l be limited to the institution to which they are attached for the time being for the purpose 
of teaching, research work, charitable work; and  
(c) shall be limited to the period specified in this behalf by the Central Government by general or 
special order.  
(2) In respect of any such veterinary qualification, the Central Government, after consultation with 
the Council, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that it shall be a recognised  veterinary 
qualification only when granted before a specified date.  
18. Power to require information as to cou rses of study and examinations. —Every veterinary 
institution in a State which grants a recognised veterinary qualification shall furnish such inf ormation as 
the Council may from time to time require as to the courses of study and examinations to be undergone in 
order to obtain such qualification, as to the ages at which such courses of study and examinations are 
required to be undergone and such qu alification is conferred and generally as to the requisites for 
obtaining such qualification.  
19. Inspection of veterinary institutions and examinations. —(1) A Committee constituted under 
section 12 may, subject to regulations
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 8]
tutions and examinations. —(1) A Committee constituted under 
section 12 may, subject to regulations, if any, made by the Council,  appoint such number of veterinary 
inspectors as it may deem requisite to inspect any veterinary institution or any college or other institution 
where veterinary education is given or to attend any examination held by any veterinary institution for the 
purpose of recommending to the Central Government recognition of veterinary qualification granted by 
that veterinary institution.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 9]
9 
 (2) The veterinary inspectors shall not interfere with the conduct of any training or examination, but 
shall report to the Commit tee on the adequacy of the standards of veterinary education including staff, 
equipment, accommodation, training and other facilities prescribed by regulations for giving veterinary 
education or on the sufficiency of every examination which they attend.  
(3) The Committee shall forward a copy of any such report to the veterinary institution concerned and 
shall also forward a copy with remarks, if any, of the said institution ther eon, to the Central Government.  
20. Appointment of visitors. —(1) The Council may  appoint such number of visitors as it may deem 
requisite to inspect any veterinary institution or any college or other institution where veterinary 
education is given or to attend any examination held by any veterinary institution for the purpose of 
grant ing any recognise d veterinary qualification.  
(2) Any person, whether he is a member or not, may be appointed as a visitor under this section, but a 
person who is appointed as an inspector under section 19 for any inspection or examination shall not be 
appo inted as a visitor for the same inspection or examination.  
(3) The visitors shall not interfere with the conduct of any training or examination, but shall report to 
the President on the adequacy of the standards of veterinary education including staff, equ ipment, 
accommodation, training and other facilities prescribed by regulations for giving veterinary education or 
on the sufficiency of every examination which they attend.  
(4) The report of a visitor shall be treated as confidential unless in any particular case the President 
otherwise directs:  
Provided that if the Central Government requires a copy of the report of the visitor, the Council shall 
furnish the same.  
21. Withdrawal of recognition. —(1) When upon report by the Committee or the visi tor, it appears 
to the Council — 
(a) that the co
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 9]
(1) When upon report by the Committee or the visi tor, it appears 
to the Council — 
(a) that the courses of study and examinations to be undergone in, or the proficiency required 
from candidates at any examination held by, any veterinary institution, are not in conformity with the 
regulations made under this Act  or fall short of the standards required thereby, or  
(b) that the staff, equipment, accommodation, training and other facilities for instruction and 
training provided in such veterinary institution or in any college or other institution affiliated to it do  
not conform to the stand ards prescribed by the Council.  
the Council shall make a representation to that effect to the Central Government.  
(2) After considering such representation, the Central Government may send it to the State 
Government of the State in  which the veterinary institution is situated and the State Government shall 
forward it along with such remarks as it may choose to make to the veterinary institution, with an 
intimation of the period within which that institution may submit its explanatio n to the State Government.  
(3) On receipt of the explanation or, where no explanation is submitted within the period fixed, then 
on the expiry of that period, the State Government shall make its recommendation to the Central 
Government.  
(4) The Central Gov ernment, after making such inquiry, if any, as it may deem fit, may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, direct that an entry shall be made in the appropriate Schedule against 
the said veterinary qualification declaring that it shall be a recognised v eterinary qualification only when 
granted before a specified date or that the said veterinary qualification if granted to students of a specified 
college or institution affiliated to any veterinary institution shall be a recognised veterinary qualification  
only when granted before a specified date or, as the case may be, that the said veterinary qualification 
shall be a 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 9]
 before a specified date or, as the case may be, that the said veterinary qualification 
shall be a recognised veterinary qualification in relatio n to a specified college or institution affiliated to 
any veterinary institution only when gr anted after a specified date:  
Provided that before issuing such notification the Central Government may consult the Indian Council 
of Agricultural Research.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 10]
10 
 22. Minimum sta ndards of veterinary education. —(1) The Council may, by regulations, specify 
the minimum standards of veterinary education required for granting recognised veterinary qualifications 
by veterinary institutions in those States to which this Act extends.  
(2) Copies of the draft regulations an d of all subsequent amendments thereof shall be furnished by the 
Council to the State Government concerned and the Council shall, before submitting such regulations or 
any amendments thereof, as the case may be, to the Central Government for approval, take  into 
consideration the comments of the State Government received within three months from the furnishing of 
the copies as aforesaid.  
(3) The Central Government may, before approving such regulations or any amendments thereof, 
consult the Indian Council of  Agricultural Research.  
(4) The Committee constituted under section 12 shall from time to time report to the Council on the 
efficacy of the regulations and may recommend to the Council such amendments thereof as it may think 
fit.  
CHAPTER III  
INDIAN VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS REGISTER  
23. Indian vet erinary practitioners register. —(1) The Council shall, as soon as may be after the 
commencement of this Act, cause to be maintained in such form and in such manner as may be provided 
by regulations a register  of veterinary practitioners to be known as the Indian veterinary practitioners 
register which shall contain the names of all persons who possess the recognised veterinary qualifications 
and who are for the time being enrolled on a State veterinary registe r of the State to which this Act 
extends.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the Council to keep the Indian veterinary practitioners 
register in accordance with the provisions of this Act and of any orders made by the Council, and from 
time to ti me to revise the register and publish it in the Gazette of India or in such other manner as may be 
provided by regulatio
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 10]
ster and publish it in the Gazette of India or in such other manner as may be 
provided by regulations.  
(3) Such register shall be deemed to be a public document within the meaning of the Indian Evidence 
Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), and may be proved by a copy published in the Gazette of India.  
(4) Each State Veterinary Council shall furnish to the Council six printed copies of the State 
veterinary register as soon as may be after the 1st day of April of each year and each State Veterinary 
Council shall inform the Council without delay of all additions to, and other amendments in, the State 
veterinary r egister made from time to time.  
24. Registration in the Indian veterinary practitioners register. —The Secretary of the Council 
may, on receipt of the report of registration of a person in a State veterinary register or on an application 
made in such form and in such manner, as may be provided by regulations, by any such person, enter his 
name in the Indian veterinary practitioners register:  
Provi ded that the Secretary is satisfied that the person concerned possesses a recognised veterinary 
qualification.  
25. Issue of  certificate of registration. —(1) Any person whose name has been entered in the Indian 
veterinary practitioners register shall, on an  application made in this behalf in such form and in such 
manner and on payment of such fees, not exceeding fifteen rupees, as may be provided by regulations, be 
entitled to a certificate of registration.  
(2) On receipt of an application under sub -section (1), the Council shall grant to the applicant a 
certificate of registration in such form as may be provided by regulations:  
Provided that on the removal of his name from a register, such certificate shall cease to be valid.  
(3) Where it is shown to the sat isfaction of the Secretary of the Council that a certificate of 
registration has been lost or destroyed, the Secretary may, on payment of such fees, not exceeding ten 
rupees, as may be specif
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 10]
r destroyed, the Secretary may, on payment of such fees, not exceeding ten 
rupees, as may be specified by regulations, issue a duplicate certificate in such form as  may be specified 
in the regulations.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 11]
11 
 26. Registratio n of additional qualifications. —(1) If any person whose name is entered in the 
Indian veterinary practitioners register obtains any post -graduate degree or diploma in veterinary science 
in addition to hi s recognised veterinary qualification, he shall, on an application made in this behalf in 
such form and in such manner and on payment of such fees, not exceeding fifteen rupees, as may be 
provided by regulations, be entitled to have an entry stating such d egree or diploma made against his 
name in such register in addition to any entry previously made.  
(2) The entries in respect of any such person in a State veterinary register shall be altered in 
accordance with the alterations made in the Indian veterinary  practitioners register.  
27. Removal of names from the Indian vet erinary practitioners register. —If the name of any 
person enrolled on a State veterinary register is removed therefrom in pursuance of any power conferred 
under this Act, the Council shall di rect the removal of the name of such person from the Indian veterinary 
practitioners register.  
28. Person enrolled on Indian veterinary practitioners register to notifychange of place of 
residence or practice .—Every person registered in the Indian veterinary practitioners register shall notify 
any transfer of the place of his residence or practice to the Council and the State Veterinary Council 
within ninety days of such transfer, failing which his right to participate in the election of members of the 
Council or a State Veterinary Council shall be liable to be forfeited by order of the Central Government 
either permanently or for such period as may be specified therein.  
CHAPTER IV  
PRIVILEGES OF REGISTERED VETERINARY PRACTITIONERS  
29. Privileges of persons, who are enrolled on the Indian vet erinary practitioners register. — 
Subject to the conditions and restrictions laid down in this Act, every person whose name is for the time 
being borne on the Indian ve
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 11]
ictions laid down in this Act, every person whose name is for the time 
being borne on the Indian veterinary practitioners register shall be entit led according to his qualifications 
to practise as a veterinary practitioner and to recover in due course of law in respect of such practice any 
expenses, charges in respect of medicaments and other appliances or any fees to which he may be 
entitled.  
30. R ight of persons who are enrolled on the Indian vet erinary practitioners register. —No 
person, other than a registered veterinary practitioner, shall — 
(a) hold office as veterinary physician or surgeon or any other like office (by whatever name 
called) in Go vernment or in any institution maintained by a local or other authority;  
(b) practise veterinary medicine in any State:  
Provided that the State Government may, by order, permit a person holding a diploma or 
certificate of veterinary supervisor, stockman or  stock assistant (by whatever name called) issued by 
the Directorate of Animal Husbandry (by whatever name called) of any State or any veterinary 
institution in India, to render, under the supervision and direction of a registered veterinary 
practitioner, minor veterinary services.  
Explanation. —“Minor veterinary services ” means the rendering of preliminary veterinary aid, 
like, vaccination, castration, and dressing of wounds, and such other types of preliminary aid or the 
treatment of such ailments as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
speci fy in this behalf;  
(c) be entitled to sign or authenticate a veterinary health certificate or any other certificate 
required by any law to be signed or authenticated by a duly qualified veterinary practitioner;  
(d) be entitled to give evidence at any inque st or in any court of law as an expert under section 45 
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872 ), on any matter relating to veterinary medicine.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 11]
ter relating to veterinary medicine.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 12]
12 
 CHAPTER V  
DISCIPLINE  
 31. Professional conduct. —(1) The Council may, by regulations, specify standards of professional 
conduct and etiquette and a code of ethics for veterinary practitioners.  
(2) Regulations made by the Council under sub -section ( 1) may specify which violations thereof shall 
constitute infamous conduct in any professional respect, that is t o say, professional misconduct, and such 
provisions shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in 
force.  
CHAPTER VI  
STATE VETERINARY COUNCILS  
32. Establishment and composition of State Veterinary Councils. —(1) Except where a Joint State 
Veterinary Council is established in accordance with an agreement made under section 33, the State 
Government shall establish a State Veterinary Council consisting of the following members, namely: — 
(a) four members elected fro m among themselves by veterinary practitioners registered in the  
State veterinary register;  
(b) the heads of veterinary institutions, if any, in the State, ex officio ; 
(c) three members nominated by the State Government;  
(d) the Director of Veterinary Services of the State (by whatever name called), ex officio ; 
(e) one member to be nominated by the State Veterinary Association, if any;  
(f) Registrar of the State Veterinary Council, ex officio.  
(2) The names of persons nomina ted or elected as members shall be notified by the State Government 
in the Official Gazette.  
(3) A person shall not be qualified for nomination or election as a member of the State Veterinary 
Council unless he holds a recognised veterinary qualification.  
33. Inter -State agreements. —(1) Two or more State Governments may enter into an agreement to 
be in force for such period and to be subject to renewal for further periods, if any, as may be specifi ed in 
the agreement to provide — 
(a) for the establishment of a Joint State Veterinary Council for all participating States; or  
(b) for the S
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 12]
e establishment of a Joint State Veterinary Council for all participating States; or  
(b) for the State Veterinary Council of one State to serve the needs of the other participating 
States.  
(2) In addition to such matters as are in this Act specified, an agr eement under this section may — 
(a) provide for the apportionment between the participating States of the expenditure in 
connection with the State Veterinary Council or Joint State Veterinary Council;  
(b) determine which of the participating State Governments shall exercise the several functions of 
the State Government under this Act and the references in this Act to the State Government shall be 
construed accordingly;  
(c) provide for consultation between the participating State Governments either generally or with 
reference to particular matters arising under this Act;  
(d) make such incidental and ancillary provisions not inconsistent with this Act as may be 
deemed necessary or expedient for giving effect to the agreement.  
(3) An agreement under this section shall be published in the Official Gazett es of the participating 
States.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 13]
13 
 34. Compos ition of J oint State Veterinary Councils. —(1) A Joint State Veterinary Council  shall 
consist of the following members, namely: — 
(a) two members elected from among themselves by veterinary practitioners registered in the 
register of each of the participating States;  
(b) the heads of veterinary institutions, if any, in the participati ng States, ex officio ; 
(c) two members nominated by each participating State Government;  
(d) the Director of Veterinary Services of each of the participating States, by whatever name 
called, ex officio;  
(e) one nominee of the State Veterinary Associations,  if any, of each of the participating States;  
(f) Registrar of the Joint State Veterinary Council, ex officio . 
(2) The names of the persons nominated or elected as members shall be notified by the State 
Governments in the Official Gazettes of the States.  
(3) A person shall not be qualified for nomination or election as a member of the Joint State 
Veterinary Council unless he holds a recognised veterinary qualification.  
35. Incorporatio n of State Veterinary Councils. —Every State Veterinary Council shall be a  body 
corporate by such name as may be notified by the State Government in the Official Gazette or, in the case 
of a Joint State Veterinary Council, as may be determined in the agreement, having perpetual succession 
and a common seal with power to acquire and hold property, both movable and immovable, and shall b y 
the said name sue or be sued.  
36. President. —The President of the State Veterinary Council shall be elected by the members of 
that Council from amongst themselves in such manner as may be prescrib ed. 
37. Mode of elections. —The election under this Chapter shall be conducted in the prescribed manner 
and where any dispute arises regarding any such election, it shall be referred to the State Government for 
its decision.  
38. Terms of office and causal v acancies. —(1) Subject to the provisions of this section, a member
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 13]

38. Terms of office and causal v acancies. —(1) Subject to the provisions of this section, a member 
of the State Veterinary Council, other than an ex officio member, shall hold office for a term of three 
years from the date of his election or nomination to the State Veterinary Council or u ntil his successor has 
been duly elected or nominated, whichever is longer:  
Provided that a member of the State Veterinary Council nominated under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) 
of section 32 or clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 34, shall hold office  during the pleasure of the 
authority nominating him.  
(2) Members of the State Veterinary Council shall be eligible for re -election or re -nomination, as the 
case may be.  
(3) An elected or nominated member of the State Veterinary Council shall be deemed to have vacated 
his office— 
(a) if he is absent without excuse, sufficient in the opinion of the State Veterinary Council, from 
three consecutive meetings of the State Veterinary Council;  
(b) if he ceases to hold the office from w hich he has been nominated;  
(c) in the case of a member whose name is required to be included in any State veterinary 
register, if his name is removed from the register;  
(d) if he has been convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude and punishable with 
imprisonment;  
(e) if he is  an undischarged insolvent;  
(f) if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 14]
14 
 (4) No act done by the State Veterinary Council shall be called in question on the ground merely of 
the existence of any vacancy, or defect, in the establ ishment of, the State Veterinary Council.  
(5) A casual vacancy in the State Veterinary Council shall be filled by fresh election or nomination, 
as the case may be, and the person elected or nominated to fill the vacancy shall hold office only for the 
remai nder of the term for which the member whose place he takes was elected or nominated.  
(6) The State Veterinary Council shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to transaction of 
business at its meetings as may be prescribed.  
39. Resignation. —(1) The President of the State Veterinary Council may at any time resign his office 
by notice in writing addressed to the State Veterinary Council and delivered to the Registrar and the 
resignation shall take effect from the date on which it is accepted by that Co uncil or on the expiry of 
ninety days from the date of receipt of the resignation by the R egistrar, whichever is earlier.  
(2) A member of the State Veterinary Council may at any time resign his office by notice in writing 
addressed to the President of the State Veterinary Council and every such resignation shall take effect 
from the date on which it is accepted by the President or on the expiry of ninety days from the date of 
receipt of the resignation by the President, whichever is earlier.  
40. Executive a nd other Committees. —Subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be 
prescribed, the State Veterinary Council may constitute an Executive Committee and other Committees 
for exercising any power or discharging any duty of the State Veterinary Council or for inquiring into, 
reporting with respect to, or advising on, any matter which the State Veterinary Council may refer to 
them.  
41. Fees and allowances. —The President and other members of the State Veterinary Council and the 
members of the Committees (o ther than the
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 14]
nd other members of the State Veterinary Council and the 
members of the Committees (o ther than the members of the State Veterinary Council) shall be paid such 
fees and allowances for attending the meetings of the State Veterinary Council and the Committees as 
may be prescribed.  
42. Appointment of Registrar and other officers or servants. —(1) The State Veterinary Council 
may, with the previous sanction of the State Government, appoint a Registrar who shall also act as 
Treasurer unless the State Veterinary Council appoints any person as Treasurer and may appoint such 
other officers and employ ees as it may deem necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) The terms and conditions of service of the Registrar, and of the other officers and employees 
appointed by the State Veterinary Council shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Regi strar and other officers and employees of the State Veterinary Council shall be deemed to 
be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
(4) All orders and decisions and other instruments of the State Veterinary Council shall be 
authenticated by the signature of the Registrar or any other officer of the State Veterinary Council duly 
authorised by it in this behalf.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), for the first two years from the first 
constitution of the State Veterinary Council the Registrar of the State Veterinary Council shall be a person 
appointed by the State Government, who shall hold office during the pleasure of the State Government.  
43. Information to be furnish ed by State Veter inary Council. —(1) The State Veterinary Council 
shall furnish such reports, copies of its minutes and of the minutes of the Executive Committee and 
abstract of its accounts to the State Government as the State Government may from time to time require 
and s hall forward to the Council copies of all material so furnished to the State Government
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 14]
quire 
and s hall forward to the Council copies of all material so furnished to the State Government.  
(2) The State Government may publish in such manner as it thinks fit any report, copy or abstract 
furnished to it under this section.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 15]
15 
 CHAPTER VII  
REGISTRATION  
44. Preparation and maintenance of State vet erinary practitioners register. —(1) The State 
Government shall as soon as may be cause to be prepared in the manner hereinafter provided a register of 
veterinary practitioners to be known as the State veterinary register for the State.  
(2) The State Veterinary Council shall on its establishment assume the duty of maintaining the State 
veterinary register in accordance with the provisions of this Act.  
(3) The State veterinary register shall contain the names of the  persons possessing the recognised 
veterinary qualifications.  
(4) The State veterinary register shall include the following particulars, namely: — 
(a) the full name, nationality and residential address of the registered person;  
(b) the date of his admission  in the State veterinary register;  
(c) his qualification for registration and the date on which he obtained such qualification and 
authority which conferred it;  
(d) his professional address; and  
(e) such further particulars as may be prescribed.  
45. First preparation of register. —(1) For the purpose of first preparing the State veterinary 
register, the State Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a Registration 
Tribunal consisting of three persons holding recognised veterinary  qualifications and shall also appoint a 
Registrar who shall act as Secretary of the Tribunal.  
(2) The State Government shall, by the same or a like notification, appoint a date on or before which 
application for registration, which shall be accompanied by  the prescribed fee, not exceeding twenty -five 
rupees, shall be made to the Registration Tribunal.  
(3) The Registration Tribunal shall examine every application received on or before the appointed 
date, and, if it is satisfied that the applicant is qualifi ed for registration under section 46, shall direct the 
entry of the name of the applicant on the register.  
(4) The register so pr
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 15]
n 46, shall direct the 
entry of the name of the applicant on the register.  
(4) The register so prepared shall thereafter be published in such manner as the State Government 
may direct, and any person aggrieved by a decision of the Registration Tribunal expressed or implied in 
the register as so published may, within sixty days from the date of such publication, appeal to an 
authority appointed by the State Government in this behalf by notification in the Official Gazette.  
(5) The Registrar shall amend the register in accordance with the decisions of the authority appointed 
under sub -section ( 4) and shall thereupon issue to every person whose name is entered in the register a 
certificate of registration in the prescribed form.  
(6) Upon the establishment of the State Veterinary Council, the register shall be given into its 
custody, and the State Government may direct that all or any specified part of the application fees for 
registration in the first register shall be paid to the  credit of the State Veterinary Council.  
46. Qualifications for en try on preparation of register. —A person shall be entitled, on payment of 
the prescribed fee not exceeding twenty -five rupees, to have his name entered on the State veterinary 
register if he  resides in the State and if he holds a recognised veterinary qualification.  
47. Scrutiny of  applications for registration. —(1) After the date appointed for the receipt of 
applications for registration under sub -section ( 2) of section 45, all applications for registration shall be 
addressed to the Registrar of the State Veterinary Council and shall be accompanied by the prescribed fee 
not exceeding twenty -five rupees.  
(2) If upon such application the Registrar of the State Veterinary Council is of the opini on that the 
applicant is entitled to have his name entered on the State veterinary register, he shall enter thereon the 
name of the applicant:  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 15]
 enter thereon the 
name of the applicant:  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 16]
16 
 Provided that no person, whose name has under the provisions of this Act been removed from the 
State veterinary r egister of any State, shall be entitled to have his name entered on the State veterinary 
register of another State except with the approval of the State Veterinary Council from whose register his 
name was removed.  
(3) Any person whose application for regis tration is rejected by the Registrar of the State Veterinary 
Council may, within three months from the date of such rejection, appeal to the State Veterinary Council.  
(4) A person aggrieved by the decision of the State Veterinary Council under sub -section (3) may, 
within sixty days from the communication to him of such decision, appeal to the State Government.  
(5) Upon entry in the State veterinary register of a name under this section, the Registrar of the State 
Veterinary Council shall issue a certificate  of registration in the prescribed form.  
48. Renewal fees. —(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that 
for the retention of a name in the State veterinary register, there shall be paid in every five years to the 
State  Veterinary Council, such renewal fee, not exceeding fifteen rupees, as may be prescribed and where 
such direction has been made, such renewal fee shall be due to be paid before the 1st day of April of the 
year to which it relates.  
(2) Where a renewal fee is not paid within the said period, the Registrar of the State Veterinary 
Council shall remove the name of the defaulter from the State veterinary register:  
Provided that a name so removed may be restored to the said register on payment of renewal fee in 
such manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) On payment of the renewal fee, the Registrar of the State Veterinary Council shall issue a 
certificate of renewal and such certificate shall be proof of renewal of registration.  
49. Removal from the register. —(1) Subjec t to the provisions of this section, the State Veteri
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 16]
.  
49. Removal from the register. —(1) Subjec t to the provisions of this section, the State Veterinary 
Council may order that the name of any person shall be removed from the State veterinary register where 
it is satisfied after giving that person a reasonable opportunity of being heard and after suc h further 
inquiry, if any, as it may thin k fit to make — 
(a) that his name has been entered in the State veterinary register by error or on account of mis -
representation or suppression of a material fact, or  
(b) that he has been convicted of an offence invo lving moral turpitude and punishable with 
imprisonment or has been guilty of any infamous conduct in any professional respect or has violated 
the standards of professional conduct and etiquette or the code of ethics which in the opinion of the 
State Veteri nary Council renders him unfit to be kept in the said register.  
(2) An order under sub -section ( 1) may direct that any person whose name is ordered to be removed 
from the State veterinary register shall be ineligible for registration under this Act, either  permanently or 
for such period of years as may be specified.  
(3) An order under sub -section ( 1) shall not take effect until the expiry of three months from the date 
thereof or until an appeal, if any on such order is finally disposed of, whichever date is  later.  
(4) A person aggrieved by an order under sub -section ( 1) may, within sixty days from the 
communication to him of such order, appeal to the Council.  
(5) A person aggrieved by the deci sion of the Council under sub -section ( 4) may, within sixty days 
from the communication to him of such decision, appeal to the Central Government.  
(6) A person whose name has been removed from the register under this section or under sub -section 
(2) of section 48 shall forthwith surrender his certificate of registration and certificate of renewal, if any, 
to the Registrar of the State Veterinary Council and the name so removed shall b
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 16]
f renewal, if any, 
to the Registrar of the State Veterinary Council and the name so removed shall be published in the 
Official Gazette.  
(7) A person whose name has been removed from the State veterinary register under this section or 
sub-section ( 2) of section 48 shall not be entitled to have his name registered in the State veterinary 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 17]
17 
 register or in any other State veterinary register, except with the approval of the State Veterinary Council 
from whose register his name has been removed.  
50. Restoration to State veterinary register.—The State Veterinary Council may, at any time for 
reasons appearing to it sufficient and subject to approval of the Council, order that upon payment of the 
prescribed fee not exceeding twenty -five rupees, the na me of a person removed from a State veterinary 
register shall be restored thereto . 
51. Printing  of State veterinary register. —As soon as may be after the 1st day of April each year, 
the Registrar of the State Veterinary Council shall cause to be printed co pies of the State veterinary 
register as it stood on the said date and such copies shall be made available to persons applying therefor 
on payment of the prescribed charge not exceeding ten rupees and shall be evidence that on the said date 
the persons who se names are entered therein were regi stered veterinary practitioners.  
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
52. Transfer of registration. —Where a registered veterinary practitioner of one State is practising  
veterinary medicine in another State, he may, on payment of prescribed fee which shall not exceed the 
renewal fee for registration in such other State, make an application in the prescribed form to the Council 
for the transfer of his name from the State v eterinary register of the State where he is registered to the 
State veterinary register of the State in which he is practising veterinary medicine, and on receipt of any 
such application, the Council shall, notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in t his Act, direct that 
the name of such person be removed from the first -mentioned State veterinary register and entered in the 
State veterinary register of the second -mentioned State and the State Veterinary Councils concerned shall 
comply with such directi on: 
Provided that such a person shall be required to produce a c
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 17]
ed shall 
comply with such directi on: 
Provided that such a person shall be required to produce a certificate to the effect that all dues in 
respect of his registration in the former State have been paid:  
Provided further that where any such application for transfer is made by a veterinary practitioner 
against whom any disciplinary proceeding is pending or where for any other reason it appears to the 
Council that the application for transfer has not been made bona fide  and the transfer should not be made, 
the Council may, after giving the ve terinary practitioner a reasonable opportunity of making a 
representation in this behalf, reject the application.  
53. Bar of jurisdiction. —No order refusing to enter a name in a register or removing a name from a 
register shall be called in question in any  court.  
54. I ssue of duplicate certificates. —Where it is shown to the satisfaction of the Registrar of the 
State Veterinary Council that a certificate of registration or a certificate of renewal has been lost or 
destroyed, the Registrar may, on payment of the prescribed fee, not exceeding ten rupees, issue a 
duplicate certificate in the prescribed form.  
55. Penalty for falsely claiming to be re gistered.—If any person whose name is not for the time 
being entered in a register falsely represents that it is so  entered or uses in connection with his name or 
title any words or letters reasonably calculated to suggest that his name is so entered, he shall be 
punishable on first conviction with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, and on any subsequent 
conviction with imprisonment which may extend to six months or with fine not exceeding one thousand 
rupees or with both.  
56. Misuse of titles .—If any person, — 
(a) not being a person registered in a register, takes or uses the description of a veterinary 
practitioner, or  
(b) not possessing a recognised veterinary qualification, uses a degree or a diploma or a licence or 
an abbreviation indi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 17]
ecognised veterinary qualification, uses a degree or a diploma or a licence or 
an abbreviation indicating or implying such qualification,  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 18]
18 
 he shall be punishable on first conviction with fine which may extend to one th ousand rupees, and on any 
subsequent conviction with imprisonment which may extend to six months or with fine not exceeding five 
thousand rupees or with both.  
57. Pr actice by unregistered persons. —(1) After the expiry of one year from the date appointed 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 45, no person, other than a registered veterinary practitioner or a person 
permitted by the State Government under the proviso to clause ( b) of section 30 shall practise veterinary 
medicine or render minor veterinary services , as the case may be, in that State.  
(2) If any person contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1), he shall be punishable on first 
conviction with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, and on any subsequent conviction with 
imprisonment which may  extend to six months or with fine not exceeding five thousand rupees or with 
both.  
58. Failure to surrender certificate of registration .—If any person whose name has been removed 
from a register fails without sufficient cause forthwith to surrender his ce rtificate of registration or 
certificate of renewal, or both, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees 
and in case of a continuing offence with an additional fine which may extend to ten rupees per day after 
the first day du ring which the offence continues.  
59. Cognizance of offence. —No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this 
Act except upon complaint made by order of the State Government or State Veterinary Council.  
60. Bar of suit and other legal proceedings .—No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against the 
Central Government or the State Government or the Council or a State Veterinary Council in respect of 
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act , or of any rules, 
regulations or orders made thereunder.  
61. Payme nt of part of 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 18]
ce of this Act , or of any rules, 
regulations or orders made thereunder.  
61. Payme nt of part of fees to Council. —The State Veterinary Council shall, before the end of June 
in each year, pay to the Council a sum equivalent to one -fourth of the total fees realised by the S tate 
Veterinary Council under this Act during the period of twelve months ending on the 31st day of March of 
that year.  
62. Accounts and audit. —(1) The Council shall maintain appropriate accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement o f accounts including the balance sheet, in accordance with such 
general directions as may be issued and in such form as may be specified by the Central Government in 
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Co uncil shall be audited annually by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of 
India or any person appointed by him in this behalf and any expenditure incurred by him or any person so 
appointed in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Council to th e Comptroller and Auditor -
General of India.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the Council shall have the same rights and privileges and authority in 
connection w ith such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India has in connection with the 
audit of Government accounts, and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books 
of accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and paper s and to inspect the office of the Council.  
(4) The accounts of the Council as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any 
person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded annually 
to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before each House of 
Parliament.  
(5) A copy of the accounts of the Council
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 18]
se the same to be laid before each House of 
Parliament.  
(5) A copy of the accounts of the Council as so certified together with the audit report thereon shall be 
forwarded simultaneously to the Council.  
63. Appoin tment of Commission of Inquiry. —(1) Whenever it appears to the Central Government 
that the Council is not complying with any of the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may 
appoint a Commission of Inquiry consisting of three persons, two of whom shall be appointed by the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 19]
19 
 Central Government, one being the Judge of a High Court and one by the Council and refer to it the 
matter on which the inquiry is to be made.  
(2) The Commission shall proceed to inquire in a summary manner and report to th e Central 
Government on the matters referred to it together with such remedies, if any, as the Commission may like 
to recommend.  
(3) The Central Government may accept the report or remit the same to the Commission for 
modification or reconsideration.  
(4) After the report is finally accepted, the Central Government may order the Council to adopt the 
remedies so recommended within such time as may be specified in the order and if the Council fails to 
comply within the time so specified, the Central Governmen t may pass such order or take such action as 
may be necessary to give effect to the recommendations of the Commission.  
(5) Whenever it appears to the State Government that the State Veterinary Council is not complying 
with any of the provisions of this Act , the State Government may likewise appoint a similar Commission 
of inquiry in respect of the State Veterinary Council to make inquiry in like manner and pass such orders 
or take such action as specified in sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4). 
64. Power of Central Government to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of Chapters II, III, IV and V.  
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall b e laid, as soon as may be, after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session im mediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule, or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall, 
thereafter, have effect on
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 19]
, or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall, 
thereafter, have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
65. Power of State Government to make rules. —(1) The State Government may, by not ification in 
the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of Chapters VI, VII and VIII.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the follo wing matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner in which the President of the State Veterinary Council shall be elected under 
section 36;  
(b) the manner in which election under Chapter VI shall be conducted;  
(c) the procedure to be observed by the State Veterinary Council at its meetings  under sub -section 
(6) of section 38;  
(d) the conditions and restrictions with respect to the constitution of Executive Committee and 
other Committees under section 40;  
(e) the fees and allowances for attending the meetings of the State Veterinary Council and the 
Committees under section 41;  
(f) the terms and conditions of appointment of the Registrar, other officers and employees of the 
State Veterinary Council under  sub-section ( 2) of section 42;  
(g) the particulars to be included in the State veterinary register under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 4) 
of section 44;  
(h) the fee which shall be accompanied by an application for registration under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 45 and sub -section ( 1) of section 47;  
(i) the form of certifi cate of registration under sub-section ( 5) of section 45 and sub -section ( 5) of 
section 47;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 20]
20 
 (j) the fee payable under section 46, section 50, section 52 and section 54;  
(k) the renewal fee under sub -section ( 1) of section 48;  
(l) the manner of payment of renewal fee under the provis o to sub -section ( 2) of section 48;  
(m) the charge for supplying printed copies of the State veterinary register under section 51;  
(n) the form of duplicate certificate under section 54;  
(o) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed under Chapte rs VI, VII and VIII.  
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of the State Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or, where such Legislature consists of one 
House, before that House.  
66. Power to make regulations. —(1) The Council may, with the previous approval of the Central 
Government, make regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules made under 
section 64, to carry out the purposes of Chapters II, III, IV and V.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner in which  the President and Vice -President shall be elected under sub -section ( 4) of 
section 3;  
(b) the procedure to be observed respectively by the Council and the Committee at their meeting 
under sub -section ( 6) of section 9 and sub -section ( 2) of section 12;  
(c) the terms and conditions of appointment of the Secretary, other officers and empl oyees of the 
Council under sub -section ( 2) of section 11;  
(d) the fees and allowances for attending the meetings of the Council and the Committees under 
section 13;  
(e) the f orm and manner in which the Indian veterinary practitioners register shall be maintained 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 23;  
(f) the manner of keeping the Indian veterinary practitioners register under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 23;  
(g) the form and manne r in whic
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 20]
ry practitioners register under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 23;  
(g) the form and manne r in which an application may be made under section 24;  
(h) the form of application  and the fee payable under sub -section ( 1) of section 25;  
(i) the form of certificat e of registration under sub -section ( 2) of section 25;  
(j) the fee payable under sub-section ( 3) of section 25;  
(k) the form of duplicate certificate under sub -section ( 3) of section 25;  
(l) the form and manner in which an application may be made and the fee payable under sub -
section ( 1) of section 26;  
(m) the standards of professional  conduct and etiquette and code of ethics to be observed by 
veterinary practitioners under sub -section ( 1) of section 31;  
(n) any other matter for which under this Act provision may be made by regulations.  
(3) Every regulation shall, as soon as may be afte r it is made by the Council, be forwarded to the 
Central Government and that Government shall cause a copy of the same to be laid before each House of 
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one sessi on 
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the 
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the 
regulation or both Houses agree that the regulati on should not be made, the regulation shall, thereafter, 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 21]
21 
 modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously d one under 
that regulation.  
67. Repeal and saving. —As from the commencement of this Act in any State, every other Act 
relating to any matter contained in this Act and in force in that State shall, to the extent to which that Act 
or any provision contained t herein corresponds, or is repugnant, to this Act or any provision contained in 
this Act, stand repealed and the provisions of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), 
shall apply to such repeal as if such o ther Act were a Central Act.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 22]
22 
 THE  FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See section 2 (e) and section 15]  
RECOGNISED VETERINARY QUALIFICATION S GRANTED BY UNIVERSITIES OR VETERINARY INSTITUTIONS 
IN INDIA  
University or veterinary institution  Recognised veterinary qualification  Abbreviation for 
registration  
1 2 3 
DEGREES    
1. Agra University  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and Animal 
Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A. H. 
2. Andhra Pradesh Agricultural University    Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B. V. Sc.  
 Bachelor of Veterinary Science and Animal 
Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A. H. 
1[3. Assa m Agricultural University  in respect 
of College of: - 
(i) Veterinary Science, Guwahati  
 
(ii) Lakhimpur College of Veterinary Science, 
Assam.   
 
Bachelor of Veterinary Science and Animal 
Husbandry  
Bachelor of Veterinary Science and Animal 
Husbandry   
 
B. V. Sc. & A. H. 
 
B. V. Sc. & A.H. (This 
qualification shall be a 
recognised veterinary 
qualification only when 
granted on or after the 
24th January, 2024.)  
4. Bidhan Chandra Krishi  Viswa Vidyalaya  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and Animal 
Husbandry  B. V. sc. & A.H .  
5. University of Bihar  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and Animal 
Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A. H. 
6. University of Bombay  Bachelor of Science (Vety.)  B.Sc. (Vet.)  
 Bachelor of Veterinary Science and Animal 
Husbandry  B. V. Sc. &  A.H. 
 Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B. V. Sc.  
7. University  of Calcutta  Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B. V. Sc.  
 Bachelor of Veterinary Science and Animal 
Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A. H. 
8. University of Calicut  Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B. V. Sc.  
9. Chandra  Shekhar  Azad  University  of 
Agriculture and Techn ology  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and Animal 
Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A. H. 
10. Gauhati  Univeresity  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and Animal 
Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A. H. 
11. Govind  Ballabh  Pant University  of 
Agriculture and Technology  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and Animal 
Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A. H. 
12. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 22]
ulture and Technology  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and Animal 
Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A. H. 
12. G ujarat Agricultural University  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and Animal 
Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A.H.  
13. H aryana Agricultural University  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and Animal 
Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A.H.  
 Bachelor of Veterinary Animal Science  B. V. A. Sc.  
14. University of Jabalpur  Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B. V. Sc.  
 Bachelor of Veterinary Science and Animal 
Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A.H.  
                                                           
1. Subs.by Notification No. S.O. 3425 (E), dated 28-7-2023. 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 23]
23 
 University or veterinary  institution  Recognised veterinary qualification  Abbreviation for 
registration  
1 2 3 
15. Jawaharlal Nehru Krishi  Vishwa  
Vidyalaya  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A.H.  
16. Kerala Agricultural University  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A.H.   
 Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B. V. Sc.  
17. University of Kerala  Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B. V. Sc.  
18. Konkan  Krishi  Vidyapeeth  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A. H. 
19. University of Madras  Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B. V. Sc.  
20. Magadh University  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. S c. & A. H. 
21. Maha rashtra Agricultural University  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A. H. 
22. Mahatma Phule  Krishi  Vidyapeeth  Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B. V. Sc.  
 Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A. H. 
23. Marathwada  Krishi  Vidyapeeth  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A. H. 
24. University of Mysore  Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B. V. Sc.  
25. Nagpur University  Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B. V. Sc.  
 Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A. H.  
 Bachelor of Science (Vety .) B. Sc. (Vet.)  
26. Orissa University  of Agriculture and 
Technology  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A. H. 
27. Osmania  University  Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B. V. Sc.  
 Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A. H. 
28. Punja b Un iversity Lahore            
(1942—Aug. 1947)  Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B. V. Sc.  
29. East Punjab University, Solan  (1948—
54) Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B. V. Sc.  
30. Punjab University, Chandigarh 
(1984—62) Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B. V. Sc.  
 Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. &
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 23]
f Veterinary Science  B. V. Sc.  
 Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A. H. 
31. Punjab Agricultural University  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A.H. 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 24]
24 
 University or veterinary institution  Recognised veterinary qualification  Abbreviation for  
registration  
1 2 3 
32. Punjab  Krishi  Vidyapeeth  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and Animal 
Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A.H.  
1[33. Rajasthan Agricultural University  
(In respect of students passed out from 
Apollo College of Veterinary 
Medicine, Jaipur)  
 Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  
Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  
 B.V.Sc. & A.H.  
(This qualification 
shall be a 
recognised 
veterinary 
qualification as 
aforesaid only 
when granted on 
or before the 
10th September, 
2009).  
B.V.Sc. & A.H.  
(This qualification 
shall be a 
recognised 
veterinary 
qualification as 
aforesaid only 
when granted on 
or after the 
14th September, 
2008  and on or 
before the 10th 
September, 
2009).]  
34. University of Rajasthan  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and Animal 
Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A.H.  
35. Rajendra Agricultural University  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and Animal 
Husbandry  2[B.V.Sc. & A.H.  
This qualification 
shall be a 
recognised 
veterinary 
qualification as 
aforesaid only 
when granted on 
or before 4th day 
of August, 2011]  
36. Ranchi University  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and Animal 
Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A.H.  
37. Sardar Patel University  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and Animal 
Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A.H.  
38. University of Saugar  Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B. V. Sc.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs .by Notification No. S.O. 2518(E), dated 25 -9-2014.  
2. Subs . by Notification No. S.O. 2662(E), dated 30 -8-2013.   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 25]
25 
 University or veterinary institution  Recognised veterinary qualification  Abbreviation for 
registration  
1 2 3 
39. Sri Venkateswara University  Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B. V. Sc.  
40. 1[Tamil Nadu Veterinary and Animal 
Sciences University (Since the Tamil 
Nadu Veterinary and Animal University 
bifurcated from Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University), Chennai State of Tamil 
Nadu, in respect of: — 
(i) Madras Veterinary College 
Chennai, Tamil Nadu ; 
(ii) College of Veterinary Science 
and Research Institute, Namakkal, 
Tamil Nadu;  
(iii) Veterinary College and 
Research Institute, Orthanadu, Tamil 
Nadu;  
(iv) Veterinary College and 
Research Institute, Tirunelveli, Tamil 
Nadu.  Bachelor of Veterinary Scien ce 
Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  
Bachelor of Veterinary Science  
Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  
Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  
Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  
 
 B. V. Sc.  
(This qualification 
shall be a recognised 
veterinary 
qualification only 
when granted on or 
after the 20th 
September, 1989 
and on or before the 
21st December, 
2006);  
B.V.Sc. & A.H.  
(This qualification 
shall be a recognised 
veterinary 
qualification only 
when granted on or 
after the 22nd 
December, 2006);  
B.V.Sc.  
(This qualification 
shall be a recognised 
veterinary 
qualification only 
when granted on or 
after the 20th 
September, 1989 
and on or before the 
21st December, 
2006);  
B.V.Sc. & A.H.  
(This qualification 
shall be a recognised 
veterinary 
qualification only 
when granted on or 
after the 22nd 
December, 2006);  
B.V.Sc. & A.H.  
(This qualification 
shall be a recognised 
veterinary 
qualification only 
when granted on or 
after the 20th 
October, 2017);  
B.V.Sc. & A.H.  
(This qualification 
shall be a recognised 
veterinary 
qualification only 
when granted on or 
after the 20th 
October, 2017);]  
                                       
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 25]
only 
when granted on or 
after the 20th 
October, 2017);]  
                                                           
1. Subs . by Notification No. S .O.1296(E) , dated 08 -03-2019.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 26]
26 
 University or veterinary institution  Recognised veterinary qualification  Abbreviation for 
registration  
1 2 3 
41. University of Udaipur.  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and Animal 
Husbandry  B. V.Sc. & A.H.  
42. University of Agricultural Sciences, 
Hebbal.  Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B. V. Sc.  
43. Uttar Pradesh Agricultural University, 
Pant nagar.  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A.H.  
44. Utkal University  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A.H.  
45. Vikram University  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. & A.H.  
46. Mohan Lal Sukhadia University  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandary  B. V. Sc. & A.H.  
1[ 2[47. Sher -E-Kashmir University of 
Agricultural Sciences and Technology, 
Srinagar, Jammu and Kashmir.]  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B. V. Sc. &A. H...;  
2[48.H imachal Pradesh Krishi 
Vishvavidyala, College of Veterinary and 
Animal Sciences, Palampur (H. P.)  
 Bachelor of Veterinary Science  
 
 B. V. Sc. This 
qualification shall 
be recognised  
veterinary 
qualification for 
the purposes of the 
said Act when 
granted on or after 
12 January, 1990.]  
1[49. Birsa Agricultural University, 
Kanke, Ranchi (Bihar).  
 
 Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandary  
 
 3[B. V. Sc. & A. 
H. This 
qualification shall 
be a recognised 
veterinary 
qualification as 
aforesaid only 
when granted on 
or after the 1st 
April, 1981.]  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by S. O. 823/93.  
2. Entries inserted by S. O. 823/93, renumbered as S. Nos. “47” and “48” respectively by S. O. 1165/95.  
3. Subs.  by S. O. 268/97.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 27]
27 
 University or veterinary institution  Recognised veterinary qualification  Abbreviation for 
registration  
1 2 3 
50. Choudhari Charan Singh Haryana 
Agricultural University,Hisar (Haryana).  
 
 Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  
 
 B. V. Sc. & A. H. 
This qualification 
shall be a recognised  
veterinary 
qualification as 
aforesaid only when 
granted on or  after 
the 8th October, 
1991.]  
1[51. West Bengal University of Animal 
and Fishery Sciences, Calcutta.  
 
 Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  
 
 B. V. Sc. & A.H. 
This qualification 
shall be a 
recognised. 
veterinary 
qualification as 
aforesaid only when 
granted on or after 
the 17th April, 1995 
or 31 -12-2000.  
52. Indra Gandhi Krishi  
Vishwavidyalaya, Raipur Bachelor of Veterinary  
Science and Animal  
Husbandry  B.V.Sc.&A.H  
(This qualification 
shall be a  
recognized 
veterinary  
qualification as 
aforesaid  
only when granted 
on or  
after the 27th 
December,  
1990 and on or 
before 31st  
October 2012. ) 
53. University of Agricultural  
Sciences, Dharwad  Bachelor of Veterinary  
Science  B.V.Sc.  
(This qualification 
shall be a  
recognized veterinary  
qualification as 
aforesaid  
only when granted on 
or 
after the 16th 
Apri1,1990.)  
B. V. Sc. &A. H  
(This qualification 
shall be a  
recognized Veterinary  
qualification as 
aforesaid  
only when granted on 
or 
before the 18th 
November,  
1996).  
   
                                                           
1. Ins. by S. O. 1411/96.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 28]
28 
 University or veterinary institution  Recognised veterinary qualification  Abbreviation for 
registration  
1 2 3 
54. Patna University, Patna  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B.V.Sc.& A.H  
This qualification 
shall be a  
recognized 
veterinary  
qualification as 
afore -said 
only when granted 
in the  
year 1961.  
55. Dr. Panjabrao Deshmukh Krishi  
Vidyapeeth, Akola  Bachelor of Veterinary  
Science and Animal  
Husbandry  B.V.Sc.&A.H  
(This qualification 
shall be a  
recognized 
veterinary  
qualification as 
aforesaid  
only when granted 
on or  
after the 6th 
Nov.,1995 and  
on or before 15th  
Oct.,2001.)  
56. Acharya N.G. Ranga Agricultural  
University, Hyderabad  Bachelor of Veterinary  
Science and Animal  
Husbandry  B.V.Sc.& A.H  
(This qualification 
shall be a  
recognized 
veterinary  
qualification as 
aforesaid  
only when granted 
on or  
after the 26th 
Nov.,1998.  
This qualification 
shall be a  
recognized 
veterinary  
qualification as 
afore said  
only when granted 
on or 
before 31st of 
March 2006.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 29]
29 
 University or veterinary institution  Recognised veterinary qualification  Abbreviation for 
registration  
1 2 3 
57. Marathwada Agricultural  
University, Parbhani  Bachelor of Veterinary  
Science and Animal  
Husbandry  B.V.Sc.& A.H.  
(This qualification 
shall be a  
recognized 
veterinary  
qualification as 
aforesaid  
only when granted 
in or 
after 1972.  
58. Pondicherry University, Pondicherry  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B.V.Sc.& A.H. 
(This qualification 
shall be a 
recognized 
veterinary  
qualification as 
aforesaid  
only when granted 
in or 
after the 25th 
November,  
1999.)  
 
 
59. University of Agricultural  
Sciences, Dharwad  Bachelor of Veterinary  
Science and Animal  
Husbandry  B.V.Sc.&A.H  
(This qualification 
shall be a  
recognized 
veterinary  
qualification as 
aforesaid  
only when granted 
on or  
after the 19th 
November,  
1996) (This 
Qualification shall 
be a recognized 
veterinary 
qualification as 
aforesaid only 
when granted on 
or before the 31st 
March, 2005).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 30]
30 
 University or veterinary institution  Recognised veterinary qualification  Abbreviation for 
registration  
1 2 3 
60. University of Agricultural  
Sciences, Bangalore  Bachelor of Veterinary  
Science and Animal  
Husbandry  B. V. Sc. &A. H  
(This qualification 
shall be a 
recognized 
veterinary  
qualification as 
afore -said 
only when granted 
on or  
after the 10th 
March, 2000.)  
(This qualification 
shall be a  
recognized 
veterinary  
qualification only 
when  
granted on or 
before the  
31st day of March, 
2005).  
61. Chaudhary Sarwan Kumar H.P.  
Krishi Vishwavidyalaya, College of  
Veterinary Science, Palampur,  
H.P. Bachelor of Veterinary  
Science and Animal  
Husbandry  B.V.Sc.&A.H.  
(This qualification 
shall be  
a recognized 
veterinary  
qualification only 
when  
granted on or after 
the 23 rd 
June, 2001)  
62. Sher -e-Kashmir University of  
Agricultural Science  
Technology, Jammu  Bachelor of Veterinary  
Science and Animal  
Husbandry  B.V.Sc.&A.H.  
(This qualification 
shall be a  
recognized 
veterinary  
qualification only 
when  
granted on or after 
the 
10th Feb., 2000)  
63. Sher -e-Kashmir University of  
Agricultural Science  
Technology, Kashmir  Bachelor of Veterinary  
Science and Animal  
Husbandry  B.V.Sc.&A.H.  
(This qualification 
shall be a  
recognized 
veterinary  
qualification only 
when  
granted on or after 
the 
20th Sept., 1999).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 31]
31 
 University or veterinary institution  Recognised veterinary qualification  Abbreviation for 
registration  
1 
 2 
 3 
 
64. Maharashtra Animal and Fishery  
Sciences University, Nagpur  Bachelor of Veterinary  
Science and Animal  
Husbandry.  B.V.Sc.&A.H.  
(This qualification 
shall be a  
recognized 
veterinary  
qualification only 
when  
granted on or after 
the 11th February, 
2002.)  
65. Dr. Balasahab Sawant Krishi  
Vidyapeeth, Dapoli  Bachelor of Veterinary  
Science and Animal  
Husbandry  B.V.Sc.&A.H.  
(This qualification 
shall be a  
recognized 
veterinary  
qualification only 
when  
granted on or after 
the 13th  
February, 2001.)  
66. Central Agricultural University,  
Imphal, Manipur  Bachelor of Veterinary  
Science and Animal  
Husbandry  B.V.Sc.&A.H.  
(This qualification 
shall be a  
recognized 
veterinary  
qualification only 
when  
granted on or after 
the 28.03.2003.)  
1[67. Narendra Deva University of 
Agriculture and Technology, Faizabad 
(College of Veterinary Science and Animal 
Husbandry, Faizabad)  
 Bachelor of Veterinary  
Science and Animal  
Husbandry  B.V.Sc.&  A.H.  
(This qualification 
shall be a  
recognized 
veterinary  
qualification only 
when  
granted on or after 
the 17th July, 2004 
and before 5th 
August,  2019.) ] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Notification No. S.O. 4715 (E), dated 2 4-09-2021.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 32]
32 
 University or veterinary institution  Recognised veterinary qualification  Abbreviation for 
registration  
1 2 3 
1[68. Ka mataka Veterinary, Animal &  
Fisheries Sciences University,  
Bidar in respect :-- 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) Veterinary  Colleges, Bangalore and 
Bidar  
 
 
 
(ii) Veterinary College, Shimoga  
 
 
 
(iii) Veterinary College, Hassan  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) Veterinary College, Gadag  
 
 Bachelor of Veterinary  
Science and Animal  
Husbandry  B.V.Sc & A.H.  
(This qualification 
shall be a  recogni sed 
veterinary  
qualification  
only when granted on 
or after the 1st April, 
2005)  
B.V.Sc & A.H.  
(This qualification 
shall be a  
recognized veterinary  
 
qualification only 
when granted on or  
after the 24th August, 
2011)  
 
B.V.Sc & A.H.  
(This qualification 
shall be a  
recogni sed veterinary  
qualification  
only when granted on 
or after the 24th 
August , 2012) 
 
B.V.Sc & A.H.  
(This qualification 
shall be a  
recognised veterinary  
qualification  
only when granted on 
or after the 15th May, 
2023)] 
69. Anand Agricultural University  
Anand in respect of College of  
Veterinary Science and Animal  
Husbandry, Anand  Bachelor of Veterinary  
Science and Animal  
Husbandry  B.V.Sc.&A.H.  
(This qualification 
shall be a  
recognized veterinary  
qualification only 
when  
granted on or after the 
01st 
May, 2004).  
70. Sardar Krushinagar Dantiwada  
Agricultural University,  
Sardarkrushinagar in respect of  
College of Veterinary Science and  
Animal Husbandry,  
Sardarkrushinangar  Bachelor  
Science  
Husbandry  
of Veterinary  
and Animal  B.V.Sc.&A.H.  
(This qualification 
shall be a  
recognized veterinary  
qualification only 
when  
granted on or after the 
1st 
May,2004).  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Notification No. S.O. 2873 (E), dated 3-07-2023. 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 33]
33 
 University or veterinary institution  Recognised veterinary qualification  Abbreviation for 
registration  
1 2 3 
 1[72. Sri Venkateswara  Veterinary 
University in respect of constituent 
Veterinary Colleges at Hyderabad, Tirupati 
and Gannavaram  
College of Veterinary Science, Proddatur  
College of Veterinary Science, Kortula  
 
 Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  
 
 B.V.Sc. and A.H.  
(This qualification 
shall be a recognised 
veterinary 
qualification only 
when granted on or 
after 1st April, 
2006.)  
B.V.Sc. and A.H.  
(This qualification 
shall be a recognised 
veterinary 
qualification only 
when granted on 
or after 5th 
October 2013.)  
B.V.Sc. and A.H.  
(This qualification 
shall be a 
recognised 
veterinary 
qualification only 
when granted on 
or after 5th 
October 2013.);]  
73. Guru Angad Dev Veterinary and  
Animal Sciences University,  
Ludhiana  
College of Veterinary Science,  
Ludhiana  
Khalsa College of Veterinary and  
Animal Sciences, Amritsar Bachelor of Veterinary  
Science and Animal  
Husbandry  
Bachelor of Veterinary  
Science and Animal  
Husbandry  B.V.Sc.&A.H.  
(This qualification 
shall be a  
recognized 
veterinary  
qualification only 
when  
granted on  or after 
the 21st  
April, 2006).  
B.V.Sc.&A.H.  
(This qualification 
shall be a  
recognized 
veterinary  
qualification only 
when  
granted on or after 
the 27th  
July, 2015).  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Notification No. S.O. 577(E), dated 19 -02-2015.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 34]
34 
 University or veterinary institution  Recognised veterinary qualification  Abbreviation for 
registration  
1 2 3 
1[74. Swamy Keshwanand Rajasthan 
Agricultural Uni versity, Bikaner in respect 
of— 
(i) College of Veterinary and Animal 
Sciences, Bikaner  
(ii) Apollo College of Veterinary 
Medicine, Jaipur  
 
 Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  
 
 B.V.Sc. & A.H.  
(This qualification 
shall be a 
recognised 
veterinary 
qualification as 
aforesaid only 
when granted on 
or after the 11th 
September, 2009 
and on or before 
the 12th May, 
2010).]  
2[75. Rajasthan University of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, Bikaner in respect of — 
(i) College of Veterinary and Animal 
Sciences, Bikaner  
 
 Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  
 
 B.V.Sc. & A.H.  
(This qualification 
shall be a 
recognised  
veterinary 
qualification as 
aforesaid only 
when granted on 
or after the 13th 
May, 2010).  
(ii) Apollo College of Veterinary 
Medicine, Jaipur  
 
 Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  
 
 B.V.Sc. & A.H.  
(This qualification 
shall be a 
recognised  
veterinary 
qualification as 
aforesaid only 
when granted on 
or after the 13th 
May, 2010 and on 
or before the 
24thJuly, 2015).  
  
                                                           
1. Subs . by Notification No. S .O. 2518(E) , dated 25 -09-2014 . 
2. Subs . by Notification No. S .O. 198(E) , dated 18 -01-2017.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 35]
35 
 University or veterinary institution  Recognised veterinary qualification  Abbreviation for 
registration  
1 2 3 
(iii) Mahatma Gandhi College of Veterinary 
Sciences, Bharatpur  
 
 Bachelor of Veterinary Science and Animal 
Husbandry Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  
 
 B.V.Sc. & A.H. (This 
qualification shall be a 
recognised veterinary 
qualification as 
aforesaid only when 
granted on or after the 
19th January, 2011 and 
on or before the 24th 
July, 2015).".  
(iv) Arawali Veterinary College, Sikar  
 Bachelor of Veterinary Science  
and Animal Husbandry  
 
 
 
 B.V.Sc. & A.H.  
(This qualification 
shall be a recognized 
veterinary qualification 
as aforesaid only when 
granted on or after the 
17th December, 
2014.".  
1[(v) Mahatma Jyotiba Fule College of Veterinary 
and Animal Sciences, Chomu, Jaipur  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and  Animal 
Husbandry  B.V.Sc & A.H.  
(This qualification 
shall be a recognized 
veterinary qualification 
as aforesaid only when 
granted on or after the 
15th December, 
2014.).]  
2[(vi) College of Veterinary and Animal Science, 
Navania, Udaipur  
 
 Bachelor of Veterinary Science and Animal 
Husbandry  
 
 B.V.  Sc. & A.H. (This 
qualification shall be a 
recognized veterinary 
qualification only 
when granted on or 
after 8th September, 
2018).]  
3[(vii) Post Graduate Institute of Veterinary 
Education and Research, Jaipur Bachelor of Veterinary Science and Animal 
Husbandry  B.V.  Sc. & A.H. (This 
qualification shall be a 
recogni sed veterinary 
qualification only 
when granted on or 
after 31st August, 
2020 ).] 
4[(viii) Apollo College of Veterinary Medicine, 
Jaipur Bachelor of Veterinary Science and Animal 
Husbandry  B.V.Sc. & A.H. (This 
qualification shall be a 
recognised veterinary 
qualification only 
when granted on or 
after the 1st March 
2023.]  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Notification No. S .O. 2858(E) , dated 31 -08-2017.  
2
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 35]
                                 
1. Ins. by Notification No. S .O. 2858(E) , dated 31 -08-2017.  
2. Ins. by Notification No. S .O. 1146(E) , dated 07 -03-2019.  
3. Ins. by Notification No. S .O. 1270(E), dated 20 -04-2020. 
4. Ins. by Notification No. S.O. 1456(E), dated 12 -5-2020.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 36]
36 
 University or veterinary institution  Recognised veterinary qualification  Abbreviation for 
registration  
1 2 3 
76. Madhya Pradesh Pashu Chikitsa. 
Vigyan Vishwavidyalaya, Jabalpurin 
respect of: -- 
(i) College of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry, Jabalpur  
(ii) College of Veterinary Science 
and Animal Husbandry, Mhow]  
 Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  
 
 B.V.Sc & A.H . 
(This qualification 
shall be a 
recognised 
veterinary 
qualification only 
when granted on 
or after the 1st day 
of January, 2011)  
1[78. Lala Lajpat Rai University of 
Veterinary and Animal Sciences, Hisar 
State of Haryana, in respect of: - 
(i) College of Veterinary Sciences, 
Hisar, Haryana ;  
(ii) International Institute of 
Veterinary Education and Research, 
Bahu Akbarpur, Rohtak, Haryana  
 Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  
 
 B.V.Sc. & A.H.  
(This qualification 
shall be a 
recognised 
veterinary 
qualification only 
when granted on 
or after the 1st 
December, 2010);  
B.V.Sc. & A.H.  
(This qualification 
shall be a 
recognised  
veterinary 
qualification only 
when granted on 
or after the 21st 
November, 2019).]  
2[79. Chhattisgarh Kamdhenu, 
Vishwavidy ala Anjora, Durg in respect of: -
- 
College of Veterinary Science and Animal 
Husbandry, Durg.  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal  Husbandry  
 
 B.V.Sc. & A.H.  
(This qualification 
shall be a 
recognized 
veterinary 
qualification as 
aforesaid only 
when granted on 
or after the 1st day 
of November, 
2012)]  
  
                                                           
1. Subs . by Notification No.  S.O. 43(E) , dated 03 -01-2019.  
2. Ins. by Notification No. S .O. 989(E) , dated 29 -04-2010.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 37]
37 
 University or veterinary institution  Recognised veterinary qualification  Abbreviation for 
registration  
1 2 3 
1[80. Nanaji Deshmukh Veterinary 
Science University, Jabalpur in respect of: -
- 
(i) College of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry, Jabalpur  
(ii) College of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry, Mhow. Bachelor of  Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry.  
 B.V.Sc. & A.H.  
This qualification 
shall be a 
recognised 
veterinary 
qualification only 
when granted on 
or after 
21.8.2012.]  
2[81. Bihar Agricultural University, 
Sabour, Bhagalpur, in respect of Bihar 
Veterinary College, Patna  
 
 Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  
 
 B.V.Sc. & A.H.  
This qualification 
shall be a 
recognized 
veterinary 
qualification only 
when granted 3[on 
or after 05.08.2011 
and on or before 
12.06.2018].]  
4[82. Navsari Agricultural University, 
Navsari College of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry, Navsari  
 
 Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  
 
 B.v.Sc. & AH  
This qualification 
shall be a 
recognised 
veterinary 
qualification only 
when granted on 
or after 
16.1.2014.]  
83. Tripura University in respect of 
Students admitted in College of Veterinary 
Science and Animal Husbandry at R.K. 
Nagar, Agartala (Tripura) during 2009 -10. Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  
 B.V.Sc. & A.H.  
(This qualification 
shall b e a 
recognised 
veterinary 
qualification only 
when granted on 
3rd September, 
2014 and not 
before or after this 
date).]  
5[83 A. Tripura University in respect of 
Students admitted in College of Veterinary 
Science and Animal Husbandry at R.K. 
Nagar, Agartala (Tripura) from 2012 -13 
 
 Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  
 
 B.V.Sc & A .H. 
(This qualification 
shall be a recognised 
veterinary 
qualification only 
when granted on or 
after 28/07/2017) .] 
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Notific
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 37]
r 28/07/2017) .] 
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Notification No. S.O. 770(E), dated 02 -03-2017.  
2. Ins. by  Notification  No. S .O.2662(E) , Dated 30 -08-2013.  
3. Subs . by Notification  No. S .O.1145(E) , dated 07 -03-2019 . 
4. Ins. by Notification No. S .O.1022(E) , Dated 02 -04-2014.  
5. Ins. by Notification No. S .O. 4233(E) , dated 28 -08-2018.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 38]
38 
 University or veterinary institution  Recognised  veterinary qualification  Abbreviation for 
registration  
1 2 3 
1[84. Junagarh Agricultural University in 
respect of College of Veterinary Science 
and Animal Husbandry, Junagarh  
 
 Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  
 
 B.V.Sc. and A.H.  
(This qualification 
shall be a 
recognised 
veterinary 
qualification only 
when granted on 
or after 30th June 
2013.).]  
2[86. Bihar Animal Science University, 
Patna, Bihar in respect of Bihar Veterinary 
College, Patna.  
 
 Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  
 
 B.V.Sc. & A.H. 
(This qualification 
shall be a 
recognised 
veterinary 
qualification only 
when granted on 
or after 
13.06.2018).]  
3[87. ICAR -Indian Veterinary Research 
Institute, Bareilly in the State of Uttar 
Pradesh  Bach elor of Veterinary  Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B.V.Sc. & A.H. 
(This qualification 
shall be a 
recognized 
veterinary 
qualification only 
when granted on 
or after the 25th 
June 2020.]  
  4[88. Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel University of Agriculture and Technology, Meerut in respect  of- 
(i) College of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, Meerut.]  
DIPLOMAS    
1. Assam Veterinary College  Graduate in Veterinary Science  G.V. Sc.  
 Graduate in Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  G.V. Sc. & A.H.  
2. Bengal Veterinary College  Graduate of Bengal Veterinary College  G.B.V.C.  
 Graduate in Veterinary Science  G.V. Sc.  
3. Bihar Veterinary College  Graduate of Bihar Veterinary College  G.B.V.C.  
4. Bombay Veterinary College  Graduate of Bombay Veterinary College  G.B.V.C.  
5. Madras Veterinary College  Graduate of Madras Veterinary College  G.M.V.C.  
6. Punjab Veterinary College  Licensed Veterinary Practitioner 
(Conferred before 15 -8-1947)  L.V.P.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Notification No. S .O. 577(E) , dated 19 -02-2015.  
2. Ins. by Notification No. S .O.1145(E) , dated
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 38]
otification No. S .O. 577(E) , dated 19 -02-2015.  
2. Ins. by Notification No. S .O.1145(E) , dated 07 -03-2019.  
3. Ins. by Notification No. S.O. 283 (E), dated 20 -1-2020.  
4. Subs. by Notification No. S.O. 847(E), dated 23-02-2021. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 39]
39 
 University or veterinary institution  Recognised veterinary qualification  Abbreviation for 
registration  
1 2 3 
1[89. Acharya Narendra Deva 
University of Agriculture and Technology, 
Kumarganj, Ayodhya, Uttar Pradesh in 
respect of College of Veterinary Science 
and Animal Husbandry, Ayodhya.  Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  B.V.Sc. & A.H. 
(This Qualification 
shall be a recognized 
veterinary 
qualification only 
when granted on or 
after the 5th August, 
2019.]  
2[83. Tripura University in respect of 
Students admitted in College of Veterinary 
Science and Animal Husbandry at R.K. 
Nagar, Agartala (Tripura) during 2009 -10. 
 
 Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  
 
 B.V.Sc. & A.H.  
(This qualification 
shall be a recognised 
veterinary 
qualification only 
when granted on 3rd 
September, 2014 
and not before or 
after this date). ] 
3[84. Junagarh Agricultural University in 
respect of College of Veterinary Science 
and Animal Husbandry, Junagarh  
 
 Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry  
 
 B.V.Sc. and A.H.  
(This qualification 
shall be a recognised  
veterinary 
qualification only 
when granted on or 
after 30th June 
2013.).]  
4[85 5[P. V. Narsimha Rao Telangana 
Veterinary University], Hyderabad in 
respect of Colleges namely: - 
(i) College of Veterinary Sciences, 
Rajendranagar, Hyderabad  
(ii) College of V eterinary Sciences, 
Korutla, District Karimnagar  
 
 Bachelor of Veterinary Science and 
Animal Husbandry.  
 
 B.V.Sc. and A.H.  
(This qualification 
shall be a recognised 
veterinary 
qualification only 
when granted on or 
after the 
22.11.2014).  
B.V.Sc. and A.H.  
(This qualification 
shall be a recognised 
veterinary 
qualification only 
when granted on or 
after 22.11.2014).]  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Notification No. S.O. 4715(E) Dated 24 -09-2021.  
2. Ins. by Notification No. S.O.3318(E) Dated 30 -12-2014.  
3. Ins. by 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 39]
715(E) Dated 24 -09-2021.  
2. Ins. by Notification No. S.O.3318(E) Dated 30 -12-2014.  
3. Ins. by Notificati on No. S.O. 577(E), Dated 19 -02-2015.  
4. Ins. by Notification No. S.O. 1096(E), dated 26 -02-2016.  
5. Subs. by Notification No. S.O.341(E), dated 02 -02-2017  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDIAN VETERINARY COUNCIL ACT, 1984.pdf - page 40]
40 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
[See section 2 (e) and section 16]  
RECOGNISED VETERINARY QUALIFICATIONS GRANTED BY INSTITUTIONS OUTSIDE INDIA  
 
Country and Institution  Recognised veterinary qualification  Abbreviation for registration  
1 2 3 
UNITED KINGDOM    
1. Royal College of Veterinary 
Surgeons  Member of the Royal College of 
Veterinary Surgeons.  M.R.C.V. S. 
2. University of Bristol  Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B.V. Sc. 
3. University of Cambridge  Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B.V. Sc. 
4. University of Edinburgh  Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B.V. Sc.  
5. University of Glasgow  Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B.V. Sc.  
6. University of Liverpool  Bachelor of Veterinary Science  B.V. Sc.  
7. University of London  Bachelor of Veterinary Medicine  B. Vet. Med.  
REPUBLIC OF IRELAND    
8. University of Dublin  Bachelor of Veterinary Medicine  B.V. M. 
9. National University of Ireland  Bachelor of Veterinary Medicine  B.V. M. 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES  ACT, 1947  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
2A. Dismissal, etc., of an individual workman to be deemed to be an industrial dispute . 
 
CHAPTER II  
AUTHORITIES UNDER THIS ACT 
3. Works Committee . 
4. Conciliation officers . 
5. Board of Conciliation . 
6. Courts of Inquiry . 
7. Labour Courts . 
7A. Tribunals . 
7B. National Tribunals . 
7C. Disqualifications for the presiding officers of Labour  Courts, Tribunals and National Tribunals . 
7D. Qualifications, terms and conditions of service of Presiding Officer.  
8. Filling of vacancies . 
9. Finality of orders constituting Boards, etc . 
 
CHAPTER IIA  
NOTICE OF CHANGE  
9A. Notice of change . 
9B. Power of Government to exempt . 
CHAPTER IIB  
REFERENCE OF CERTAIN  INDIVIDUAL  DISPUTES TO GRIEVANCE  SETTLEMENT  AUTHORITIES  
9C. Setting up of Grievance Settlement Authorities and reference of certain individual disputes to 
such authorities . 
 
CHAPTER III  
REFERENCE OF DISPUTES TO BOARDS , COURTS OR TRIBUNALS  
10. Reference of disputes to Boards, Courts or Tribunals . 
10A. Voluntary reference of disputes to arbitration . 
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 2]
2 
 CHAPTER IV  
PROCEDURE, POWERS AND DUTIES OF AUTHORITIES  
SECTIONS  
11. Procedure and powers of conciliation officers, Boards, Courts and Tribunals . 
11A. Powers of Labour Courts, Tribunals and National Tribunals to give appropriate relief in case of 
discharge or dismissal of workmen . 
12. Duties of conciliation officers . 
13. Duties of Board . 
14. Duties of Courts . 
15. Duties of La bour Courts, Tribunals and National Tribunals . 
16. Form of report or award . 
17. Publication of reports and awards . 
17A. Commencement of the award.  
17B. Payment of  full wages to workman pending proceedings in higher courts.  
18. Persons on whom settlements and awards are binding . 
19. Period of operation of settlements and awards . 
20. Commencement and conclusion of proceedings . 
21. Certain matters to be kept confidential . 
 
CHAPTER V  
STRIKES AND LOCK -OUTS  
22. Prohibition of strikes and lock -outs. 
23. General prohibition of strikes and lock-outs. 
24. Illegal strikes and lock -outs. 
25. Prohibition of financial aid to illegal strikes and lock -outs. 
 
CHAPTER VA  
LAY-OFF AND RETRENCHMENT  
25A. Application of sections 25C to 25E . 
25B. Definition of continuous service . 
25C. Right of workmen laid -off for  compensation . 
25D. Duty of an employer to maintain muster rolls of workmen . 
25E. Workmen not entitled to compensation in certain cases . 
25F. Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen . 
25FF. Compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings . 
25FFA. Sixty days’ notice to be given of intention to close down any undertaking . 
25FFF. Compensation to workmen in case of closing down of undertakings . 
25G. Procedure for retrenchment . 
25H. Re -employment of retrenched workmen . 
25-I. [Repealed .] 
25J. Ef fect of laws inconsistent with this Chapter . 
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 3]
3 
 CHAPTER VB  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO LAY -OFF, RETRENCHMENT AND CLOSURE IN CERTAIN 
ESTABLISHMENTS  
SECTIONS  
25K. Application of Chapter VB . 
25L. Definitions . 
25M. Prohibition of lay -off. 
25N. Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen . 
25-O. Procedure for closing down an undertaking . 
25P. Special provision as to restarting of undertakings closed down before commencement of the 
Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 1976 . 
25Q. Penalty for lay -off and re trenchment without previous permission . 
25R. Penalty for closure . 
25S. Certain provisions of Chapter VA to apply to an industrial establishment to which this Chapter 
applies . 
 
CHAPTER VC  
UNFAIR LABOUR PRACTICES  
25T. Prohibition of unfair labour practice . 
25U. Penalty for committing unfair labour practices . 
 
CHAPTER VI  
PENALTIES  
26. Penalty for illegal strikes and lock -outs. 
27. Penalty for instigation, etc . 
28. Penalty for giving financial aid to illegal strikes and lock -outs. 
29. Penalty for breach of settlement or award . 
30. Penalty for disclosing confidential information . 
30A. Penalty for closure without notice . 
31. Penalty for other offences.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
32. Offence by companies, etc.  
33. Conditions of service, etc., to remain unchanged under certain circumstances during pendency of 
proceedings.  
33A. Special provision for adjudication as to whether conditions of service, etc., changed during 
pendency of proceedings.  
33B. Power to transfer certain proceedings.  
33C. Recovery of money due from an employer.  
34. Cognizance o f offences . 
35. Protection of persons . 
36. Representation of parties . 
36A. Power to remove difficulties . 
36B. Power to exempt . 
37. Protection of action taken under the Act . 
38. Power to make rules . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 4]
4 
 SECTIONS  
39. Delegation of powers . 
40. Power to amend Schedules . 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. —INDUSTRIES WHICH MAY BE DECLARED TO BE PUBLIC UTILITY 
SERVICES UNDER SUB -CLAUSE ( vi) OF CLAUSE ( n) OF SECTION 2 . 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE. —MATTERS WITHIN THE JURISDICTION OF LABOUR  COURTS . 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE. —MATT ERS WITHIN THE JURISDICTION OF INDUSTRIAL  TRIBUNALS . 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE. —CONDITIONS OF SERVICE FOR CHANGE OF WHICH NOTICE IS TO BE 
GIVEN . 
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE. —UNFAIR  LABOUR  PRACTICES . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 5]
5 
 THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947  
ACT NO. 14 OF 19471  
[11th March , 1947.]  
An Act to make provision for the investigation and settlement of industrial disputes, and for 
certain other purposes.  
WHEREAS  it is expedient to make provision for the investigation and settlement of industrial disputes, 
and for certain other purposes here inafter appearing;  
It is hereby enacted as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short t itle, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the  Industrial Disputes Act, 
1947.  
2[(2) It extends to the whole of India:  
3*    *    *    *    *] 
(3) It shall come into force o n the first day of April, 1947.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context, — 
(a) “appropriate Government ” means — 
(i) in relation to any  industrial dispute concerning 4*** any industry carried on by or under 
the author ity of the Central Government, 5*** or by a railway company 6[or concerning any such 
controlled industry as may be specified in this beh alf by the Central Government] 7*** or in 
relation to an industri al dispute concerning 8[9[10[11[a Dock Labour Board established under 
section 5A of the Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act, 1948 (9 of 194 8), or 12[the 
Industrial Finance Corporation of India Limited formed and registered under the Companies Act, 
1956 (1 of 1956) ], or the Employe es’ State Insurance Corporation established under section 3 of 
the Employees ’ State Insurance Act, 1948 (34 of 1948), or the Board of Trustees constituted 
under section 3A of the Coal Mines Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1948  
(46 of 1948), or the Central Board of Trustees and the State Boards of Trustees constituted under 
section 5A and section 5B, respectively, of the Employees ’ Provident Fund and Miscellaneous 
Provisions Act, 1952 (19 of 1952), 13***, or the Life Insurance Corporatio n of India established 
under section 3 of the Life Insurance Corporati
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 5]
he Life Insurance Corporatio n of India established 
under section 3 of the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956 (31 of 1956), or 14[the Oil and 
Natural Gas Corporation Limited registered  under the Companies  Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) ], or the 
                                                           
1. This Act has been extended to Goa, Daman and Diu by Reg. 12 of 1962 , s. 3 and the schedule (w.e.f. 19 -12-1962) ; to 
Pondicherry by Reg. 7 of 1963 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1963); and Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands by Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 and 
the Schedule.  
2. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 2, for the sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 29 -8-1956).  
3. Omitted by Act 51 of 1970, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 1 -9-1971).  
4. Certain words omitted by Act 36 of 1964, s. 2 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
5. The words “by the Federal Railway Authority” omitted by the A.O. 1948.  
6. Ins. by Act 65 of 1951, s. 32.  
7. The words “operating a Federal Railway” omitted by the A.O. 1950.  
8. Ins. by Act 47 of 1961, s. 51 and the Second Schedule, Part III (w.e.f. 1 -1-1962).  
9. Subs. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 2, for “the Deposit Insurance Corporation established” (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
10. Subs. by Act 45 of 1971, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15 -12-1971).  
11. Subs. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
12. Subs. by Act 24 of 1996, s. 2, for “the Industrial Finance Corporation of India established under section 3 of the Indust rial 
Finance Corporatio n Act, 1948 (15 of 1948)” (w.e.f. 11 -10-1995).  
13. The words and figures “or the “Indian Airlines” and “Air India” Corporations established under section 3 of the Air 
Corporations Act, 1953 (27 of 1953)” by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 11 -10-1995).  
14. Subs. by Act  24 of 1996, s. 2, for “the Oil and Natural Gas Commission established under section 3 of the Oil and Natural 
Gas Commission Act, 1959 (43 of 1959)” (w.e.f. 11 -10-1995).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 6]
6 
 Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporati on established under section 3 of the Deposit 
Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961 (47 of 1961), or the Central Warehousing 
Corporation established under section 3 of the Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962 (58 of 1962), 
or the Unit Trust of  India established under section 3 of the Unit Trust of India Act, 1963  
(52 of 1963), or the Food Corporation of Ind ia established under section 3 or a Board of 
Management established for two or more cont iguous States under section 16 of the Food 
Corporat ions Act, 1964 (37 of 1964), or 1[the Airports Authority of India constituted under 
section 3 of the Airports Authority of India Act, 1994 (55 of 1994)] , or a Regional Rural Bank 
established under section 3 of the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976 (21 of 1976), or the Export 
Credit and Guarantee Corporation Limited or the Industrial Reconstruction Bank of India 2[the 
National Housing Bank established under sec tion 3 of the National Housing B ank Act, 1987 (53 
of 1987) ], or 3[4[an air transport service, or a banking or an insurance company ], a mine, an oil -
field] 5[, a Cantonment Board,] or a 6[major po rt, any  company in which not less than fifty -one 
per cent. of the paid -up share capital is held by the Central Government, or any corporation, not 
being a corporation referred to in this clause, established by or under any law made by 
Parliament, or the Central public sector undertaking, subsidiary companies set u p by the principal 
undertaking and autonomous bodies owned or controlled by the Central Government, the Central 
Government, and ] 
7[(ii) in relation to any other industrial dispute, including the State public sector undertaking, 
subsidiary companies set up by the principal undertaking and autonomous bodies owned or 
controlled by the State Government, the State Government: Provided that in case of a dispute 
between a contractor and the contract labour employed through the con
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 6]
ded that in case of a dispute 
between a contractor and the contract labour employed through the contractor in any industrial 
establis hment where such dispute first arose, the appropriate Government shall be the Central 
Government or the State Government, as the case may be, which has control over such industrial 
establishment ;] 
6[(aa) “arbitrator ” includes an umpire;]  
8[ 9[(aaa)] “average pay ” means the average of t he wages payable to a workman — 
(i) in the case of monthly paid workman, in the three complete calendar months,  
(ii) in the case of weekly paid workm an, in the four complete weeks,  
(iii) in the case of daily paid workman, in the twelve full working days,  
preceding the date on which the average pay becomes payable if the workman had worked for three 
complete calendar months or four complete weeks or twelve full working days, as the case may be, and 
where such calculation can not be made, the average pay shall be calculated as the average of the wages 
payable to a workman during the period he actually worked;]  
10[(b) “award ” means an interim or a final determination of any industrial dispute or of any 
question relating thereto b y any Labour Court, Industrial Tribunal or National Industrial Tribunal and 
includes an arbitration  award made under section 10A;]  
11[(bb) “banking company ” means a banking company as defined in section 5 of the Banking 
Companies Act, 1949 (10 of 1949), hav ing branches or other establishments in more  than one State, 
and includes 12[the Export -Import Bank of India ,] 13[the Industrial Re construction Bank of India,] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 24 of 1996,  s. 2,  for “the International Airports Authority of India constituted under section 3 of the International 
Airports Authority of India Act, 1971 (48 of 1971)” (w.e.f. 11 -10-1995).  
2. Ins. by Act 53 of 1987, s. 56 and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 9 -7-1988).  
3. Subs. by Act 54 of 1949, s. 3, f
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 6]
 53 of 1987, s. 56 and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 9 -7-1988).  
3. Subs. by Act 54 of 1949, s. 3, for “a mine oil -field”.  
4. Subs. by Act 24 of 1996, s. 2, for “a banking or an insurance company” (w.e.f. 11 -10-1996).  
5. Ins. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 2 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
6. Subs. by Act 24 of 2010, s. 2, for “major port, the Central Government, and” (w.e.f  15 -9-2010).  
7. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for sub -clause ( ii) (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
8. Ins. by Act 43 of 1953, s. 2 (w.e.f. 24 -10-1953).  
9. Clause ( aa) re-lettered as clause ( aaa) by Act 36 of 1964, s. 2 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
10. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 3, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
11. Subs. by Act 38 of 1959, s. 64 and the third Schedule, Part II, for clause ( bb). 
12. Ins. by Act 28 of 1981, s. 40 and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 4 -1-1982).  
13. Ins. by Act 62 of 1984, s. 71 and the Third Schedule (w.e.f. 20 -3-1985). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 7]
7 
 1[2***,] 3[the Small Industries Development Bank of India established under section 3 of the Small  
Industries Development Bank of India Act, 1989 (39 of 1989),] the Reserve Bank of I ndia, the State 
Bank of India 4[, a corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking Companies 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Underta kings) Act, 1970 (5 of 1970) 5[, a corresponding new bank 
constituted under section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) 
Act, 1980 (40 of 1980), and any subsidiary bank]] as defined in the State Bank of India (Subsidiary 
Banks) Act, 1959 (38 of 1959);]  
(c) “Board ” means a Board of Conciliat ion constituted under this Act;  
6[(cc) “closure ” means the permanent closing down of a place of employment or part thereof;]  
(d) “conciliation officer ” means a conciliation of ficer appoint ed under this Act;  
(e) “conciliation proceeding ” means any proceeding held by a conciliation o fficer or Board under 
this Act;  
7[(ee) “controlled industry ” means any industry the control of which by the Union has been 
declared by any Central Act to be exp edient in the public interest;]  
8*    *   *    *    * 
(f) “Court ” means a Court of Inqu iry constituted under this Act;  
(g) “employer ” means ,— 
(i) in relation to an industry carried on by or under the a uthority of any department of 9[the 
Central Government or a State Government], the authority prescribed in this behalf, or where no 
authority is prescribed, the head of the departmen t; 
(ii) in relation to an industry carried on by or on behalf of a local authority, the chief 
execu tive officer of that authority;  
 10[(gg) “executive ”, in relation to a trade union, means the body, by whatever name called, to 
which the management of the affairs of  the trade union is entrusted;]  
11*    *    *    *   * 
(i) a person shall be deemed to be “independent ” for the p urpose of his appointment as the 
chairman or other member of a Board, Court or T
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 7]
endent ” for the p urpose of his appointment as the 
chairman or other member of a Board, Court or Tribunal, if he is unconnected with the industrial 
dispute referred to such Board, Court or Tribunal or with any industry dir ectly affected by such 
dispute:  
12[Provided that no p erson shall cease to be independent by reason only of the fact that he is a 
shareholder of an incorporated company which is connected with, or likely to be affected by, such 
industrial dispute; but in such a case, he shall disclose to the appropriate Gover nment the nature and 
extent of the share s held by him in such company;]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 18 of 1964, s. 38 and the Second Schedule, Part II (w.e.f. 1 -7-1964).  
2. The words “the Industrial Development Bank of India” omitted by Act 53 of 2003, s. 12 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 2 -7-2004).  
3. Ins. by Act 39 of 1989, s. 53 and the Second Schedule (date to be notified).  
4. Subs. by Act 5 of 1970, s. 20, for “and any subsidiary bank” (w.e.f. 19 -7-1969).  
5. Subs. by Act 40 of 1980, s. 20 (w.e.f. 15 -4-1980).  
6. Ins. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
7. Ins. by Act 65 of 1951, s. 32.  
8. Omitted by Act 36 of 1964, s. 2 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
9. Subs. by the A.O. 1948, for “a Government in British India”.  
10. Ins. by Act 45 of 1971, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15 -12-1971).  
11. Clause ( h) omitted by the A.O. 1950.  
12. Ins. by Act 18 of 1952, s. 2.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 8]
8 
 1[(j) “industry ” means any business, trade, undertaking, manufacture or calling  of employers and 
includes any calling, service, employment, handicraft, or industrial occupation  or avocation of 
workmen;  
(k) “industrial dispute ” means any dispute or difference between  employers and employers, or 
between employers and workmen, or between workmen and workmen, which is connected with the 
employment or non -employment or the terms of e mployment or with the condi tions of labour, of any 
person;  
2[(ka) “industrial establishment or undertaking ” means an establishment or undertaking in wh ich 
any industry is carried on:  
Provided that where several activities are carried on in an establishment  or undertaking and only 
one or some of such activities is or are an industry or in dustries, then, — 
(a) if any unit of such establishment or undertaking carrying on any activity, being an 
industry, is severable from the other unit or units of such establishment or undertaking, such unit 
shall be deemed to be a separate industrial establ ishment or undertaking;  
(b) if the predominant activity or each of the predominant activities carried on in such 
establishment or undertaking or any unit thereof is an industry and the other activity or each of 
the other activities carried on in such establishment or undertaking or unit thereof is not severable 
from and is, for the purpose of carrying on, or aiding the carrying on of, such predominant 
activity or acti vities, the entire establishment or undertaking or, as the case may be, unit thereof 
shall be deemed to be an industrial  establishment or undertaking;]  
3[(kk) “insurance company ” means an insurance company as defined in section 2 of the Insurance 
Act, 1938  (4 of 1938), having branches or other establish ments in more than one State;]  
                                                           
1. Clause ( j) shall stand substituted as follows when clause ( c) of section 2 of the Industrial  Disputes
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 8]
se ( j) shall stand substituted as follows when clause ( c) of section 2 of the Industrial  Disputes (Amendment) Act, 1982  
(46 of 1982) will come into force: — 
(j) “industry” means any systematic activity carried on by co -operation between an employer a nd his workmen 
(whether such workmen are employed by such employer directly or by or through any agency, including a contractor) for 
the production, supply or distribution of goods or services with a view to satisfy human wants or wishes (not being wants o r 
wishes which are merely spiritual or religious in nature), whether or not, — 
(i) any capital has been invested for the purpose of carrying on such activity; or  
(ii) such activity is carried on with a motive to make any gain or profit,  
and includes — 
(a) any activity of the Dock Labour Board established under section 5A of the Dock Workers (Regulation of 
Employment) Act, 1948 (9 of 1948);  
(b) any activity relating to the promotion of sales or business or both carried on by an establishment, but does 
not include — 
(1) any agricultural operation except where such agricultural operation is carried on in an integrated manner with any 
other activity (being any such activity as is referred to in the foregoing provisions of this clause) and such other activity  is 
the predominant one.  
Explanation :—For the purposes of this sub -clause, “agricultural operation” does not include any activity carried on in a 
plantation as defined in clause ( f) of section 2 of the Plantations Labour Act, 1951 (69 of 1951); or  
(2) hospita ls or dispensaries; or  
(3) educational, scientific, research or training institutions; or  
(4) institutions owned or managed by organisations wholly or substantially engaged in any charitable, social or 
philanthropic service; or  
(5) khadi or village industr ies; or  
(6) any activity of the Government relatable to the sovereign functions of the Government including all the activities 
carried on by the departments of the Centr
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 8]
functions of the Government including all the activities 
carried on by the departments of the Central Government dealing with defence research, atomic energy and space; or  
(7) any domest ic service; or  
(8) any activity, being a profession practised by an individual or body of individuals, if the number of persons 
employed by the individual or body of individuals in relation to such profession is less than ten; or  
(9) any activity, being an  activity carried on by a co -operative society or a club or any other like body of individuals, if 
the number of persons employed by the co -operative society, club or other like body of individuals in relation to such 
activity is less than ten;  
2. Ins. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
3. Ins. by Act 54 of 1949, s. 3.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 9]
9 
 1[(kka) “khadi ” has the meaning assigned to it in clause ( d) of section 2 of the Khadi and Village 
Industries Comm ission Act, 1956 (61 of 1956);]  
2[3[(kkb)] “Labour Court ” means  a Labour Cour t constituted under section 7 ;] 
4[(kkk) “lay-off” (with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions) means the failure, 
refusal or inability of an employer on account of shortage of coal, power or raw materials or the 
accumulation of stocks or the break -down of machinery 5[or natural calamity or f or any other 
connected reason] to give employment to a workman whose name is borne on the muster rolls of his 
industrial establishment a nd who has not been retrenched.  
Explanation .—Every workman whose name is borne on the muster rolls of the industrial 
establishment and who presents himself for work at the establishment at the time appointed for the 
purpose during normal working hours on any day and is not given employment by the employer 
within two hours of his so presenting himself shall be deemed to have  been laid -off for that day 
within the meaning of this clause:  
Provided that if the workman, instead of being given employment at the commencement of any 
shift for any day is asked to present himself for the purpose during the second half of the shift for the 
day and is given employment then, he sha ll be deemed to have been laid -off only for one -half of that 
day: 
Provided further that if he is not given any such employment even after so presenting himself, he 
shall not be deemed to have been laid -off for th e second half of the shift for the day and shall be 
entitled to full basic wages and dearness allowance for that part of the day ;] 
(l) “lock-out” means the  6[temporary closing of a place of employment] , or the suspension of 
work, or the refusal by an employer to continue to employ any number of persons employed by him;  
7[(la) “major port ” means a major port as defined in clause ( 8) of section 3 of the India n Ports 
Act, 19
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 9]
major port ” means a major port as defined in clause ( 8) of section 3 of the India n Ports 
Act, 1908 (15 of 1908);  
(lb) “mine ” mean s a mine as defined in clause ( j) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the  Mines Act, 
1952 (35 of 1952)];  
2[(ll) “National Tribunal ” means a National Industrial Tribunal constituted under section 7B;]  
8[(lll) “office bearer ”, in relation to a trade union, includes any member of the executive thereof, 
but does not include an auditor;]  
(m) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(n) “public utility service ” means — 
(i) any railway service 7[or any transport service for the carriage of passe ngers or goods by 
air]; 
 8[(ia) any service in, or in connection with the worki ng of, any major port 9[or dock  or any 
industrial establishment or unit engaged in essential defence services] ;] 
(ii) any section of an industrial establishment, on the working of which the safety of the 
establishment or the wo rkmen employed therein depends;  
(iii) any postal, telegraph or telephone service;  
(iv) any industry which supplies power , light or water to the public;  
(v) any system of pu blic conservancy or sanitation;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
2. Ins. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 3 (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
3. Clause ( kka) re-lettered as clause ( kkb) by Act 46 of 1982, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21-8-1984).  
4. Ins. by Act 43 of 1953, s. 2 (w.e.f. 24 -10-1953).  
5. Subs. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 2, for “or for any other reason” (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
6. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
7. Ins. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 2 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
8. Ins. by Act 45 of 1971, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15 -12-1971).  
9. Subs. by Act 25 of 2021, s. 17, for “or dock” (w.e.f. 30 -6-2021).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 10]
10 
 (vi) any industry specified in t he 1[First Schedule] which the appropriate Government may, if 
satisfied that public emergency or public interest so requires, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, declare to be a public utility service for the purposes of this Act, for such period as may 
be specified in the notification:  
Provided that the period so specified shall not, in the first instance, exceed six months but 
may, by a like noti fication, be extended from time to time, by any period not exceeding six 
months, at any one time if in the opinion of the appropriate Government public emergency or 
public in terest requires such extension;  
(o) “railway company ” means a railway company as defined in section 3 of the Indian Railways 
Act, 1890 (9  of 1890);  
2[(oo) “retrenchment ” means the termination by the employer of the service of a workman for any 
reason whatsoever, otherwise than as a punishment inflicted by way of disciplinary  action, but does 
not include — 
(a) voluntary retirement of the wor kman; or  
(b) retirement of the workman on reaching the age of superannuation if the contract of 
employment between the employer and the workman concerned contains a  stipulation in that 
behalf; or  
3[(bb) termination of the service of the workman as a result of the non -renewal of the contract 
of employment between the employer and the workman concerned on its expiry or of such 
contract being terminated under a stipulation in tha t behalf contained therein; or]  
(c) termination of the service of a workman on the g round of co ntinued ill -health;]  
4[(p) “settlement ” means a settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceeding and 
includes a written agreement between the employer and workmen arrived at otherwise than in the 
course of conciliation proceeding where such a greement has been signed by the parties thereto in such 
manner as may be prescribed and a copy thereof has been sent to 5[an officer authorised in this behalf 
by
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 10]
 as may be prescribed and a copy thereof has been sent to 5[an officer authorised in this behalf 
by] the appropriate Government  and the conciliation officer;]  
(q) “strike ” means a cessation of w ork by a body of persons employed in any industry ac ting in 
combination or a concern ed refusal, or a refusal under a common understanding, of any number of 
persons who are or have been so employed to continue t o work or to accept employment;  
6[(qq) “trade union ” means a trade union registered under the Trade Unions Act, 1926  
(16 of 1926);]  
7[(r) “Tribunal ” means an Industrial Tribunal constituted under section 7A and includes an 
Industrial Tribunal constituted before the 10th day of March, 1957, unde r this  Act;]  
8[(ra) “unfair labour practice ” means any of the practices s pecified in the Fifth Schedule;  
(rb) “village industries ” has the meaning assigned to it in clause ( h) of section 2 of the Khadi and 
Village Industries Commission Act, 1956 (61 of 19 56);]  
9[(rr) “wages ” means all remuneration capable of being expressed in terms of money, which 
would, if the terms of employment, expressed or implied, were fulfilled, be payable to a workman in 
respect of his employment or of work done in such employme nt, and i ncludes — 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 2 for “Schedule” (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
2. Ins. by Act 43 of 1953, s. 2 (w.e.f. 24 -10-1953).  
3. Ins. by Act 49 of 1984, s. 2 (w.e.f. 18 -8-1984).  
4. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 3, for clause ( p) (w.e.f. 7 -10-1956).  
5. Ins. by Act 35 of 1965, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1965).  
6. Ins. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
7. Subs. by Act 18 of 1957, s. 2, for clause ( r) (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
8. Ins. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
9. Ins. by Act 43 of 1953, s. 2 (w.e.f. 24 -10-1953).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 11]
11 
 (i) such allowances (including dearness allowance) as the workman is for the time being 
entitled to;  
(ii) the value of any house accommodation, or of supply of light, water, medical attendance or 
other amenity or of any service or of any concessio nal supply of  foodgrains or other articles;  
(iii) any travelling concession;  
1[(iv) any commission payable on the promotion  of sales or business or both;]  
but does not include — 
(a) any bonus;  
(b) any contribution paid or payable by the employer to any pension fund or provident fund 
or for the benefit of the workman under any l aw for the time being in force;  
(c) any gratuity payable on t he termination of his service;]  
2[(s) “workman ” means any person (including an apprentice) employed in any industry to do any 
manual, unskilled, skilled, technical, operational, clerical or supervisory work for hire or reward, 
whether the terms of employment be express or implied, and for the purposes of any proceeding 
under this Act in relation to an industrial dispute, includes any such person who has been dismissed, 
discharged or retrenched in connection with, or as a consequence of, that disp ute, or whose dismissal, 
discha rge or retrenchment has led  to that dispute, but doe s not include any such person — 
(i) who is subject to the Air Force Act, 1950 (45 of 1950), or the Army Act, 1950  
(46 of 1950), or the Navy Act, 1957 (62 of 1957); or  
(ii) who is employed in the police service or as an officer or o ther employee of a prison; or  
(iii) who is employed mainly in a managerial  or administrative capacity; or  
(iv) who, being employed in a supervisory capacity, draws wages exceeding 3[ten thousand 
rupees ] per mensem or exercises, either by the nature of the duties attached to the office or by 
reason of the powers vested in him, functions  mainly of a managerial nature. ] 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Kerala   
Amendment of section 2 .—In section 2 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (Central Act 14 of 

<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 11]
a   
Amendment of section 2 .—In section 2 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (Central Act 14 of 
1947), in clause (s), for  the words “clerical or supervisory work” the words “clerical, supervisory 
work or any work for the promotion of sales” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Kerala Act 12 of 2017, s. 2]  
Assam  
Amendment of section 2 .—In the principal Act, in section 2, in clause (s) , in between the words 
“or supervisory work” and “for hire or reward”, the words ‘or any work for the promotion of sales”, 
shall be inserted.  
[Vide Assam Act 22 of 200 7, s. 2]  
Orissa  
Amendment of section 2. —In clause(s) of section 2 of the Industrial Disputes Act 1947 (14 of 
1947), for the words and comma “operational, clerical or supervisory work”, the words and commas 
“sales promotion, operational, clerical or supervisory work or any work for promotion of sales” shall be 
substituted.  
[Vide Orissa  Act 5 of 2014 , s. 2]  
4[2A. Dismissal, etc., of an individual workman to be deeme d to be an industrial dispute .—5[(1)] 
Where any employer discharges, dismisses, retrenches, or otherwise terminates the services of an 
individual workman, any dispute or difference between that workman and his employer connected with, 
or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or termination shall be deemed to be an 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for clause ( s) (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
3. Subs. by Act 24 of 2010, s. 2, for “one thousand six hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
4. Ins. by Act 35 of 1965, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1965).  
5. Section 2A numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 24 of 2010, s. 3 (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 12]
12 
 industrial  dispute notwithstanding that no other workman nor any union of work men is a party to the 
dispute.]  
1[(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in section l0, any such workman as is specified in                     
sub-section ( 1) may, make an application direct to the Labour Court or Tribunal for adjudication of the 
dispute referred to therein after the expiry of forty -five days from the date he has made the application to 
the Conciliation Officer of the appro priate Government for conciliation of the dispute, and in receipt of 
such application the Labour Court or Tribunal shall have powers and jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the 
dispute, as if it were a dispute referred to it by the appropriate Government in ac cordance with the 
provisions of this Act and all the provisions of this Act shall apply in relation to such adjudication as they 
apply in relation to an industrial dispute referred to it by the appropriate Government.  
(3) The application referred to in sub -section ( 2) shall be made to the Labour Court or Tribunal before 
the expiry of three years from the date of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise termination of 
service as specified in sub -section ( 1).] 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Andhra  Pradesh  
In Section 2A, After the existing sub -section (2), t he following sub -section shall be added, namely: — 
“(3) Notwithstanding anything in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), no such dispute or difference between 
that workman and his employer connected with or arising out of, such  discharge, dismissal, 
retrenchment or termination shall be deemed to be an industrial dispute if such dispute is not raised in 
conciliation proceeding within a period of three years from the date of such discharge, dismissal, 
retrenchment or termination:  
Provided that the Labour Court or the Conciliation Officer, as the case may be, may consider to 
extend the said period of three years when the applicant workman satisfies the Court or Conciliation 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 12]
xtend the said period of three years when the applicant workman satisfies the Court or Conciliation 
Officer that he had sufficient cause for not raising the di spute within the period of three years. ”. 
[Vide Andhra Pradesh 12 of 2015, s . 2] 
Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh  
Section 2A .—In sub -section (3), for "three years", substitute "one year".  
[Vide Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Second 
Order, 2020, Notification No. S.O. 3465(E), dated (5 -10-2020) and Vide Union Territory of Ladakh 
Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, Notification No. S.O. 3774(E), dated           
(23-10-2020).  
Meghalaya  
Amendment of section 2 (s) of Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (Central Act No. 14 of 1947). —For 
the existing clause (s) of section 2 of the Industrial Disputes act, 1947 (Central Act No. 14 of 1947) the 
following shall be substituted, namely: -- 
“(S) “Workmen” means any person (including an apprentice) employed  in any industry to do any 
manual skilled or  unskilled, technical, sales promotion, operational, clerical or supervisory work or 
any work for the promotion of sales for hire or r eward, whether the terms of employment be 
expressed or implied, and for the purposes of any proceeding under this act in relation to an industrial 
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 24 of 2010, s. 3 (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 13]
13 
 dispute, includes in connection with, or as a consequence of, that dispute, or whose dismissal, 
discharge, or  retrenchment has led to that dispute, but does not include any such person: — 
(i) who is subject to the Air Force Act, 1950 (45 of 1950), or the Army Act 1950 (46 of 1950), or 
the Navy Act, 1957 (62 of 1957); or  
(ii) Who is employed in the police service o r as an Officer or other employee of a person; or  
(iii) who is employed mainly in a managerial or administrative capacity; or  
(iv) Who being employed in a supervisory capacity, draws wages exceeding one thousand six 
hundred rupees per mensem  or exercises,  either by the nature of the duties attached to the office or 
by reason of the powers vested in him, functions mainly or a managerial nature.”  
[Vide Meghalaya Act 5 of 2009, s. 2]  
Rajasthan  
Amendment of section 2, Central Act No. 14 of   1947. - In the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 
(Central Act No. 14 of 1947), in its application to the State of Rajasthan, hereinafter referred to as the 
principal Act, in section 2, - 
(a) the existing sub -clause (iii) of clause (g) shall be deleted; and  
(b) in clause (s), the existing expression “by an employer or by a contractor in relation to the 
execution of his contract with such employer” shall be deleted.  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 21 of 2014, s. 2]  
Amendment of section 2A, Central Act No. 14 of 1947. - In section 2A of the principal Act, after 
the existing sub -section (3), the following new sub -section shall be added, namely: - 
“(4) Notwithstanding anything in sub -sections (1), (2) and (3), no such dispute or difference 
between that workman and his emplo yer connected with, or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, 
retrenchment or termination shall be deemed to be an industrial dispute if such dispute is not raised in 
conciliation proceeding within a period of three years from the date of such discharg e, dismissal, 
retrenchment or termination:  
Provided that an authority, a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 13]
he date of such discharg e, dismissal, 
retrenchment or termination:  
Provided that an authority, as may be specified by the State Government, may consider to extend 
the said period of three years when the applicant workman satisfies the authority that he had sufficient 
cause for no t raising the dispute within the period of three years.”.  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 21 of 2014, s. 3]  
Rajasthan  
Amendment of section 2, Central Act XIV of 1947 .-In section 2 of the principal Act ;-- 
(i) after clause (aa) the following new clauses shall be inserted, namely - 
" (aaa) "arbitration proceeding" means - 
(i) any proceeding under Chapter III -A of this Act before an arbitrator, or  
(ii) any proceeding before an Industrial Tribunal in arbitration;  
(aaaa) "arbitrator" means an arbitrator to whom a dispute is referred for arbitration 
under the provisions of Chapter III -A of this Act and includes an umpire;"  
(ii) in clause (b), for the words, figures and letter "under section 10A", the words, 
figures and letter "under Chapter III -A" shall be substitut ed; 
(iii) after clause (eee) the following new clause shall be inserted, namely - 
"(eeee) "member" means a person who is an ordinary member of a Union 
and who has paid a subscription of not less than four annas per month:  
Provided that no person shall at an y time be deemed to be a member if his 
subscription is in arrears for a period of three months or more next preceding such time;";  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 14]
14 
 (iv) in clause (g), after sub -clause (ii), the following sub -clause shall be inserted, namely - 
" (iii) where the owner of any  industry in the course of or for the purpose of conducting 
the industry contracts with any person for the execution by or under the contractor of the 
whole or any part of any work which is ordinarily a part of the industry, the owner of the 
industry;";  
(v) after clause (oo) the following new clauses shall be inserted, namely - 
"(ooo) "Registrar" means the person for the time being appointed to be the 
Registrar of Unions under this Act and includes in respect of such powers and duties 
of the Registrar as may  be conferred and imposed on him, an Assistant Registrar of 
Unions;  
(oooo) "Representative Union" means a Union for the time being registered as a 
Representative Union under this Act;";  
(vi) after clause (rr), the following new clause shall be inserted, na mely - 
"(rrr) "Union" means a Trade Union of employees registered under the Indian 
Trade Unions Act, 1926 (Central Act XVI of 1926);"; and  
(vii) in clause (s), after the words "employed in any industry", the words "by an employer 
or by a contractor in relat ion to the execution of his contract with such employer" shall be 
inserted.  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 34 of 1958, s. 3]  
CHAPTER II  
AUTHORITIES UNDER THIS ACT 
3. Works Committee .—(1) In the case of any industrial establishment in which one hundred or more 
workmen  are employed or have been employed on any day in the preceding twelve months, the 
appropriate Government may by general or special order require the employer to constitute in the 
prescribed manner a Works Committee consisting of representatives of employe rs and workmen engaged 
in the establishment so however that the number of representatives of workmen on the Committee shall 
not be less than t he number of representatives of the employer. The representatives of the workmen shall 
be chosen in the prescribed  manner from among the workmen
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 14]
The representatives of the workmen shall 
be chosen in the prescribed  manner from among the workmen engaged in the establishment and in 
consultation with their trade union, if any, registered under the Indian Trade  Unions Act, 1926  
(16 of 1926).  
(2) It shall be the duty of the Works Committee to promote measures for securi ng and preserving 
amity and good relations between the employer and workmen and, to that end, to comment upon matters 
of their common interest or concern and endeavour to compose any material difference of opin ion in 
respect of such matters.  
 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Manipur  
In section 3 of the Disturbed Areas (Special Courts) Act, 1976, (hereinafter referred to as the 
Principal Act): -- 
 (a) in sub -section (1), between the words, “communities”, and “it may”, the following words, 
brackets and figures shall be inserted, namely — 
“or by reason of extension and indiscriminate armed violence by members of an association 
declared as unlawful association under the Unla wful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967”;  
(b)  in sub -section (2) — 
(i) In clause (a) of the proviso, t he word “and” appearing at the end shall be deleted, and the 
words, letters and brackets, “save in respect of the cases referred to in clause (aa)”, shall be 
inserted in the beginning, and  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 15]
15 
 (ii) below clause (a) of the pr oviso so amended, the following cla use shall be added, 
namely: -- 
“(aa) in respect of extensive and indiscriminate armed violence by members of any 
association declared as unlawful association under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) 
Act, 1967, no period commencing from a date earlier than  the date of publication of the 
notification, if any, under section 3 of the Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act, 1958 (28 of 
1958) in respect of that area or earlier than two years before the date of publication of the 
notification under sub -section (1), sh all be specified therein; and “.  
[Vide Manipur Act 11 of 1982, s. 2]  
Rajasthan  
Insertion of new section 3A, in Central Act XIV of 1947. -After section 3 of the principal Act, the 
following new section shall be inserted, namely - 
"3A. Registrar and Assistant Registrar .-(1) The State Government shall, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint a person to be the Registrar of Unions for the purpose of this Act for the 
whole of the State.  
(2) The State Government may, by similar notification, appoint a pers on to be the Assistant 
Registrar of Unions for any local area and may, by general or special order, confer on such person all 
or any of the powers of the Registrar of Unions under this Act."  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 34 of 1958, s. 4]  
Insertion of new Chapter II -B in Central Act XIV of 1947. - After section 9B of the principal Act, 
the following new Chapter shall be inserted, namely: - 
"CHAPTER II -B 
Registration of Unions.  
9C. Maintenance of register .-It shall be the duty of the Registrar to maintain in such form a s may be 
prescribed a register of Unions registered by him under the provisions of this Act.  
9D. Application for Registration .-Any Union which has for the whole of the period of three months 
next preceding the date of its so applying under this section a m embership of not less than fifteen per cent. 
of the total number of workmen employed
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 15]
is section a m embership of not less than fifteen per cent. 
of the total number of workmen employed in unit of an industry may apply in the prescribed form to the 
Registrar for registration as a Representative Union.  
9E. Registration of Union .-On receipt of an application from a Union for registration under section 
9D and on payment of the fee prescribed, the Registrar shall, if, after holding such inquiry as he deems fit, 
he comes to the conclusion that the conditions requisite for registrati on specified in the said section are 
satisfied and that the Union is not otherwise disqualified for registration, enter the name of the Union in 
the appropriate register maintained under section 9C and issue a certificate of registration in such form as 
may be prescribed:  
Provided that - 
(i) where two or more Unions fulfilling the conditions necessary for registration under this 
Act apply for registration in respect of the same unit of an industry, the Union having the largest 
membership of employees employe d in the unit of the industry shall be registered; and  
(ii) the Registrar shall not register any Union if he is satisfied that the application for its 
registration is not made bona fide in the interest of the workmen but is made in the interest of the 
empl oyers t o the prejudice of the interest of the workmen.  
9F. Cancellation of registration .-The Registrar shall cancel the registration of a Union - 
(a) if, after holding such inquiry, if any, as he deems fit he is satisfied - 
(i) that it was registered under mistake, misrepresentation or fraud; or  
(ii) that the membership of the Union has for a continuous period of three months 
fallen below the minimum required under section 9D for its registration:  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 16]
16 
 Provided that where a strike or a closure not being an illegal strike or closure 
under this Act in a unit of industry involving more than one -third of the workmen in the 
unit of the industry has extended to a period exceeding fourteen days in any calendar 
month, such month shall be excluded in computing the sa id period of three months:  
Provided further that the registration of a Union shall not be cancelled under the 
provisions of this sub -clause unless its membership at the time of the cancellation is less 
than such minimum; or  
(iii) that the registered Union is being conducted not bona fide in the interests of 
workmen but in the interests of employers to the prejudice of the interests of workmen; or  
(iv) that it has instigated, aided or assisted the commencement or continuance of 
an illegal strike;  
(b) if its registration under the Indian Trade Unions Act, 1926 (Central Act XVI of 1926) 
is cancelled.  
9G. Registration of another Union in place of existing registered Union .-(1) If at any time any 
Union (hereinafter in this section referred to as "applicant Union" ) makes an application to the Registrar 
for being registered in place of the Union (hereinafter in this section referred to as "representative Union") 
for a unit of an industry on the ground that it has a larger membership of workmen employed in such unit 
of the industry, the Registrar shall call upon the representative Union by a notice in writing to show cause 
within one month of the receipt of such notice why the applicant Union should not be registered in its 
place. An application made under this sub -section shall be accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Registrar shall forward to the Labour Commissioner of the State Government a copy of the 
said application and notice.  
(3) If, on the expiry of the period of notice under sub -section (1) and after holding such inquiry as he 
deems fit, the Registrar comes to the conclusion that the applicant Union c
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 16]
ding such inquiry as he 
deems fit, the Registrar comes to the conclusion that the applicant Union complies with the conditions 
necessary for registration specified in section 9D and that its membership was during the whole of the 
period of thr ee months immediately preceding the date of the application under this section larger than the 
membership of the representative Union, he shall, subject to the provisions of section 9D, register the 
applicant Union in place of the representative Union.  
(4) Every application made under this section shall be published in the prescribed manner not less 
than fourteen days before the expiry of the period of notice under sub -section (1).  
9H. Application for re -registration .-(1) Any Union the registration of which  has been cancelled on 
the ground that it was registered under a mistake or on the ground specified in sub -clause (ii) of clause (a) 
of section 9F may, at any time after three months from the date of such cancellation and on payment of 
such fees as may be prescribed, apply for re -registration. The provisions of sections 9D and 9E shall 
apply in respect of such application.  
(2) A Union the registration of which has been cancelled on any other ground shall, not, save with the 
permission of the State Governmen t, be entitled to apply for re -registration.  
9I. Appeal to Industrial Tribunal from order of Registrar .-(1) Any party to a proceeding before, 
the Registrar may, within thirty days from the date of an order passed by the Registrar under this Chapter, 
appeal  against such order to the Industrial Tribunal:  
Provided that the Industrial Tribunal may, for sufficient reason, admit any appeal made after the 
expiry of such period.  
(2) The Industrial Tribunal may admit an appeal under sub -section (1) if on a perusal of the 
memorandum of appeal and the decision appealed against it finds that the decision is contrary to law or 
otherwise erroneous.  
(3) The Industrial Tribunal in appeal, may confi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 16]
ision is contrary to law or 
otherwise erroneous.  
(3) The Industrial Tribunal in appeal, may confirm, modify or rescind any order passed by the 
Registrar and may pass such co nsequential orders as it may deem fit. A copy of the orders passed by the 
Industrial Tribunal, shall be sent to the Registrar.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 17]
17 
 9J. Publication of orders .-Every order passed under section 9E or section 9F or section 9G and 
every order passed in appeal under  section 9I shall be published in the prescribed manner."  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 34 of 1958, s. 5]  
4. Conciliation officers .—(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint 
such number of persons as it thinks fit, to be conciliation officers, charged with the duty of mediating in and 
promoting the set tlement of industrial disputes.  
(2) A conciliation officer may be appointed for a specified area or for specified industries in a specified area or 
for one or more specified industries and either permanently or for a limited period.  
5. Board of Conciliation .—(1) The appropriate Government may as occasion arises by notification in the 
Official Gazette constitute a Board of Conciliation for promoting the settlement of an industr ial disp ute. 
(2) A Board shall consist of a chairman and two or four other members, as the app ropriate Government thinks 
fit. 
(3) The chairman shall be an independent person and the other members shall be persons appointed in equal 
numbers to represent the  parties to the dispute and any person appointed to represent a party shall be appointed on 
the recommendation of that party:  
Provided that, if any party fails to make a recommendation as aforesaid within the prescribed time, the 
appropriate Government sha ll appoint such persons as it thin ks fit to represent that party.  
(4) A Board, having the prescribed quorum, may act notwithstanding the absence of the chairman or any of its 
member s or any vacancy in its number:  
Provided that if the appropriate Government  notifies the Board that the services of the chairman or of any other 
member have ceased to be available, the Board shall not act until a new chairman or member, as the c ase may be, 
has been appointed.  
6. Courts of Inquiry .—(1) The appropriate Government m ay as occasion arises by notif
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 17]
 appointed.  
6. Courts of Inquiry .—(1) The appropriate Government m ay as occasion arises by notification in the Official 
Gazette constitute a Court of Inquiry for inquiring into any matter appearing to be connected with or relevan t to an 
industrial dispute.  
(2) A Court may consist of one independent person or of such numb er of independent persons as the appropriate 
Government may think fit and where a Court consists of two or more members, one of them shal l be appointed as 
the chairman.  
(3) A Court, having the prescribed quorum, may act notwithstanding the absence of the c hairman or any of its 
member s or any vacancy in its number:  
Provided that, if the appropriate Government notifies the Court that the services of the chairman have ceased to 
be available, the Court shall not act until a new chairman has b een appointed.  
1[7. Labour Courts .—(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute 
one or more Labour Courts for the adjudication of industrial disputes relating to any matter specified in the Second 
Schedule and for performing such ot her functions as may be a ssigned to them under this Act.  
(2) A Labour Court shall consist of one person only to be appointed by the appropriate Government.  
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the presiding of ficer of a Labour Court, unle ss— 
2[(a) he is, or has be en, a Judge of a High Court; or  
(b) he has, for a period of not less than three years, been a District Judge or an Additional District Judge; or  
3*    *    *   *    *  
4[(d)] he has held any judicial office in India fo r not less than seven years; or  
4[(e)] he has been the presiding officer of a Labour Court constituted under any Provincial Act or State Ac t 
for not less than five years.  
5[(f) he is or has been a Deputy Chief Labour Commissioner (Central) or Joint Commissioner of th e State 
Labour Department, having a degree in law and at least seven years' experience in th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 17]
 of th e State 
Labour Department, having a degree in law and at least seven years' experience in the labour department 
including three years of experience as Conciliation Officer:  
Provided that no such Deputy Chief Labour Commissioner or Joint Labour Commissioner  shall be appointed 
unless he resigns from the service ofthe Central Government or State Government, as the case may be, before being 
appointed as the presiding officer; or  
(g) he is an officer of Indian Legal Service in Grade Ili with three years' experie nce in the grade.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 4, for section 7 (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).   
2. Ins. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 3 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
3. Clause ( c) omitted by Act 46 of 1982, s. 3 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
4. Clauses ( a) and ( b) re-lettered as ( d) and ( e) respectively by Act 36 of 1964, s. 3 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
5. Ins. by Act 24 of 2010, s. 4 (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 18]
18 
 7A. Tribunals .—(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute one or more Industrial Tribunals for the adjudication of industrial disputes relating to any 
matter, whether specified in the Second S chedule or the Third Schedule 1[and for performing such other 
functions as may be as signed to them under this Act].  
2[(1A) The Industrial Tribunal constituted by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) shall also 
exercise, on and from the commencement  of Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017, the 
jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on the Tribunal referred to in section 7D of the Employees' 
Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 (19 of 1952).]  
(2) A Tribunal shall consist of one person only to be appointed  by the appropriate Government.  
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the presiding  officer of a Tribunal unless — 
(a) he is, or has be en, a Judge of a High Court; or  
3[(aa) he has, for a period of not less than three years, been a District Judge o r an Additional 
District Judge; 4***]  
5[(b) he is or has been a Deputy Chief Labour Commissioner (Central) or Joint Commissioner of the 
State Labour Department,,  having a degree in law and at least seven years' experience in the labour 
department including three years of experience as Conciliation Officer:  
Provided that no such Deputy Chief Labour Commissioner or Joint Labour Commissioner shall 
be appointed unless  he resigns from the service of the Central Government or State Government, as the 
case may be, before being appointed as the presiding officer; or  
(c) he is an officer of Indian Legal Service in Grade III with three years' experience in the grade. ] 
6*    *    *   *    * 
(4) The appropriate Government may, if it so thinks fit, appoint two persons as assessors to advise the 
Tribun al in the proceeding before it.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 7A .—In sub -se
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 18]
al in the proceeding before it.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 7A .—In sub -section ( 3) of section 7A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (Central Act 
14 of 1947) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after clause ( a), the following cla use shall be inserted, 
namely: — 
“(aa) he is, or has been a District Judge, or ” 
[Vide Karnataka Act 6 of 1963, s. 2]  
Amendment of section 7A .—In clause ( aa) of sub -section ( 3) of section 7A of the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947 (Central Act 14 of 1947), as inserted by the Industrial Disputes (Karnataka 
Amendment) Act, 1962 (Karnataka Act 6 of 1963), after the words “distr ict Judge” the words “for a 
period of not less than three years”, shall be inserted.  
[Vide Karnataka Act 35 of 1963, s. 2]  
Kerala  
Amendment of Section 7A .—In sub -section ( 3) of section 7A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 
(Central Act 14 of 1947) for clause ( a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely: -- 
“(a) he is, or has been, a judicial officer not below the rank of a District Judge, or is qualified for 
appointment as a Judge of a High Court; or” . 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 4 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
2. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 158 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
3. Ins. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 4 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
4. The word “or” omitted by Act 46 of 1982, s. 4 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
5. Ins. by Act 24 of 2010, s. 5 (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
6. Clause ( b) omitted by  Act 46 of 1982 , s. 4  (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 19]
19 
 [Vide Kerala Act 28 of 1961, s. 2]  
Orissa  
Amendment of section 7A (Act 14 of 1947) .—In sub -section (3) of section 7 -A of the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), after clause ( a), the following new clause shall be inserted, namely: - 
“(aa) he has been a member of the Orissa Superior Judicia l Service for a period of not less than seven 
years.”  
[Vide Orissa Act 6 of 1960, s. 2]  
7B. National Tribunals .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute one or more National Industrial Tribunals for the adjudication of industrial disputes which, in 
the opinion of the Central Government, involve questions of national importance or are of such a nature 
that industrial establishments situated in more than one State are likely to be interested in,  or affected  by, 
such disputes.  
(2) A National Tribunal shall consist of one person only to be appointed by the Central Government.  
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the presiding o fficer of a National Tribunal 
1[unless he is, or has been, a Judge  of a High Court].  
(4) The Central Government may, if it so thinks fit, appoint two persons as assessors to advise the 
National Tribunal in the proceeding before it.  
7C. Disqualifications for the presiding officers of Labour Courts, Tr ibunals and National  
Tribunals. —No person shall be appointed to, or continue in, the office of the presiding officer of a 
Labour Court, Trib unal or National Tribunal, if — 
(a) he i s not an independent person; or  
(b) he has attaine d the age of sixty -five years.]  
2[7D. Qualifications, terms and conditions of service of Presiding Officer .—Notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Act, the qualifications, appointment, term of office, salaries and allowances, 
resignation and removal and other terms and conditions of s ervice of the Presiding Officer of the 
Industrial Tribunal appointed by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) of section 7
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 19]
of the 
Industrial Tribunal appointed by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) of section 7A, shall, after 
the commencement of 3[the Tribunal s Reforms Act, 2021, be governed by the provisions of Chapter II of 
the said Act]: 
Provided that the Presiding Officer appointed before the commencement of Part XIV of Chapter 
VI of the Finance Act, 2017, shall continue to be governed by the provisions of this Act, and the rules 
made thereunder as if the provisions of section 184 of the Finance Act,  2017 had not come into force.]  
4[8. Filling of vacancies .—If, for any reason a vacancy (other than a temporary absence) occurs in 
the office of the presiding officer of a Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal or in the office of t he 
chairman or any other member of a Board or Court, then, in the case of a National Tribunal, the Central 
Government and in any other case, the appropriate Government, shall appoint another person in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill the vacancy, and the proceeding may be continued 
before the Labour Court, Tribunal, National Tribunal, Board or Court, as the case may be, from the stage 
at which the vacancy is filled.  
9. Finality of or ders constituting Boards, etc .—(1) No order of the appropriate Government or of 
the Central Government appointing any person as the chairman or any other member of a Board or Court 
or as the presiding officer of a Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal shall be called in question in 
any manner; and no act or proceeding before any Board or Court shall be called in question in any manner 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 46 of 1982 , s. 5, for certain words (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
2. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 158 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
3. Subs. by Act 33 of 2021, s. 8, for “Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017 (7 of 2017), be governed by the provis ions 
of section 184 of that Act” (w.e.f.  4-4-2021).  
4. Subs. by Ac
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 19]
7), be governed by the provis ions 
of section 184 of that Act” (w.e.f.  4-4-2021).  
4. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 5, for sections 8 and 9 (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 20]
20 
 on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the consti tution of, such Board or 
Court.  
(2) No settlement arrived at in the cou rse of a conciliation proceeding shall be invalid by reason only 
of the fact that such settlement was arrived at after the expiry of the period referred to in sub -section ( 6) 
of section 12 or sub -section ( 5) of section 13, as the case may be.  
(3) Where the  report of any settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceeding before a 
Board is signed by the chairman and all the other members of the Board, no such settlement shall be 
invalid by reason only of the casual or unforeseen absence of any of the members (including the 
chairman) of the Board during any stage of  the proceeding.]  
1[CHAPTER IIA 
NOTICE OF CHANGE  
9A. Notice of change .—No employer, who proposes to effect any change in the conditions of service 
applicable to any workman in respect of any matter specified in the Fourth Schedu le, shall effect such 
change, — 
(a) without giving to the workmen likely to be affected by such change a notice in the prescribed 
manner of the nature of the cha nge proposed to be effected; or  
(b) within twenty -one d ays of giving such notice:  
Provided that no notice shall be required for effecting any suc h change — 
(a) where the change is effected in pursuance of any 2[settlement or award]; or  
(b) where the workmen likely to be affected by the change are persons to who m the Fundamental 
and Supplementary Rules, Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, Civil Services 
(Temporary Service) Rules, Revised Leave Rules, Civil Service Regulations, Civilians in Defence 
Services (Classification, Control and Appea l) Rules or the Indian Railway Establishment Code or any 
other rules or regulations that may be notified in this behalf by the appropriate Government in the 
Official Gazette, apply.  
9B. Power of Government to exempt .—Where the appropriate Government is of 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 20]
ficial Gazette, apply.  
9B. Power of Government to exempt .—Where the appropriate Government is of  opinion that the 
application of the provisions of section 9A to any class of industrial establishments or to any class of 
workmen employed in any industrial establishment affect the employers in relation thereto so 
prejudicially that such application may cause serious repercussion on the industry concerned and that 
public interest so requires, the appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct 
that the provisions of the said section shall not apply or shall apply, subject to su ch conditions as may be 
specified in the notification, to that class of industrial establishments or to that class of workmen 
employed in  any industrial establishment.]  
3[CHAPTER IIB  
GRIEVANCE  REDRESSAL  MACHINERY  
9C. Setting up of Grievance Redressal Machinery. —(1) Every industrial establishment 
employing twenty or more workmen shall have one or more Grievance Redressal Committee for the 
resolution of disputes arising out of individual grievances.  
(2) The Grievance Redressal Committee shall consist of equal number of members from the 
employer and the workmen.  
(3) The chairperson of the Grievance Redressal Committee shall be selected from the employer and 
from among the workmen alternatively on rotation basis every year.  
(4) The total number of members o f the Grievance Redressal Committee shall not exceed more than 
six: 
Provided that there shall be, as far as practicable, one woman member if the Grievance Redressal 
Committee has two members and in case the number of members are more than two, the number o f women 
members may be increased proportionately.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the setting up of Grievance Redressal 
Committee shall not affect the right of the workman to raise industrial dispute on the same matter under 
the pro visions of this Act.  
                                                   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 20]
ame matter under 
the pro visions of this Act.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 6 (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
2. Subs. by Act 24 of 2010, s. 6, for Chapter IIB (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
3. Ins. by Act 46 of 1982 , s. 7 (w.e.f. 21-8-1984).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 21]
21 
 (6) The Grievance Redressal Committee may complete its proceedings within thirty days on receipt 
of a written application by or on behalf of the aggrieved party.  
(7) The workman who is aggrieved of the decision of the Grievance Redress al Committee may 
prefer an appeal to the employer against the decision of Grievance Redressal Committee and the 
employer shall, within one month from the date of receipt of such appeal, dispose off the same and send 
a copy of his decision to the workman co ncerned.  
(8) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the workmen for whom there is an established 
Grievance Redressal Mechanism in the establishment .] 
Rajasthan  
Amendment of section 9D, Central Act 14 of 1947. -In the Indus trial Disputes Act, 1947  (Central 
Act 14 of 1947), as amended by the Indus trial Disputes (Rajasthan Amendment) Act, 1958 (Rajasthan 
Act 34 of 1958), in its application to the State of Rajasthan, hereinafter referred to as the principal Act, in 
section 9D, for the words "three mo nths next preceding the date of its so applying", the words "at least 
three months during the period of six months immediately preceding the calendar month in which it so 
applies" shall be substituted.  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 14 of 1970, s. 2]  
Amendment of section 9E, Central Act 14 of 1947. -In section 9E of the principal Act, the existing 
section shall be numbered as sub section (1) and after sub -section (1) so re -numbered,   the following new 
sub-section shall be  inserted, namely: -  
"(2) Once a union has been registered as a representative union under this Act, the registration of the 
union shall be held valid for a period of two years from the date of its registration and shall continue to 
hold valid unless the registration is cancelled under section 9F o f this Act or another union is registered in 
its place according to section 9G of this Act ." 
[Vide Rajasthan Act 14 of 1970, s. 3]  
Amendment of section 9F, Central Act 14 of 1947. -In s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 21]
t ." 
[Vide Rajasthan Act 14 of 1970, s. 3]  
Amendment of section 9F, Central Act 14 of 1947. -In sub -clause (ii) of clause (a) of section 9F of 
the principal Act, after t he words "conti nuous period of three months", the words "at any time after two 
years from the date of its registration" shall be inserted.  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 14 of 1970, s. 4]  
Amendment of Chapter II -B, Central Act No.14 of 1947. - Chapter II -B of the pri ncipal Act, as 
inserted by the Rajasthan Act No. 34 of 1958, shall be renumbered as  
“CHAPTER IIC ”. 
[Vide Rajasthan Act 21 of 2014, s. 4]  
Amendment of section 9G, Central Act 14 of 1947. -In section 9G of the principal Act - 
(a) in sub -section (1) — 
(i) the words "at any time", occurring after the word "If" shall be deleted; and  
(ii) after the words "for a unit of an industry", the words "at any time after a lapse of two 
years from the date of regis tration of the representative union" shall be inserted; and  
(b) in sub -section (3), for the words "three months immediately preceding the date of the 
application", the words "at least   three months during the period of six months immediately preceding 
the calendar month in which it so applied" shall be substituted . 
[Vide Rajasthan Act 14 of 1970, s. 5]  
Amendment of section 9C, Central Act No. 14 of 1947. - Section 9C of the principal Act, as inserted by 
the Rajasthan Act No. 34 of 1958, shall be renumbered as “ 9CC ”. 
[Vide Rajasthan Act 21 of 2014, s. 5]  
Amendment of  section 9D, Central Act No. 14 of 1947. - In section 9D of the principal Act, as inserted 
by the Rajasthan Act No. 34 of 1958, the existing expression “fifteen per cent”  shall be substituted by the 
expression “thirty per cent”.  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 21 of 2014, s. 6]  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 22]
22 
  
 
CHAPTER III  
REFERENCE OF DISPUTES TO BOARDS, COURTS OR TRIBUNALS  
10. Reference of disputes t o Boards, Courts or Tribunals .—(1) 1[Where the appropriate Government is 
of opinion that any industrial dispute exists or is apprehended, it may at an y time], by order in writing, — 
(a) refer the dispute to a Board for pro moting a settlement thereof; or  
(b) refer any matter appearing to be connected with or relevant to the dispute to a Court for inquiry; or  
2[(c) refer the dispute or any matter appearing  to be connected with, or relevant to, the dispute, if it 
relates to any matter specified in the Second Schedule, to a Labour Court for adjudication ; or 
(d) refer the dispute or any matter appearing to be connected with, or relevant to, the dispute, whethe r 
it relates to any matter specified in the Second Schedule or the Third Schedule, to a Tribunal for 
adjudication:  
Provided that where the dispute relates to any matter specified in the Third Schedule and is not likely to 
affect more than one hundred workmen, the appropriate Government may, if it so thinks fit, make the reference 
to a Labour Court under clause ( c):] 
3[Provided further that] where the dispute relates to a public utility service and a notice under section 22 
has been given, the appropriate Government shall, unless it considers that the notice has been frivolously or 
vexatiously given or that it would be i nexpedient so to do, make a reference under this  
sub-section notwithstanding that any other proc eedings under this Act in respect of the dispute may have 
commenced:  
4[Provided also that where the dispute in relation to which the Central Government is the appropriate 
Government, it shall be competent for that Government to refer the dispute to a Labour Court or an Industrial 
Tribunal, as the case may be, consti tuted by the State Government. ] 
5[(1A) Where the Central Government is of opinion that any industrial dispute exists or is 
apprehended and the dispute inv
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 22]
l Government is of opinion that any industrial dispute exists or is 
apprehended and the dispute involves any question of national importance or is of such a nature that 
industrial establishments situated in more than one State are likely to be interested in, or affected by, such dispute 
and that the dispute should be adjudicated by a National Tribunal, then, the Central Government may, whether or not 
it is the appropriate Government in relation to that dispute, at any time, by order in wri ting, refer the dispute or any 
matter appearing to be connected with, or relevant to, the dispute, whether it relates to any matter specified in the 
Second Schedule or the Third Schedule, to a National  Tribunal for adjudication.]  
(2) Where the parties to a n industrial dispute apply in the prescribed manner, whether jointly or separately, for a 
reference of the dispute to a Board, Court , 6[Labo ur Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal], the appropriate 
Government, if satisfied that the persons applying represe nt the majority of each party, shall make the 
reference accordingly.  
7[(2A) An order referring an industrial dispute to a Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal under 
this section shall specify the period within which such Labour  Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal shall 
submit its award on such dispute  to the appropriate Government:  
Provided that where such industrial dispute is connected with an individual workman, no such pe riod 
shall exceed three months:  
Provided further that  where the parties to an industrial dispute apply in the prescribed manner, 
whether jointly or separately, to the Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal for extension of such 
period or for any other reason, and the presiding officer of such Labour Cou rt, Tribunal or National 
Tribunal considers it necessary or expedient to extend such period, he may for reasons to be recorded in 
writing, extend such period by such furt her period as he may think fit:  
Provided
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 22]
 be recorded in 
writing, extend such period by such furt her period as he may think fit:  
Provided also that in computing an y period specified i n this sub -section, the period, if any, for which 
the proceedings before the Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal had been stayed by any injunction 
or order of a  Civil Court shall be excluded:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 1952, s. 3, for “If any industrial dispute exists or is apprehended, the appropriate Government may”.  
2. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 7, for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
3. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for “Provided that” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
4. Ins. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 8 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
5. Ins. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 7 (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
6. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 7, for “or Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
7. Ins. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 8 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 23]
23 
 Provided also that no proceedings before a Labour Court,  Tribunal or National Tribunal shall lapse 
merely on the ground that any period specified under this sub -section had expired without suc h 
proceedings being completed.]  
(3) Where an industrial dispute has been referred to a Board, 1[Labour Court, Tribunal o r National 
Tribunal] under this section, the appropriate Government may by order prohibit the continuance of any 
strike or lock -out in connection with such dispute which may be in existence on the date of the reference.  
1[(4) Where in an order referring an industrial dispute to 2[a Labour Court, Tribunal or National 
Tribunal] under this section or in a subsequent order, the appropriate Government has specified the points  
of dispute for adjudication, 3[the Labour  Court or the Tribunal or the National Tribunal, as the case may 
be], shall confine its adjudication to those points and matters incidental thereto.  
(5) Where a dispute concerning any establishment or establishments has bee n, or is to be, referred to a 
4[Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal] under this section and the appropriate Government is of 
opinion, whether on an application made to it in this behalf or otherwise, that the dispute is of such a 
nature that any other establishment, group or clas s of establishments of a similar nature is likely to be 
interested in, or affected by, such dispute, the appropriate Government may, at the time of making the 
reference or at any time thereafter but before the submission of the award, include in that refer ence such 
establishment, group or class of establishments, whether or not at the time of such inclusion any dispute 
exists or is apprehended in that establishment, gro up or class of establishments.]  
5[(6) Where any reference has been made under sub -section  (1A) to a National Tribunal, then 
notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, no Labour Court or Tribunal shall have jurisdiction to 
adjudicate upon any
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 23]
g contained in this Act, no Labour Court or Tribunal shall have jurisdiction to 
adjudicate upon any matter which is under adjudication before the Natio nal Tribunal, and accordingly, — 
(a) if the matt er under adjudication before the National Tribunal is pending a proceeding before a 
Labour Court or Tribunal, the proceeding before the Labour Court or the Tribunal, as the case may  
be, in so far as it relates to such matter, shall be deemed to have been q uashed on such referenc e to 
the National Tribunal; and  
(b) it shall not be lawful for the appropriate Government to refer the matter under adjudication 
before the National Tribunal to any Labour Court or Tribunal for adjudication during the pendency of 
the proceeding in relation to such matte r before the National Tribunal.  
6[Explanation .—In this sub -section, “Labour Court ” or “Tribunal ” includes any Court or Tribunal  
or other authority constituted under any law relating to investigation and settlement of industrial 
disputes in force in any State.]  
(7) Where any industrial dispute, in relation to which the Central Government is not the appropriate 
Government, is referr ed to a National Tribunal, then notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, any 
reference in section 15, section 17, section 19, section 33A, section 33B and section 36A to the 
appropriate Government in relation to such dispute shall be construed as a reference to the Central 
Government but, save as aforesaid and as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, any reference in any 
other provision of this Act to the appropriate Government in relation to that dispute shall mean a 
reference to the State Gover nment.]  
7[(8) No proceedings before a Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal in relation to an industrial 
dispute shall lapse merely by reason of the death of any of the parties to the dispute being a workman, and 
such Labour Court, Tribunal or Nation al Tribunal shall complete such proceedings and submit its awa
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 23]
such Labour Court, Tribunal or Nation al Tribunal shall complete such proceedings and submit its award 
to the appropriate Government.]  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 18 of 1952, s. 3.  
2. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 7, for “a Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
3. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for “the Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
4. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for “Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
5. Ins. by s. 7,  ibid. (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
6. Ins. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 5 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
7. Ins. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 8 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 24]
24 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  
Amendment of Central Act XIV of 1947 .—(1) In section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, as 
amended by the Industrial Disputes (Madras Amendment) Act, 1949 (Madras Act XII of 1949),                    
sub-section (2A) shall be omitted.  
(2) Section 10A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, a s inserted by the Industrial Disputes (Mysore 
Amendment) Act, 1953 (Mysore Act 15 of 1953), shall be omitted.  
[Vide Karnataka Act 1 of 1960, s. 2]  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 10 .—In the industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (Central Act 14 of 1947) 
(hereinafter  referred to as the principal Act), in section 10, after sub -section (4), the following sub -section 
shall be inserted  namely: — 
“(4A) Notwithstanding anything contained in the section 9C and in this section, in the case of a 
dispute falling within the scope  of section 2A, the individual workman concerned may, within six 
months from the date of communication to him of the order of di scharge, dismissa l, retrenchment or 
termination or the date of commencement of the Industrial Disputes (Karnataka Amendment) Act , 
1987, whichever is later, apply, in the prescribed manner, to the Labour Court for adjudication of the 
dispute and the Labour Court dispose of such application in the same manner as a dispute referred 
under sub -section ( 1). 
Note .—An application under sub -section ( 4A), may be made even in respect of a dispute pending 
consideration of the Government for reference, on the date of commencement of the Industrial 
Disputes (Karnataka Amendment) Act, 1987.”  
[Vide Karnataka Act 5 of 1988, s. 2]  
1[10A. Voluntary re ferenc e of disputes to arbitration .—(1) Where any industrial dispute exists or 
is apprehended and the employer and the workmen agree to refer the dispute to arbitration, they may, at 
any time before the dispute has been referred under section 10 to a Labour Court or Tribunal or National 
Tribunal, by a written agreement, refer the dispute
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 24]
on 10 to a Labour Court or Tribunal or National 
Tribunal, by a written agreement, refer the dispute to arbitration and the reference shall be to such person 
or persons (including the presiding officer of a Labour Court or Tribunal or National Tribunal) as an 
arbitrat or or arbitrators as may be specifie d in the arbitration agreement.  
2[(1A) Where an arbitration agreement provides for a reference of the dispute to an even number of 
arbitrators, the agreement shall provide for the appointment of another person as umpire who shall enter 
upon the reference, if the arbitrators are equally divided in their opinion, and the award of the umpire 
shall prevail and shall be deemed to be the arbitration award  for the purposes of this Act.]  
(2) An arbitration agreement referred to i n sub -section ( 1) shall be in such form and shall be signed 
by the parties thereto in su ch manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) A copy of the arbitration agreement shall be forwarded to the appropriate Government and the 
conciliation officer and the appropr iate Government shall, within 3[one month] from the date of the 
receipt of such copy, publish th e same in the Official Gazette.  
2[(3A) Where an industrial dispute has been referred to arbitration and the appropriate Government is 
satisfied that the persons ma king the reference represent the majority of each party, the appropriate 
Government may, within the time referred to in sub -section ( 3), issue a notification in such manner as 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 8 (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
2. Ins. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 6 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
3. Subs. by  Act 36 of 1964,  s. 6, for “fourteen days” (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 25]
25 
 may be prescribed; and when any such notification is issued, the employers and w orkmen who are not 
parties to the arbitration agreement but are concerned in the dispute, shall be given an opportunity of 
presenting their case before the arbitrator or arbitrators.]  
(4) The arbitrator or arbitrators shall investigate the dispute and subm it to the appropriate 
Government the arbitration award signed by the arbitrator or all the arbitrators, as the case may be.  
2[(4A) Where an industrial dispute has been referred to arbitration and a notification has been issued 
under sub -section ( 3A), the appropriate Government may, by order, prohibit the continuance of any strike 
or lock -out in connection with such dispute which may be in existence  on the date of the reference.]  
(5) Nothing in the Arbitration Act, 1940 (10 of 194 0), shall apply to arbitrat ion under this section.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Kerala  
Insertion of new section 10B. —After section 10A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (Central Act 
14 of 1947) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the following section shall be inserted, namely: - 
“10B. Power to issue orders regarding terms and conditions of service pending settlement of 
disputes .— (1) Where an industrial dispute has been referred by the State Government to a Labour 
Court or Tribunal under sub -section ( 1) of section 10 and if, in the opinion of that Government, it is 
necessary or expedient so to do for securing the public safety or convenience or the maintenance of 
public order or supplies and services essential to the life of the community or for maintaining 
employment or industri al peace in the establishment concerning which such reference has been made, 
it may, by general or  special order, make provision — 
(a) for requiring the employers or workmen or both to observe such terms and conditions of 
employment as may be specified in t he order or as may be determined in accordance with the order, 
including payment 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 25]
be specified in t he order or as may be determined in accordance with the order, 
including payment of money by the employer to any person who is or has been a workman;  
(b) for requiring any public utility service not to close or remain closed and to work or continue to 
work  on such terms and conditions as may be specified in the order; and  
(c) for any incidental or supplementary matters which appear to it to be necessary or expedient for 
the purposes of the order:  
Provided that no order made under this sub -section shall requ ire any employer to observe terms and 
conditions of employment less favourable to the workmen than those which were applicable to them at 
any time within three months immediately preceding the date of the order.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section "public utility service" means — 
(i) any section of an industrial establishment on the working of which the safety of the 
establishment or the workmen employed therein depends;  
(ii) any industry which supplies power, light or water to the public;  
(iii) any industry which has been declared by the State Government to be a public utility 
service for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) An order made under sub -section ( 1) shall cease to operate on the expiry of a period of six months 
from the date of order or on the date of the award of the Labour Court or the Tribunal, as the case may be, 
whichever is earlier.  
(3) Any money paid by an employer to any person in pursuance of any order under sub -section ( 1) 
may be deducted by that employer from out of any monetary b enefit to which such person becomes 
entitled under the provisions of any award passed by the Labour Court or the Tribunal, as the case may 
be."]  
[Vide Kerala Act 30 of 1979, s. 2  ] 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 26]
26 
 Karnataka  
Insertion of new section 10B. —After section 10A of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted namely: — 
“10B. Power to issue order regarding terms and conditions of service pending settlement of 
disputes .—(1) Where an industrial dispute has been referred by the State Government to a Labour 
Court  or a Tribunal under Sub -section ( 1) of section 10 and if in the opinion of the State Government 
it is necessary or expedient so to do for securing the public safety or convenience or the maintenance 
of public order or supplies and services essential to th e life of the community or for maintain 
employment or industrial peace in the establishment concerning which such reference has been made, 
it may, by general or special order, make provision, — 
(a) for requiring the employer or workman or both to observe su ch terms and conditions of 
employment s may be specified in the order or as may be determined in accordance with the 
order, including payment of money by the employer to any person who is or has been a workman;  
(b) for requiring any public utility service not to close or remain closed and to work or 
continue to work on such terms and conditions as may be specified in the order, and  
(c) for any incidental or supplementary matter which appears to it to be necessary or 
expedients for the purpose of the order:  
Provident that no order made under this sub -section shall require any employer to observe terms and 
conditions of employment less favorable to the workman than those which were applicable to them at any 
time within the months immediately preceeding the da te of the order.  
Explanation .—For the purpose the this sub -section “public utility service” means, — 
(i) any section of an industrial establishment on the working of which the safety of the 
establishment or the workman employed therein depends;  
(ii) any ind ustry which supplies power, light or water to the public;  
(iii) any industry which has been d
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 26]
 ind ustry which supplies power, light or water to the public;  
(iii) any industry which has been declared by the State Government to be a public utility service 
for the purpose of this Act.  
(2) An order made under sub -section ( 1) shall cease to operate on the e xpiry of a period of six months 
from the date of the order or on the date of the award of the Labour Court or the Tribunal, as the case may 
be, whichever is earlier.  
(3) Any money paid by an employer to any person in pursuance of an order under sub -section  (1), 
may be deducted by that employer from out of any monetary benefit to which such person becomes 
entitled under the provisions of any award passed by the Labour Court or the Tribunal, as the case may 
be. 
[Vide Karnataka Act 5 of 1988, s. 3]  
Rajasthan  
Insertion of new section 10K. in Central Act 14 of 1947. -After section 10J of the principal Act, the 
following new section shall be inserted, namely: - 
"10K. State Government may lay down terms and conditions of employment and 
prohibit strikes, etc. - (1) Notwithstanding any thing contained in the Act, if in the opinion of the 
State Government, it is necessary or expedient so to do, for securing the public safety or 
convenience or the maintenance of public order or supplies and services essential to th e life of the 
community or for maintaining employment or maintaining industrial peace, it may by a general or 
special order, make provision - 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 27]
27 
 (a) for requiring employers, workmen or both to observe for such period as may be 
specified in the order, such term s and conditions of employment as may be determined in 
accordance with  the  order;  and  
(b) for prohibiting, subject to the provision of the order, strikes or lockouts generally 
or a strike or lockout in connection with any industrial dispute.  
(2) In case  any industrial dispute is raised in respect of any provisions in the order of the State 
Government made under sub -section (1) within a period of three months of the order, it shall be referred 
by the State Government for adjudication to an Industrial Tri bunal and the order shall lapse when the 
award of the Tribunal becomes enforceable:  
Provided, however, that the reference of the industrial dispute to adjudication shall not have the effect 
of staying the operation of the order”.  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 14 of 1970, s. 6]  
Insertion of new Chapter III -A in Central Act XIV of 1947 .- For section 10A of the principal Act, 
the following new Chapter shall be inserted, namely: - 
"CHAPTER III -A. 
Arbitration.  
10B. Submission .-(1) Any employer and a Representative Union or, in the absence of any registered 
Representative Union, any other Union which is representative of employees may, by a written 
agreement, agree to submit any present or future industrial dispute or class of such disputes to the 
arbitration of any person  whether such arbitrator is named in such agreement or not. Such agreement shall 
be called a submission.  
(2) A copy of every such submission shall be sent to the Registrar who shall register it in the register 
to be maintained for the purpose and shall pub lish it in such manner as may be prescribed.  
10C. Submission when revocable .-Every submission shall in the absence of any provision to the 
contrary contained therein be irrevocable:  
Provided that a submission to refer future disputes to arbitration may at any time be revoked by any 
of the parties to
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 27]
mission to refer future disputes to arbitration may at any time be revoked by any 
of the parties to such submission by giving the other party three months' notice in writing:  
Provided further that, before the expiry of the said period of three months the parties may agree to 
continue the submission for such fu rther period as may be agreed upon between them.  
10D. Proceedings in arbitration .-The proceedings in arbitration under this Chapter shall be in 
accordance with the provisions of the Arbitration Act, 1940 (Central Act X of 1940) in so far as they are 
applic able and the powers which are exercisable by a Civil Court under the said provisions shall be 
exercisable by the Industrial Tribunal.  
10E. Special case may be stated to Industrial Tribunal .- The arbitrator may refer any question of 
law arising before him i n any proceeding under this Act to the Industrial Tribunal for its decision. Any 
award made by the arbitrator shall be in accordance with such decision.  
10F, Award by arbitrator .-The arbitrator shall, after hearing the parties concerned, make an award 
whic h shall be signed by him.  
10G. Dispute to be referred to Industrial Tribunal if no arbitrator appointed .-Notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Chapter, if no provision has been made in any submission for the appointment 
of an arbitrator or where by re ason of any circumstances no arbitrator is appointed, such dispute may be 
referred by the State Government for adjudication by the Industrial Tribunal.  
10H. State Government may refer industrial dispute to Industrial Tribunal for adjudication .- 
(1) Notwith standing anything contained in this Chapter the State Government may, at any time, refer an 
industrial dispute for adjudication by the Industrial Tribunal, if on a report made by the Conciliation . 
Officer or otherwise it is satisfied that - 
(A) by reason o f the continuance of the dispute - 
(a) a serious outbreak of disorder or a breach of the public peace is likely 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 27]
ance of the dispute - 
(a) a serious outbreak of disorder or a breach of the public peace is likely to occur; or  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 28]
28 
 (b) serious or prolonged hardship to a large section of the community is likely to be 
caused; or  
(c) the industry concerned is likel y to be seriously affected or the prospects and scope for 
employment therein curtailed; or,  
(B) the dispute is not likely to be settled by other means; or  
(C) it is necessary in the public interest to do so.  
(2) When the State Government makes a reference to the Industrial Tribunal for adjudication of any 
industrial dispute, any submission or any award of an arbitrator with regard to that industrial dispute shall 
stand as cancelled.  
10I. Notice of award to par ties.- (1) The arbitrator or the Industrial Tribunal as an arbitrator, as the 
case may be, shall forward copies of the award made by him or it to the parties, the Commissioner of 
Labour, the Registrar and the State Government.  
(2) On receipt of such award,  the Registrar shall enter it in the register kept for the purpose.  
10J. Completion of proceeding .- The arbitration proceeding shall be deemed to have completed 
when the award is published under section 17."  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 34 of 1958, s. 6]  
CHAPTER IV  
PROCEDURE, P OWERS AND DUTIES OF AUTHORITIES  
11. Procedure and powers of conciliation officers,  Boards, Courts and Tribunals .—1[(1) Subject 
to any rules that may be made in this behalf, an arbitrator, a Board, Court, Labour  Court, Tribunal or 
National Tribunal shall follow such procedure as the arbitrator or other auth ority concerned may think 
fit.] 
(2) A conciliation of ficer or a member of a Board, 2[or Court or the presiding officer of a Labour 
Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal] may for the purpose of inquiry into any existing or apprehended 
industrial dispute, after giving reasonable notice, enter the premises occupied by any establishmen t to 
which the dispute relates.  
(3) Every Board, Court, 3[Labour  Court, Tribunal and National Tribunal] shall have the same powers 
as are vested in a Civil Court under the Code of Civi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 28]
National Tribunal] shall have the same powers 
as are vested in a Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), when trying a suit, in 
respect of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him o n oath;  
(b) compelling the production of documents and material objects;  
(c) issuing commissions fo r the examination of witnesses;  
(d) in respect of such othe r matters as may be prescribed;  
and every inquiry or i nvestigation by a Board, Court, 4[Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal], 
shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
(4) A conciliation officer 5[may enforce the attendance of any perso n for the purpose of examination 
of such person or call for] and inspect any document which he has ground for considering to be relev ant 
to the industrial dispute 6[or to be necessary for the purpose of verifying the implementation of any award 
or carrying  out any other duty imposed on him under this Act, and for the aforesaid purposes, the 
conciliation officer shall have the same powers as are vested in a Civil Court under the Code of Civil  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 9, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
2. Subs. by  Act 36 of 1956, s. 9, for “Court or Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
3. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “and Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
4. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “or Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
5. Subs. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 9, for “may call for” (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
6. Ins. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 9 (w.e.f. 17 -9-1956).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 29]
29 
 Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), 1[in respect of enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him or 
of compellin g the production of documents] ]. 
2[(5) A Court, Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal may, if it so thinks fit, appoint one or 
more persons having special knowledge of the matter under conside ration as assessor or assessors to 
advise it in the proceeding before it.  
(6) All conciliation officers, members of a Board or Court and the presiding officers of a Labour 
Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal shall be deemed to be public servants within th e meaning of section 
21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
(7) Subject to any rules made under this Act, the costs of, and incidental to, any proceeding before a 
Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal shall be in the d iscretion of that Labour Cour t, Tribunal or 
National Tribunal and the Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal, as the case may be, shall have full 
power to determine by and to whom and to what extent and subject to what conditions, if any, such costs 
are to be paid, and to give al l necessary directions for the purposes aforesaid and such costs may, on 
application made to the appropriate Government by the person entited, be recovered by that Government 
in the same manner  as an arrear of land revenue.]  
3[(8) Every 4[Labour Court, Tri bunal or National Tribunal] shall be deemed to be Ci vil Court for the 
purposes of 5[sections 345, 346 and 348 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 ( 2 of 1974 )].]  
6[(9) Every award made, order issued or settlement arrived at by or before Labour  Court or Tribunal 
or National Tribunal shall be executed in accordance with the procedure laid down for execution of orders 
and decree of a Civil Court under order 21 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908).  
(10) The Labour Court or Tribunal or N ational Tribunal, as the case may be, shall transmit any award, 
order or settlement to a Civil Court having jurisd
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 29]
l, as the case may be, shall transmit any award, 
order or settlement to a Civil Court having jurisdiction and such Civil Court shall execute the award, 
order or settlement as if it were a decree passed by it.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 11 .—For sub -section ( 4) of section 11 of the principal Act, the following 
sub-section shall be substituted, namely: — 
“(4) A Consiliation  Officer may, if he considers that any document or the testimony of any person 
is relevant or necessary for the settlement or an industrial dispute or for the purpose of verifying the 
implementation of any award or carrying out any other duty imposed on hi m under this Act, call for 
and inspect such document or summon and examine such person. For the aforesaid purposes, the 
Conciliation Officer shall have the same powers as are vested in a Civil Court while trying a suit 
under the Code of civil Procedure, 19 08 (Central Act V of 1908), in respect of the following matters, 
namely: — 
(i) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(ii) compelling the production of documents;  
(iii) issuing commission for examination of witness.  
(4A) Whoever refuses or fails to attend or take part in a conciliation proceedings or fails or refuses to 
produce the documents in pursuance of an order issued under sub -section ( 4), shall, on conviction, be 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 9, for certain words (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
2. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 9, for sub -sections ( 5) to ( 7) (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
3. Ins. by Act 48 of 1950, s. 34 and the Schedule.  
4. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 9, for “Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
5. Subs. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 9, for certain words (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
6. Ins. by Act 24 of 2010, s. 7 (w.e.f 15 -9-2010).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 30]
30 
 punishable with imprisonment for a period which may extend to three months or with fine which may 
extend to five hundred rupees or with both.”  
[Vide Karnataka Act 5 of 1988, s. 4]  
1[11A. Powers of Labour Courts, Tribunals and National Tribunals to give appropriate relief in 
case of disc harge or dismissa l of workmen .—Where an industrial dispute relating to the discharge or 
dismissal of a workman has been referred to a Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal for 
adjudication and, in the course of the adjudication proceedings, the Labour Court, Tribunal  or National 
Tribunal, as the case may be, is satisfied that the order of discharge or dismissal was not justified, it may, 
by its award, set aside the order of discharge or dismissal and direct reinstatement of the workman on 
such terms and conditions, if  any, as it thinks fit, or give such other relief to the workman including the 
award of any lesser punishment in lieu of discharge or dismissal as the circums tances of the case may 
require:  
Provided that in any proceeding under this section the Labour Cour t, Tribunal or National Tribunal, 
as the case may be, shall rely only on the materials on record and shall not take any fresh evide nce in 
relation to the matter.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
 
Tamil Nadu   
Insertion of new section 11 -B-After section 11 -A of the Industrial Disputes act, 1947 (Central Act XIV 
of 1947), the following section shall be inserted, namely: - 
“11-B. Power of Labour Court or Tribunal to execute its award by decree - A Labour Court 
or a Tribunal shall have the power of a civil court to execut e its o wn award as a decree of a civil court 
and also to execute any settlement as defined in clause (p) of section 2 as a decree.”  
[Vide Tamil Nadu Act 45 of 2008, s. 2]  
In section 11 -B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 for the expression “award” the e xpression 
“award and order” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Tamil Nadu Act 19 of 2019, s. 2]  
12. Du ties of concil
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 30]
rd and order” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Tamil Nadu Act 19 of 2019, s. 2]  
12. Du ties of conciliation officers .—(1) Where any industrial dispute exists or is apprehended, the 
conciliation officer may, or where the dispute relates to a public utility service and a notice under section 
22 has been given, shall hold conciliation procee dings in the prescribed manner.  
(2) The conciliation officer shall, for the purpose of bringing about a settlement of the dispute, 
without delay, investigate the di spute and all matters affecting the merits and the right settlement thereof 
and may do all such things as he thinks fit for the purpose of inducing the parties to come to a fair and 
amic able settlement of the dispute.  
(3) If a settlement of the dispute or of any of the matters in dispute is arrived at in the course of the 
conciliation proceedings the conciliation officer shall send a report thereof to the appropriate Government 
2[or an officer authorised in this behalf by the appropriate Government] togethe r with a memorandum of 
the settlement signed by the parties to the dispute.  
(4) If no such settlement is arrived at, the conciliation officer shall, as soon as practicable after the 
close of the investigation, send to the appropriate Government a full report setting forth the steps taken by 
him for ascertaining the facts and circumstances relating to the dispute and for bringing about a settlement 
thereof, together with a full statement of such facts and circumstances, and the reasons on account of 
whic h, in his opinion, a settlement could not be arrived at.  
(5) If, on a consideration of  the report referred to in sub -section ( 4), the appropriate Government is 
satisfied that there is a c ase for reference to a Board, 3[Labour Court , Tribunal or National Tr ibunal ], it 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 45 of 1971, s. 3 (w.e.f. 15 -12-1971).  
2. Ins. by Act 35 of 1965, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1965).  
3. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 30]
 45 of 1971, s. 3 (w.e.f. 15 -12-1971).  
2. Ins. by Act 35 of 1965, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1965).  
3. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 10, for “or Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 31]
31 
 may make such reference. Where the appropriate Government does not make such a reference it shall 
record and communicate to the parties concerned its reasons therefor.  
(6) A report under this section shall be submitted within fourteen days of t he commencement of the 
conciliation proceedings or within such shorter period as may be fixed by the appropriate Government:  
1[Provided that, 2[subject to the approval of the conciliation officer,] the time for the submission of 
the report may be extended by such period as may be agreed upon in writing by all the parties to the 
dispute.]  
13. Duties of Board .—(1) Where a dispute has been referred to a Board under this Act, it shall be the 
duty of the Board to endeavour  to bring about a settlement of the same and for this purpose the Board 
shall, in such manner as it thinks fit and without delay, investigate the dispute and all matters affecting the 
merits and the right settlement thereof and may do all such things as it  thinks fit for the purpose of 
inducing the parties to come to a fair and amic able settlement of the dispute.  
(2) If a settlement of the dispute or of any of the matters in dispute is arrived at in the course of the 
conciliation proceedings, the Board shal l send a report thereof to the appropriate Government together 
with a memorandum of the settlement signed  by the parties to the dispute.  
(3) If no such settlement is arrived at, the Board shall, as soon as practicable after the close of the 
investigation, send to the appropriate Government a full report setting forth the proceedings and steps 
taken by the Board for ascertaining the facts and circumstances relating to the dispute and for bringing 
about a settlement thereof, together with a full statement of such facts and circumstances, its findings 
thereon, the reasons on account of which, in its opinion, a settlement could not be arrived at and its 
recommendations for th e determination of the dispute.  
(4) If, on the recei
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 31]
be arrived at and its 
recommendations for th e determination of the dispute.  
(4) If, on the receipt of a report under sub -section ( 3) in respect of a dispute relating to a public utility 
service, the appropriate Government does not make a reference  to a 3[Labour Court, Tribunal or National 
Tribunal] under section 10, it shall record and communicate to the parties concerned its reasons t herefor.  
(5) The Board shall submit its report under this section w ithin two months of the date 4[on which the 
dispute was referred to it] or within such shorter period as may be fixed  by the appropriate Government:  
Provided that the appropriate Government  may from time to time extend the time for the submission 
of the report by such further periods not exceeding two months in the aggregat e: 
Provided further that the time for the submission of the report may be extended by such period as may 
be agreed on in  writing by all the parties to the dispute.  
14. Duties of Courts .—A Court shall inquire into the matters referred to it and report thereon to the 
appropriate Government ordinarily within a period of six months from the commencement of its inquiry.  
5[15. Duties of Labour Courts, Tribunals and National Tri bunals .—Where an industrial dispute 
has been referred to a Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal for adjudication, it shall hold its 
proceed ings expeditiously and shall, 6[within the period speci fied in the order referring such industrial 
dispute or the further period extended under the second proviso to sub -section ( 2A) of section 10], submit 
its award to the appropriate Government.  
16. Form of report or award .—(1) The report of a Board or Court  shall be in writing and shall be 
signed by all the members of the Boar d or Court, as the case may be:  
Provided that  nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent any member of the Board or Court 
from recording any minute of dissent from a report or from any recommendation ma de there
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 31]
 or Court 
from recording any minute of dissent from a report or from any recommendation ma de therein.  
                                                           
1. Ins.  by Act 36 of 1956, s. 10 (w.e.f. 17 -9-1956).  
2. Ins. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 8 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
3. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 11, for “Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
4. Subs. by Act 40 of 1951, s. 6, for “of the notice under section 22”.  
5. Subs. by Act  36 of 1956, s. 12, for sections 15, 16, 17 and 17A (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
6. Subs. by Act 46 of 19 82, s. 10, for certain words (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 32]
32 
 (2) The award of a Labour Court or Tribunal or National Tribunal shall be in wr iting and shall be 
signed by its presiding officer.  
17. Publ ication of reports and awards .—(1) Every report of a Board or Court together with any 
minute of dissent recorded therewith, every arbitration award and every award of a Labour  Court, 
Tribunal or National Tribunal shall, within a period of thirty days from the date of its receipt by the 
appropriate Government, be published in such manner as the app ropriate Government thinks fit.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of section 17A, the award published under sub -section ( 1) shall be final 
and shall not be called in question by any Court in any manner whatsoever.  
17A. Commencement of the award .—(1) An award (including an arbitration award) shall become 
enforceable on the expiry of thirty d ays from the date of its publication u nder section 17:  
Provided that — 
(a) if the appropriate Government is of opinion, in any case where the award has been given by a 
Labour Court or Tribunal in relation to an industrial dis pute to which it is a party; or  
(b) if the Central Government is of opinion, in any case where the award has bee n given by a 
National Tribunal,  
that it will be inexpedient on public grounds affecting national economy or social justice to give effect to 
the whole or any part of the award,  the appropriate Government, or as the case may be, the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that the award shall not become 
enforceable on the expiry of the said period of thirty days.  
(2) Where any declaration has been  made in relation to an award under the proviso to sub -section ( 1), 
the appropriate Government or the Central Government may, within ninety days from the date of 
publication of the award under section 17, make an order rejecting or modifying the award, and  shall, on 
the first available opportunity, lay the award together with a copy of the order before
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 32]
  shall, on 
the first available opportunity, lay the award together with a copy of the order before the Legislature of 
the State, if the order has been made by a State Government, or before Parliament, if the order has been 
made by the Central Government.  
(3) Where any award as rejected or modified by an order made under sub -section ( 2) is laid before the 
Legislature of a State or before Parliament, such award shall become enforceable on the expiry of fifteen 
days from the date on which it is so laid; and wh ere no order under sub -section ( 2) is made in pursuance 
of a declaration under the proviso to sub -section ( 1), the award shall become enforceable on the expiry of 
the period of ninety days referred to in sub -section ( 2). 
(4) Subject to the provisions of su b-section ( 1) and sub -section ( 3) regarding the enforceability of an 
award, the award shall come into operation with effect from such date as may be specified therein, but 
where no date is so specified, it shall  come into operation on the date when the award becomes 
enforceable under sub -section ( 1) or sub - section ( 3), as the case may be.]  
1[17B. Payment of full wages to workman pendin g proceedings in higher courts .—Where in any 
case, a Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal by its award directs r einstatement of any workman 
and the employer prefers any proceedings against such award in a High Court or the Supreme Court, the 
employer shall be liable to pay such workman, during the period of pendency of such proceedings in the 
High Court or the Supre me Court, full wages last drawn by him, inclusive of any maintenance allowance 
admissible to him under any rule if the workman had not been employed in any establishment during such 
period and an affidavit by such workman had been file d to that effect in s uch Court:  
Provided that where it is proved to the satisfaction of the High Court or the Supreme Court that such 
workman had been employed and had been receiving a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 32]
of the High Court or the Supreme Court that such 
workman had been employed and had been receiving adequate remuneration during any such period or 
part thereof, the Court shall order that no wa ges shall be payable under this section for such period or 
part, as the case may be.]  
18. Persons on whom sett lements and awards are binding .—2[(1) A settlement arrived at by 
agreement between the employer and workman otherwise than in the course of conci liation proceeding 
shall be binding o n the parties to the agreement.  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 11 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
2. Ins. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 13 (w.e.f. 7 -10-1956).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 33]
33 
 (2) 1[Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3), an arbitration award] which has become enforceable 
shall be binding on the parties to the agreement who referred the dispute to arbitration.]  
2[(3)] A settlement arrived at in the course of conciliati on proceedings under this Act 3[or an 
arbitration award in a case where a notification has been issued under sub -section ( 3A) of section 10A] or 
4[an award 5[of a Labour Court, Tribuna l or National Tribunal] which has become enf orceable] shall be 
binding on — 
(a) all par ties to the industrial dispute;  
(b) all other parties summoned to appear in the proceedings as parties to t he dispute, unless the 
Board, 6[arbitrator,] 7[Labour  Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal], as the case may be, records the 
opinion that they were so  summoned without proper cause;  
(c) where a party referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) is an employer, his heirs, successors or 
assigns in respect of the es tablishmen t to which the dispute relates;  
(d) where a party referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) is composed of workmen, all persons who 
were employed in the establishment or part of the establishment, as the case may be, to which the 
dispute relates on  the date of the dispute and all persons who subsequently become employed  in that 
establishment or part.  
19. Period of operat ion of settlements and awards .—(1) A settlement 8*** shall come into 
operation on such date as is agreed upon by the parties to the  dispute, and if no date is agreed upon, on the 
date on which the memorandum of the settlement is signed  by the parties to the dispute.  
(2) Such settlement shall be binding for such period as is agreed upon by the parties, and if no such 
period is agreed upon, for a period of six months 9[from the date on which the memorandum of settlement 
is signed by the parties to the dispute], and shall continue to be binding on the parties after the expiry of 
the period aforesaid, until the expiry of
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 33]
continue to be binding on the parties after the expiry of 
the period aforesaid, until the expiry of two months from t he date on which a notice in writing of an 
intention to terminate the settlement is given by one of the parties to the other part y or parties to the 
settlement.  
10[(3) An award shall, subject to the provisions of this section, remain in operation for  a peri od of one 
year 11[from the date on which the award becomes enforceable under section 17A]:  
Provided that the appropriate Government may reduce the said period and fi x such period as it thinks 
fit: 
Provided further that the appropriate Government may, before  the expiry of the said period, extend 
the period of operation by any period not exceeding one year at a time as it thinks fit so, however, that the 
total period of operation of any award does not exceed three years from the date o n which it came into 
operation.  
(4) Where the appropriate Government, whether of its own motion or on the application of any party 
bound by the award, considers that since the award was made, there has been a material change in the 
circumstances on which it was based, the appropri ate Government may re fer the award or a part of it 12[to 
a Labour Court, if the award was that of a Labour Court or to a Tribunal, if the award was that of a 
Tribunal or of a National Tribunal] for decision whether the period of operation should not, by rea son of 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 9, for “An arbitration award” (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
2. Section 18 re -numbered as sub -section ( 3) of that section by Act 36 of 1956, s. 13 (w.e.f. 7 -10-1956).  
3. Ins. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 9 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
4. Subs. by Act 48 of 1950, s. 34 and the Schedule, for “an award which is declared by the appropriate Government to be binding 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 15”.  
5. Ins. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 13 (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
6. Ins. by Act 36 of 19
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 33]
2) of section 15”.  
5. Ins. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 13 (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
6. Ins. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 9 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
7. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 13, for “or Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
8. The words “arrived at in the course of a conciliation proceeding under this Act” omitted by  Act 36 of 1956,  s. 14                
(w.e.f. 7 -10-1956).  
9. Ins. by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 7-10-1956).  
10. Subs. by Act 48 of 1950, s. 34 and the Schedule, for sub -section ( 3). 
11. Ins. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 14 (w.e.f. 17 -9-1956).  
12. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for “to a Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 34]
34 
 such change, be shortened and the decision of 1[Labour Court or the Tribunal, as the case may be] on such 
reference shall, 2*** be final.  
(5) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 3) shall apply to any award which by its nature, terms or other 
circumstances does not impose, after it has been given effect to, any continuing obligation on the parties 
bound by the award.  
(6) Notwithstanding the expiry of the period of operation under su b-section ( 3), the award shall 
continue to be binding on the parties until a period of two months has elapsed from the date on which 
notice is given by any party bound by the award to the other party or parties intimating its in tention to 
terminate the awa rd. 
3[(7) No notice given under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 6) shall have effect, unless it is given by a 
party representing the majority of persons bound by the settlement or award, as the case may be.]]  
20. Commencement and conclusion of proceedings .—(1) A conciliation proceeding shall be 
deemed to have commenced on the date on which a notice of strike or lock -out under section 22 is 
received by the conciliation officer or on the date of the order referring the dispute to a Board, as the case 
may be.  
(2) A conciliation proceeding shal l be deemed to have concluded — 
(a) where a settlement is arrived at, when a memorandum of the settlement is signed  by the 
parties to the dispute;  
(b) where no settlement is arrived at, when the report of the conciliation officer is received by the 
appropriate Government or when the report of the Board is published under section 17, as the case 
may be; or  
(c) when a reference is made to a Court, 4[Labour  Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal] under 
section 10 during the penden cy of conciliation proceedings.  
(3) Proceedings 5[before an arbitrator under section 10A or before a Labour Court, Tribunal or 
National Tribunal] shall be deemed to have  commenced on the date or the 6[reference of the dispute for 
a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 34]
al Tribunal] shall be deemed to have  commenced on the date or the 6[reference of the dispute for 
arbitration or adjudication, as the case may be] and such proceedings shall be de emed to have concluded 
7[on the date on which the award becomes enforceable under section 17A].  
21. Certain ma tters to be kept confidential .—There shall not be included in any report or award 
under this Act any information obtained by a conciliation offi cer, Board, Court, 8[Labour  Court, Tribunal, 
National Tribunal or an arbitrator] in the course of any investigation or inquiry as to a trade union or as to 
any individual business (whether carried on by a person, firm or company) which is not available 
otherwise than through the evi dence given befor e such officer, Board, Court, 6[Labour Court,  Tribunal, 
National Tribunal or an arbitrator], if the trade union, person, firm or company, in question has made a 
request in writing to the conciliation officer, Boar d, Court, 6[Labour Court, Tribunal, National Tribunal or 
an arbitrator], as the case may be, that such information shall be treated as confidential; nor shall such 
conciliation officer or any in dividual member of the Board, 9[or Court or the presiding officer of the 
Labour Court, T ribunal or National Tribunal or the arbitrator] or any person present at or concerned in the 
proceedings disclose any such information without the consent in writing of the secretary of the trade 
union or the person, firm or company in question, as the cas e may be:  
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to a disclosure of any such information for 
the purposes of a prosecution under section 193 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 36 of 1956,  s. 14, for “the Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
2. The words “subject to the provision for appeal omitted by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
3. Ins. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 10 (w.e.f. 19 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 34]
r appeal omitted by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
3. Ins. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 10 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
4. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956,  s. 15, for “or Tribunal” (w.e.f.  10-3-1957).  
5. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for “before a Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
6. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for “reference of a dispute for adjudication” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
7. Subs. by Act 18 of 1952, s. 4, for certain words.  
8. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 16, for “or Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
9. Subs. by s. 16, ibid., for “Court or Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 35]
35 
 CHAPTER V  
STRIKES AND LOCK -OUTS  
22. Prohibi tion of strikes and lock -outs.—(1) No person employed in a public utility service shall 
go on  strike in breach of contract — 
(a) without giving to the emplo yer notice of strike, as herein after provided, withi n six weeks 
before striking; or  
(b) within fourteen days of giving such notice; or  
(c) before the expiry of the date of strike specified in a ny such notice as aforesaid; or  
(d) during the pendency of any conciliation proceedings before a conciliation officer and seven 
days after the conclusion of such proceeding s. 
(2) No employer carrying on any public utility service shall lock -out any of his workmen — 
(a) without giving them notice of lock -out as hereinafter provided, within six weeks be fore 
locking out; or  
(b) within fourteen  days of giving such notice; or  
(c) before the expiry the date of lock -out specified in a ny such notice as aforesaid; or  
(d) during the pendency of any conciliation proceedings before a conciliation officer and seven 
days after the conclusion of such  proceedings.  
(3) The notice of lock -out or strike under this section shall not be necessary where there is already in 
existence a strike or, as the case may be, lock -out in the public utility service, but the employer shall send 
intimation of such lock -out or strike on the day on which it is de clared, to such authority as may be 
specified by the appropriate Government either generally or for a particular area or for a particular cl ass 
of public utility services.  
(4) The notice of strike referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be given by such numbe r of persons to such 
person or persons and in su ch manner as may be prescribed.  
(5) The notice of lock -out referred to in sub -section ( 2) shall be given in su ch manner as may be 
prescribed.  
(6) If on any day an employer receives from any persons employed b y him any such notices as are 
referred to in sub -section ( 1) or gives to any pers
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 35]
sons employed b y him any such notices as are 
referred to in sub -section ( 1) or gives to any persons employed by him any such notices as are referred to 
in sub -section ( 2), he shall within five days thereof report to the appropriate Government or to such 
authority as that  Government may prescribe the number of such notices  received or given on that day.  
23. General prohibi tion of strikes and lock -outs.—No workman who is employed in any industrial 
establishment shall go on strike in breach of contract and no employer of any  such wor kman shall declare 
a lock -out— 
(a) during the pendency of conciliation proceedings before a Board and seven days after the 
conclusion of such proceedings;  
(b) during the p endency of proceedings before 1[a Labour  Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal] 
and two months after the c onclusion of such proceedings; 2***  
3[(bb) during the pendency of arbitration proceedings before an arbitrator and two months after 
the conclusion of such proceedings, where a notification h as been issued under sub -section ( 3A) of 
section 10A; or]  
(c) during any period in which a settlement or award is in operation, in respect of any of the 
matters covered by the settlement or award.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 17, for “a Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
2. The word “or” omitted by Act 36 of 1964, s. 11 (w.e.f. 19-12-1964).  
3. Ins. by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 36]
36 
 24. Illegal strikes and lock -outs.—(1) A strike or a  lock-out shall be illegal if — 
(i) it is commenced or declared in contravention of section 22 or section 23; or  
(ii) it is continued in contravention of an order made under sub -section ( 3) of section 10 1[or  
sub-section ( 4A) of section 10A].  
(2) Where a strike or lock -out in pursuance of an industrial dispute has already commenced and is in 
existence at the time of the referen ce of the dispute to a Board, 4[an arbitrator, a] 2[Labour Court, Tribunal 
or National Tribunal], the continuance of such strike or lock -out shall not be deemed to be illegal, 
provided that such strike or lock -out was not at its commencement in contravention of the provisions of 
this Act or the continuance thereof was not prohibited under sub -section ( 3) of section 10 4[or su b-section 
(4A) of section 10A].  
(3) A lock -out declared in consequence of an illegal strike or a strike declared in consequence of an 
illegal lock -out shall not be deem ed to be illegal.  
25. Prohibition of financial aid to i llegal strikes and lock -outs.—No person shall knowingly 
expend or apply any money in direct furtherance of support of any illegal st rike or lock -out. 
3[CHAPTER VA  
LAY-OFF AND RETRENCHMENT  
25A. Appl ication of sections 25C to 25E .—(1) Sections 25C to 25E inclusive 4[shall not apply to 
industrial establishments to wh ich Chapter VB applies, or —] 
(a) to industrial establishments in which less than fifty workmen on an average per working day 
have been employed in t he preceding calendar month; or  
(b) to industrial establishments which are of a seasonal  character or in which work is  performed 
only intermittently.  
(2) If a question arises whether an industrial establishment is of a seasonal character or whether work 
is performed therein only intermittently, the decision of the appropriate Gov ernment there on shall be 
final.  
5[Explanation .—In this section and in sections 25C, 25D and 25E, “indust
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 36]
here on shall be 
final.  
5[Explanation .—In this section and in sections 25C, 25D and 25E, “industrial establishment ” 
means — 
(i) a factory as defined in clause ( m) of section 2 of the Factories Act 1948 (63 of 1948); or  
(ii) a mine as defined in clause ( i) of sec tion 2 of the M ines Act, 1952 (35 of 1952); or  
(iii) a plantation as defined in clause ( f) of section 2 of the Plantations Labour Act, 1951  
(69 of 1951).]  
6[25B. Def inition of continuous service .—For the purposes of this Chapter, — 
(1) a workman shall be said to be in continuous service for a period if he is, for that period, in 
uninterrupted service, including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness or 
authorised leave or an accident or a strike which is not illegal, o r a lock -out or a cessation of work 
which is not due to any fa ult on the part of the workman;  
(2) where a workman is not in continuous service within the meaning of clause ( 1) for a period of 
one year or six months, he shall be deemed to be in continu ous s ervice under an employer — 
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 36 of 1964, s. 12  (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
2. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 18, for “or Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
3. Ins. by Act 43 of 1953, s. 3 (w.e.f. 24 -10-1953).  
4. Subs. by Act 32 of 1976, s. 2, for “shall not apply -” (w.e.f. 5 -3-1976).  
5. Subs. by Act 48 of 1954, s. 2, for the Explanation  (w.e.f. 1 -4-1954).  
6. Subs. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 13, for section 25B (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 37]
37 
 (a) for a period of one year, if the workman, during a period of twelve calendar months 
preceding the date with reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under 
the employer for not less than — 
(i) one hundre d and ninety days in the case of a workman emplo yed below ground in a 
mine; and  
(ii) two hundred and  forty days, in any other case;  
(b) for a period of six months, if the workman, during a period of six calendar months 
preceding the date with reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under 
the employer for not less than — 
(i) ninety -five days, in the case of a workman employed below ground in a mine; and  
(ii) one hundred and twenty days, in any other case.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of clause ( 2), the number of days on which a workman has 
actually worked under an employer sh all include the days on which — 
(i) he has been laid -off under an agreement or as permitted by standing orders made under the 
Industrial Employment (Standi ng Orders) Act, 1946 (20 of 1946), or under this Act or under any 
other law applicable t o the industrial establishment;  
(ii) he has been on leave with full wages , earned in the previous years;  
(iii) he has been absent due to temporary disablement caused by  accident arising out of and in 
the course of his employment; and  
(iv) in the case of a female, she has been on maternity leave; so, however, that the total period 
of such maternity leave does not exceed twelve wee ks.] 
1[25C. Right of work men laid -off for compensation .—Whenever a workman (other than a badli  
workman or a casual workman) whose name is borne on the muster rolls of an industrial establishment 
and who has completed not less than one year of continuous service under an employer is laid -off, 
wheth er continuously or intermittently, he shall be paid by the employer for all days during which he is so 
laid-off, except for such weekly holidays as may intervene, compensation which 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 37]
ring which he is so 
laid-off, except for such weekly holidays as may intervene, compensation which shall be equal to fifty per 
cent. of the total of the basic wages and dear ness allowance that would have been payable to h im had he 
not been so laid -off: 
Provided that if during any period of twelve months, a workman is so laid -off for more than forty -five 
days, no such compensation shall be payable in respect of any period of t he lay -off after the expiry of the 
first forty -five days, if there is an agreement to that effect between the workman and the employer:  
Provided further that it shall be lawful for the employer in any case falling within the foregoing 
proviso to retrench t he workman in accordance with the provisions contained in section 25F at any time 
after the expiry of the first forty -five days of the lay -off and when he does so, any compensation paid to 
the workman for having been laid -off during the preceding twelve mo nths may be set off against the 
compens ation payable for retrenchment.  
Explanation .—”Badli  workman ” means a workman who is employed in an industrial establishment in 
the place of another workman whose name is borne on the muster rolls of the establishment,  but shall 
cease to be regarded as such for the purposes of this section, if he has completed one year of continuous  
service in the establishment.]  
25D. Duty of an employer to maintain muster rolls of wo rkmen .—Notwithstanding that workmen 
in any industrial  establishment have been laid -off, it shall be the duty of every employer to maintain for 
the purposes of this Chapter a muster roll and to provide for the making of entries therein by workmen 
who may present themselves for work at the establishment at the  appointed ti me during normal working 
hours.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 35 of 1965, s. 5, for section 25C ( w.e.f. 1 -12-1965).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 37]
r section 25C ( w.e.f. 1 -12-1965).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 38]
38 
 25E. Workmen not entitled to compensation in certain cases .—No compensation shall be paid to a 
workman who has been laid -off— 
(i) if he refuses to accept any alternative employment in the same establishment from  which he 
has been laid -off, or in any other establishment belonging to the same employer situate in the same 
town or village or situate within a radius of five miles from the establishment to which he belongs, if, 
in the opinion of the employer, such alte rnative employment does not call for any special skill or 
previous experience and can be done by the workman, provided that the wages which would normally 
have been paid to the workman are offered for t he alternative employment also;  
(ii) if he does not pr esent himself for work at the establishment at the appointed time during 
normal wor king hours at least once a day;  
(iii) if such laying -off is due to a strike or slowing -down of production on the part of workmen in 
another part of the establishment.  
25F. Conditions precede nt to retrenchment of workmen .—No workman employed in any industry 
who has been in continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retr enched by 
that employer until — 
(a) the workman has been given one month ’s noti ce in writing indicating the reasons for 
retrenchment and the period of notice has expired, or the workman has been paid in lieu of such 
notice, wage s for the period of the no tice; 
1*    *    *    *   * 
(b) the workman has been paid, at the time of retrenc hment, compensation which shall be 
equivalent to fifte en days' average pay 2[for every completed year of continuous service] or any part 
there of in excess of six months; and  
(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government 3[or such authority 
as may be specified by the appropriate Government by notification in the Offic ial Gazette].  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh  
Section 25F .—In clause 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 38]
tte].  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh  
Section 25F .—In clause (b), for "fifteen days", substitute "thirty days"  
[Vide Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Second 
Order, 2020,  Notification No. S.O. 3465(E), dated (5 -10-2020) and Vide Union Territory of Ladakh 
Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020,  Notification No. S.O. 3774(E), dated           
(23-10-2020). ] 
4[25FF. Compensation to workmen in cas e of transfer of undertakings .—Where the ownership or 
management of an undertaking is transferred, whether by agreement or by operation of law, from the 
employer in rela tion to that undertaking to a new employer, every workman who has been in continuous 
service for not less than one year in that undertaking immediately before such transfer shall be entitled to 
notice and compensation in accordance with the provisions of s ection 25F, as if t he workman had been 
retrenched:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to a workman in any case where there has been a 
change of employers by reason of the transfer, if — 
(a) the service of the workman has not bee n interrupted by such transfer;  
                                                           
1. The proviso omitted by Act 49 of 1984, s. 3 (w.e.f. 18 -8-1984).  
2. Subs. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 14, for “for every completed year of service” (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
3. Ins. by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
4. Subs. by Act 18 of 1957,  s. 3, for section 25FF (w.e.f. 28 -11-1956).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 39]
39 
 (b) the terms and conditions of service applicable to the workman after such transfer are not in 
any way less favourable to the workman than those applicable to him immed iately before the transfer; 
and 
(c) the new employer is, under the t erms of such transfer or otherwise, legally liable to pay to the 
workman, in the event of his retrenchment, compensation on the basis that his service has been 
continuous and has not be en interrupted by the transfer.  
1[25FFA. Sixty days ’ notice to be given  of intention to close down any undertaking .—(1) An 
employer who intends to close down an undertaking shall serve, at least sixty days before the date on 
which the intended closure is to become effective, a notice, in the prescribed manner, on the appropri ate 
Government stating clearly the reasons for the inten ded closure of the undertaking:  
Provided that nothing i n this section shall apply to — 
(a) an undertaking in which — 
(i) less than  fifty workmen are employed, or  
(ii) less than fifty workmen were employed on an average per working day in the preceding 
twelve months,  
(b) an undertaking set up for the construction of buildings, bridges, roads, canals, dams or for 
other construction work or project.  
(2) Notwithstanding a nything contained in sub -section ( 1), the appropriate Government may, if it is 
satisfied that owing to such exceptional circumstances as accident in the undertaking or death of the 
employer or the like it is necessary so to do, by order, direct that provis ions of sub -section ( 1) shall not 
apply in relation to such undertaking for such period as may be specified in the order.]  
25FFF. Compensation to workmen in case of  closing down of undertakings .—(1) Where an 
undertaking is closed down for any reason whatsoever, every workman who has  been in continuous 
service for not less than one year in that undertaking immediately before such closure shall, subject to the 
provisions of sub -section ( 2), be entitled to not
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 39]
ately before such closure shall, subject to the 
provisions of sub -section ( 2), be entitled to notice and compensation in accordance with the p rovisions of 
section 25F, as if t he workman had been retrenched:  
Provided that where the undertaking is closed down on account of unavoidable circumstances beyond 
the control of the employer, the compensation to be paid to the workman under clause ( b) of s ection 25F 
shall not exceed hi s average pay for three months.  
2[Explanation .—An undertaking which is cl osed down by reason merely of — 
(i) financial difficulties ( including financial losses); or  
(ii) accumulat ion of undisposed of stocks; or  
(iii) the expiry  of the period of the lea se or licence granted to it; or  
(iv) in a case where the undertaking is engaged in mining operations, exhaustion of the minerals 
in the area in which such operations are carried on;  
shall not be deemed to be closed down  on account of unavoidable circumstances beyond the control of the 
employer within the meaning of the proviso to  this sub -section.]  
3[(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an undertaking engaged in 
mining operations is closed do wn by reason merely of exhaustion of the minerals in the area in which 
such operations are carried on, no workman referred to in that sub -section shall be entitled to any notice 
or compensation in accordance with the provisions of section 25F, if — 
(a) the employer provides the workman with alternative employment with effect from the date of 
closure at the same remuneration as he was entitled to receive, and on the same terms and conditions 
of service as were applicable to him, immediately before the closure ; 
(b) the service of the workman has not been interrupted by s uch alternative employment; and  
(c) the employer is, under the terms of such alternative employment or otherwise, legally liable to 
pay to the workman, in the event of his retrenchment, compensation on the basis that 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 39]
lly liable to 
pay to the workman, in the event of his retrenchment, compensation on the basis that his service has 
been continuous and has not been interrupted by such alternative employ ment.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 1972, s. 2.  
2. Subs. by Act 45 of 1971, s. 4, for the Explanation  (w.e.f. 15 -12-1971).  
3. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -12-1971).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 40]
40 
 (1B) For the purposes of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 1A), the expressions “minerals ” and “mining 
operations ” shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in clauses ( a) and ( d) of section 3 of 
the Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Develo pment) Act, 1957 (67 of 1957).]  
(2) Where any undertaking set -up for the construction of buildings, bridges, roads, c anals, dams or 
other construction work is closed down on account of the completion of the work within two years from 
the date on which the undertaking had been set -up, no workman employed therein shall be entitled to any 
compensation under clause ( b) of se ction 25F, but if the construction work is not so completed within two  
years, he shall be entitled to notice and compensation  under that section for every 1[completed year of 
continuous service] or any part th ereof in excess of six months.]  
25G. Procedure for retrenchment .—Where any workman in an industrial establishment, who is a 
citizen of India, is to be retrenched and he belongs to a particular category of workmen in that 
establishment, in the absence of any agreement between the employer and the workma n in this behalf, the 
employer shall ordinarily retrench the workman who was the last person to be employed in that category, 
unless for reasons to be recorded the employe r retrenches any other workman.  
25H. Re -employment of retrenched workmen .—Where any workmen are retrenched, and the 
employer proposes to take into his employ any persons, he shall, in such manner as may be pr escribed, 
give an opportunity 2[to the retrenched workmen who are citizens of India to offer themselves for re -
employment and such r etrenched workman] who offer themselves for re -employment shall have  
preference over other persons.  
25-I. [Recovery of moneys due from  employres under this chapter. ] Rep. by the Industrial Disputes 
(Amendment and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1956  (36 of 1956), s. 19 (w.e.f. 10-3-1957).  
25J. Effect of
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 40]
nt and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1956  (36 of 1956), s. 19 (w.e.f. 10-3-1957).  
25J. Effect of laws in consistent with this Chapter .—(1) The provisions of this Chapter shall have 
effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law [including standing 
orders made under the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946 (20 o f 1946)]:  
3[Provided that where under the provisions of any other Act or rules, orders or notifications issued 
thereunder or under any standing orders or under any award, contract of service or otherwi se, a workman 
is entitled to benefits in respect of any matter which are more favourable to him than those to which he 
would be entitled under this Act, the workman shall continue to be entitled to the more favourable 
benefits in respect of that matter, no twithstanding that he receives benefits in respect of  other matters 
under this Act.]  
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that nothing contained in this Chapter shall be 
deemed to affect the provisions of any other law for the time being in  force in any State in so far as that 
law provides for the settlement of industrial disputes, but the rights and liabilities of employers and 
workmen in so far as they relate to lay -off and retrenchment shall be determined in accordance with t he 
provisions  of this Chapter.]  
4[CHAPTER VB  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO LAY -OFF, RETRENCHMENT AND CL OSURE IN CERTAIN 
ESTABLISHMENTS  
25K. Application of Chap ter VB .—(1) The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to an industrial 
establishment (not being an establishment of a seasonal character or in which work is performed only 
intermittently) in which not less than 5[one hundred] workmen were employed on an average per  working 
day f or the preceding twelve months.  
(2) If a question arises whether an industrial establishment is of a seasonal character or whether work 
is performed therein only intermittently, the decision of the
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 40]
 a seasonal character or whether work 
is performed therein only intermittently, the decision of the appropriate Government thereon s hall be 
final. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 15, for “completed year of service” (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
2. Subs. by s. 16, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
3. Subs. by  Act 36 of 1964, s. 17, for the proviso (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
4. Ins. by Act 32 of 1976, s. 2 (w.e.f. 5 -3-1976).  
5. Subs. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 12, for  “three hundred” (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 41]
41 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
Andhra Pradesh  
In Section 25K  
The following shall be substituted, namely: — 
“25-K.Application of Chapter V -B:—(1) The provisions of this chapter shall apply to an industrial 
establishment (not being an establishment of a seasonal character or in which work is performed only 
intermittently) in which not less than three hundred workmen were employed on an average per working 
day for the preceding twelve months.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the State Gov ernment, may, if satisfied that 
maintenance of industrial peace or prevention of victimization of workmen so requires, by notification in 
the official gazette apply the provisions of this chapter to an industrial establishment (not being an 
establishment o f a seasonal character or in which work is performed only intermittently) in which such 
number of workmen which may be less than three hundred but not less than one hundred, as may be 
specified in the notification, were employed on an average per working d ay for the preceding twelve 
months.  
(3) If a question arises whether an industrial establishment is of a seasonal character or whether work 
is performed therein only intermittently, the decision of the State Government thereon shall be final. ” 
[Vide Andhra  Pradesh 12 of 2015, s. 3]  
Assam  
Amendment of section 25K .-In the principal Act, in section 25K, for the words “one hundred”, 
appearing in between the words “than” and “workmen”, the words  
three hundred” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Assam Act 22 of 2018, s. 2]  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 25K .—In section 25K of the principal Act, after sub -section ( 1), the 
following sub -section shall be inserted, namely: — 
“(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1) the State Governm ent may, from time to 
time by notification in the official gazette, apply the provisions of section 25 -O and section 25 -R in so far, 
as they relate to contravention of sub -section 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 41]
ions of section 25 -O and section 25 -R in so far, 
as they relate to contravention of sub -section ( 2) of section 25 -O, also to an industrial establishment of a 
seasonal chara cter or in which work is performed only intermittently in which not less than one hundred 
workmen were employed on an average per working day for the preceding twelve months.”  
[Vide the Karnataka Act 5 of 1988, s. 5]  
Orissa  
Amendment of section 25K .—In section 25K of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947) 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in sub -section ( 1), for the words “three hundred”, the words 
“one hundred” shall be substituted.  
[Vide the Orissa Act 6 o f 1983, s. 2]  
Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh  
Section 25K .--In sub -section (1), for "one hundred", substitute "three hundred".  
[Vide Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Second 
Order, 2020,  Notification No. S.O. 3465 (E), dated (5 -10-2020) and Vide Union Territory of Ladakh 
Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020,  Notification No. S.O. 3774(E), dated           
(23-10-2020).  
Rajasthan  
Amendment of section 25 -k, Central Act No. 14 of 1947. - After sub -section (1) of section 25 -k of 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (Central Act No. 14 of 1947), hereinafter referred to as the principle 
Act, the following new sub -section shall be inserted, namely: - 
“(1-A) Without prejudice to the provisions con tained in sub section (1), the State Government 
may, if satisfied  that maintenance of industrial peace or prevention of vietimisation of workmen so 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 42]
42 
 requires, by notification in the Official Gazette, apply the provisions of this Chapter to an industrial 
establishment (not being an establishment of a seasonal character or in which work is performed only 
intermittently) in which such number of workmen, which may be less than three hundred but not less 
than one hundred as may be specified in the notification, were employed on an average per working 
day for the preceding twelve months.”  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 8 of 1984, s.2]  
Rajasthan  
Amendment  of section 25K, Central Act No. 14 of 1947. - For the existing section 25K of the principal 
Act, the following shall be substituted, namely: -  
“25K. Application of Chapter VB. - (1) The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to an 
industrial establishment (not being an establishment of a seasonal cha racter or in which work is 
performed only intermittently) in which not less than three hundred workmen were employed on an 
average per working day for the preceding twelve months.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section (1), the State Gover nment may, if satisfied 
that maintenance of industrial peace or prevention of victimization of workmen so requires, by 
notification in the Official Gazette apply the provisions of this Chapter to an industrial establishment, 
(not being an establishment of a seasonal character or in which work is performed only intermittently) 
in which such number of workmen which may be less than three hundred but not less than one 
hundred, as may be specified in the notification, were employed on an average per working day  for 
the preceding twelve  months.  
(3) If a question arises whether an industrial establishment is of a seasonal character or whether 
work is performed therein only intermittently, the decision of the appropriate Government thereon 
shall be final.”.  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 21 of 2014, s. 7]  
Gujarat  
Amendment of section 25K of XIV of 1947 .—In the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (XIV of 1947), 

<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 42]
at  
Amendment of section 25K of XIV of 1947 .—In the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (XIV of 1947), 
in its application to the State of Gujarat (hereinafter referred to as “the principal Act”), in section 25K, -- 
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words “one hundred”, the words “three hundred” shall be  
substituted;  
(ii) after sub -section (1), the following sub -section shall be inserted, namely: - 
“(1A) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section (1), the State Governme nt may, if 
satisfied that the maintenance of  industrial  peace  or prevention  of victimization  of workmen so 
requires, by notification in the Official Gazette , apply the provision of this Chapter to an 
industrial establishment (not being an establishment of a seasonal character or in which work  is 
performed  only intermittently)  in which  such number of  workmen  which  may be less than three  
hundred  but not less than one hundred, as may be specified in the notification, were employed on 
an average per working day  for the preceding twelve  months.”.  
[Vide Gujarat Act 1 of 2021, s. 2]  
25L. Definitions .—For the purposes of this Chapter, — 
(a) “industrial establishment ” means — 
(i) a factory as defined in clause ( m) of section 2 of the Fa ctories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948);  
(ii) a mine as defined in clause ( i) of sub - section ( 1) of section 2 of the M ines Act, 1952  
(35 of 1952); or  
(iii) a plantation as defined in clause ( f) of section 2 of the Plantations  Labour Act, 1951  
(69 of 1951);  
(b) notwithstanding anything contained  in sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( a) of section 2, — 
(i) in relation to any company in which not less than fifty -one per cent. of the paid -up share 
capital is hel d by the Central Government, or  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 43]
43 
 (ii) in relation to any corporation [not being a corporation referred to in sub -clause ( i) of 
clause ( a) of section 2] established by or under any law made by Parliament, the Central 
Government s hall be the appropriate Government.  
Rajasthan  
Amendment of section 25 -L, Central Act No. 14 of 1947. ---In clause (b) of s ection 25 -L of the 
principle Act, for the expression “the Central Government shall be the appropriate Government”, the 
expression “the State Government shall have no powers under his  this Chapter” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 8 of 1984, s. 3]  
25M. Prohibition of lay -off.—(1) No workman (other than a badli  workman or a casual workman) 
whose name is borne on the muster rolls of an industrial establishment to which this Chapter applies shall 
be la id-off by his employer except 1[with the prior perm ission of the appropriate Government or such 
authority as may be specified by that Government by notification  in the Official Gazette (here after in this 
section referred to as the specified authority), obtained on an application made in this behalf, unless  such 
lay-off is due to shortage of power or to natural calamity, and in the case of a mine, such lay -off is due 
also to fire, flood, excess of inflammable gas or explosion].  
2[(2) An application for permission under sub -section ( 1) shall be made by the em ployer in the 
prescribed manner stating clearly the reasons for the intended lay -off and a copy of such application shall 
also be served simultaneously on the workmen concer ned in the prescribed manner.  
(3) Where the workman (other than badli  workmen or ca sual workmen) of an industrial 
establishment, being a mine, h ave been laid -off under sub -section ( 1) for reasons of fire, flood or excess 
of inflammable gas or explosion, the employer, in relation to such establishment, shall, within a period of 
thirty days from the date of commencement of such lay -off, apply, in the prescribed manner, to th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 43]
 
thirty days from the date of commencement of such lay -off, apply, in the prescribed manner, to the 
appropriate Government or the specified authority for permission to continue the la y-off. 
(4) Where an application for permission under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section (3) has been made, the 
appropriate Government or the specified authority, after making such enquiry as it thinks fit and after 
giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard to the employer, the workmen concerned and the persons 
interested in such lay -off, may, having regard to the genuineness and adequacy of the reasons for such 
lay-off, the interests of the workmen and all other relevant factors, by order and for reasons to be recorded 
in writing, grant or refuse to grant such permission and a copy of such order shall be communicated t o the 
employer and the workmen.  
(5) Where an application for permission under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 3) has been made and 
the appropriate Government or the specified authority does not communicate the order granti ng or 
refusing to grant permission to the employer within a period of sixty days from the date on which such 
application is made, the permission applied for shall be deemed to have been granted on the expiration of  
the said period of sixty days.  
(6) An ord er of the appropriate Government or the specified authority granting or refusing to grant 
permission shall, subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 7), be final and binding on all the parties 
concerned and shall remain in force for one ye ar from the date  of such order.  
(7) The appropriate Government or the specified authority may, either on its own motion or on the 
application made by the employer or any workman, review its order granting or refusing to grant 
permission under sub -section ( 4) or refer the matter or, as the case may be, cause it to be referred, to a 
Tribunal for adjudication:  
Provided that where a reference has been made to a Tribunal under 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 43]
o a 
Tribunal for adjudication:  
Provided that where a reference has been made to a Tribunal under this sub -section, it shall pass an 
award within a period of thirty days f rom the date of such reference.  
(8) Where no application for permission under sub -section ( 1) is made, or where no application for 
permission under sub -section ( 3) is made within the period specified therein, or where the permission for 
any lay -off has been refused, such lay -off shall be deemed to be illegal from the date on which the 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 49 of 1984, s. 4, for certain words (w.e.f. 18 -8-1984).  
2. Subs. by Act 49 of 1984 , s. 4, for sub -sections ( 2) to ( 5) (w.e.f. 18 -8-1984).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 44]
44 
 workmen had been laid -off and the workmen shall be entitled to all the benefits under any law for the 
time being in force as  if they had not been laid -off. 
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained i n the foregoing provisions of this section, the appropriate 
Government may, if it is satisfied that owing to such exceptional circumstances as accident in the 
establishment or death of the employer or the like, it is necessary so to do, by order, dir ect th at the 
provisions of sub -section ( 1), or, as the case may be, sub -section ( 3) shall not apply in relation to such 
establishment for such period as may be specified in the order.]  
1[(10)] The provisions of section 25C (other than the second proviso thereto)  shall apply to cases of 
lay-off referred to in this section.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, a workman shall not be deemed to be laid -off by an 
employer if such employer offers any alternative employment (which in the opinion of the employer does 
not call for any special skill or previous experience and can be done by the workman) in the same 
establishment from which he has been laid -off or in any other establishment belonging to the same 
employer, situate in the same town or village,  or situate within such distance from the establishment to 
which he belongs that the transfer will not involve undue hardship to the workman having regard to the 
facts and circumstances of his case, provided that the wages which would normally have been pa id to the 
workman are offered for the alternative appointme nt also.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Rajasthan  
Amendment of section 25 -M, Central Act No. 14 of 1947 .- In section 25 -M of the principle Act, -  
(a) in sub -section (1), between the expression “this Chapter appli es” and the expression “shall be 
laid off", the expression “or is applied under sub -section (1 -A) of section 25 -k” shall be inserted and 
for the expression “apropriate Government”, the expression “State Government" sh
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 44]
ll be inserted and 
for the expression “apropriate Government”, the expression “State Government" shall be substituted;  
(b) in sub -section (2), for the expression “(Amendment) Act, 1976” the expression “(Rajasthan 
Amendment) Act, 1984” shall be substituted;  
 (c) for the existing sub -section  (3), the following sub -sections shall be substituted, namely: - 
     “(3) In the case of every applicat ion for permission under sub -section (1) or sub -section 
(2), the employer shall state clearly the reasons due to   which he intends to lay off or continue the 
lay off of a workman and a copy of such application shall be served on the workman Intended to 
be laid off or continued to be laid off by registered post with acknowledgment due.  
(4) Where an application for permission has been made under sub -section (1) or sub -section 
(2), the authority to whom the application has been made, after making such enquiry  as it thinks 
fit and after giving reasonable opportunity of being heard to the employer and the workman, may, 
having regard to the genuineness and adequacy of the reasons stated by the employer, the terms 
of contract of service and the standing orders gov erning the establishment, by order and for 
reasons to be recorded in writing grant or refuse to grant such permission and such order shall be 
communicated to the employer and the workman.”;  
(d) the existing sub -section (4) shall be re -numbered as sub-section (5) thereof;  
(e) after sub -section (5) as so re -numbered the following sub -section shall be inserted, namely: - 
"(6) An order of the authority specified under sub -section (1) granting or refusing to g rant 
permission shall, subject to the provisions of sub -section (7), be final and binding on both the 
parties.  
 (7) The authority specified under sub -section (1) may, either of its own motion or on the 
application made by the employer or the workman , review its order granting or refusing to g rant 
permission under sub -section 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 44]
yer or the workman , review its order granting or refusing to g rant 
permission under sub -section (4) or refer the matter to the Labour Court having jurisdiction for 
adjudication:  
                                                           
1. Sub -section ( 6) re-numbered as sub -section ( 10) by s. 4, ibid.,   (w.e.f. 18 -8-1984).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 45]
45 
 Provided that where a reference has been made to a Labour Court under this sub -section, it 
shall pass an award within a period of thirty day s from the date of such reference.”, and  
    (f) the existing sub -sections (5) and (6) shall be renumbered as sub -sections (8) and (9) thereof.  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 8 of 1984, s.  4] 
1[25N. Conditions preced ent to retrenchment of workmen .—(1) No workman emp loyed in any 
industrial establishment to which this Chapter applies, who has been in continuous service for not less 
than one year under an employer shall be retre nched by that employer until, — 
(a) the workman has been given three months ’ notice in writing indicating the reasons for 
retrenchment and the period of notice has expired, or the workman has been paid in lieu of such 
notice, wages fo r the period of the notice; and  
(b) the prior permission of the appropriate Government or such aut hority as may be specified by 
that Government by notification in the Official Gazette (hereafter in this section referred to as the 
specified authority) has been obtained on an ap plication made in this behalf.  
(2) An application for permission under sub -section ( 1) shall be made by the employer in the 
prescribed manner stating clearly the reasons for the intended retrenchment and a copy of such 
application shall also be served simultaneously on the workmen conc erned in the prescribed manner.  
(3) Where an a pplication for permission under sub -section ( 1) has been made, the appropriate 
Government or the specified authority, after making such enquiry as it thinks fit and after giving a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard to the employer, the workmen concerned  and the persons interested 
in such retrenchment, may, having regard to the genuineness and adequacy of the reasons stated by the 
employer, the interests of the workmen and all other relevant factors, by order and for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, gra nt or refuse to grant such permissi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 45]
actors, by order and for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, gra nt or refuse to grant such permission and a copy of such order shall be 
communicated t o the employer and the workmen.  
(4) Where an application for perm ission has been made under sub -section ( 1) and the appropriate 
Government or the specified authority does  not communicate the order granting or refusing to grant 
permission to the employer within a period of sixty days from the date on which such application is made, 
the permission applied for shall be deemed to have been granted on the expiration of  the said  period of 
sixty days.  
(5) An order of the appropriate Government or the specified authority granting or refusing to grant 
permission shall, subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 6), be final and binding on all the parties 
concerned and shall remain in  force for one ye ar from the date of such order.  
(6) The appropriate Government or the specified authority may, either on its own motion or on the 
application made by the employer or any workman, review its order granting or refusing to grant 
permission un der sub -section ( 3) or refer the matter or, as the case may be, cause it to be referred, to a 
Tribunal for adjudication:  
Provided that where a reference has been made to a Tribunal under this sub -section, it shall pass an 
award within a period of thirty days f rom the date of such reference.  
(7) Where no application for permission under sub -section ( 1) is made, or where the permission for 
any retrenchment has been refused, such retrenchment shall be deemed to be illegal from the date on 
which the notice of  retrenchment was given to the workman and the workman shall be entitled to all the 
benefits under any law for the time being in force as if n o notice had been given to him.  
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this section , the appropriate 
Government may, if it is satisfied that owing to such exceptional circumstances
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 45]
n , the appropriate 
Government may, if it is satisfied that owing to such exceptional circumstances as accident in the 
establishment or death of the employer  or the like, it is necessary so to do, by order, direct , that the 
provisions of sub - section ( 1) shall not apply in relation to such establishment for such period as  may be 
specified in the order.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 49 of 1984 , s. 5, for section 25N (w.e.f. 18 -8-1984).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 46]
46 
 (9) Where permission for retrenchm ent has been granted under sub -section ( 3) or where permission 
for retrenchment is deemed to be granted under sub -section (4), every workman who is employed in that 
establishment immediately before the date of application for permission under this section shall be 
entitled to receive, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to fifteen days ’ 
average  pay for every completed year of continuous service or any part thereof in excess of six months.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Rajasthan  
Amendment of section 25 -N, Central Act No. 14 of 1947. --In section 25 -N of the principle Act, - 
          (a) in sub -section (1), - 
(i) between the expression “this Chapter applies” and the expression “who has been”, the 
expression “or is applied under sub -section (1 -A) of section 25 -K” shall be inserted; and  
(ii) for clause (c), the following clause shall be substituted, namely: - 
"(c)   three months’ notice in writing stating clearly the reasons for retrenchment is served on 
the State Government or such authority as may be specified by the State Government by 
notification in the Official Gazette by registered post with acknowledgement du e, and 
the permission of the State Government or of such authority is obtained under sub 
section (2).”;  
            (b) for sub -section (2), the following sub -section shall be substituted, namely: - 
“(2)  On receipt of a notice under clause (c) of sub -section (1), the State Government or 
authority, after making such enquiry as it thinks fit and after giving reasonable 
opportunity of being heard to the employer, the workman and the office -bearer of the  
representative union of the concerned industrial establishment, may, having regard to the  
genuineness and adequacy of the reasons stated by the employer, requirements of 
industrial peace, prevention of victimisation and unfair labour practice, by order a nd for 
reasons to be recorded in writing grant or re
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 46]
isation and unfair labour practice, by order a nd for 
reasons to be recorded in writing grant or refuse to grant such permission and such order 
shall be communicated to the employer, the workman and the office -bearer of such 
representative union.”;  
(c) in sub -section (4), for the expression “(Amendment ) Act, 1976", the expression “(Rajasthan 
Amendment) Act, 1984”, for the expression “(a) of section 25 -F", the expression “(c) of sub 
section (1)”, for the word “appropriate”, the word “State” and for the expression “sub -section 
(2)” the expression “the sai d clause of the said sub -section” shall respectively be substituted;  
             (d) in sub -section (5), for the word “appropriate”, the word “State” shall be substituted;  
             (e) after sub -section (5), the following sub -section shall be inserted , namely: - 
 “(6) An order of the State Government or the authority granting or refusing to grant 
permission shall, subject to the provisions of sub -section  (7), be final and binding on all 
the parties and shall remain in force for on year form the date of such order.  
 (7) The State Government or, as the case may be, the authority may, either on its own motion 
or on the application made by  the employer or the workman, review its order granting or 
refusing to grant permission under sub -section (2) or refer t he matter to a Tribunal for 
adjudication:  
Provided that where a reference has been made to a Tribunal under this sub -section,  it shall 
pass an award within a period of thirty days from the date of such reference.”;  
(f) the existing sub -sections (6) and (7) shall respectively be re -numbered as sub - sections 
(8) and  (9) thereof; and  
(g) in sub -section (9) as so re -numbered, - 
 (i) for the expression “(Amendment) Act, 1976”, the expression “(Rajasthan 
Amendment) Act, 1984” shall be substituted;  
(ii) the expression “or the Central Government” shall be deleted;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 46]
“or the Central Government” shall be deleted;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 47]
47 
 (iii) for the word “appropriate”, wherever occurring, the word “State” shall be 
substituted; and  
(iv) for the expression “and any order passed by such authority shall be final and 
binding on the empl oyer and the workman or workmen”, the expression "and such 
authority while deciding such matter shall proceed to hold the enquiry in the 
manner and have regard to the matters specified in sub -section (2). Any order 
passed by such authority shall, subject t o review under the proviso to this sub -
section, be final and binging on the employer and the workman or workman:  
Provided that such authority as aforesaid may, either on its own motion or on the 
application made by the employer or the workman review the or der passed by it under 
this sub -section or refer the matter to a Tribunal for adjudication and to such reference, 
the provisions contained in the proviso to sub -section (7) shall, mutatis matandis , 
apply,” shall be substituted.  
 [Vide Rajasthan Act 8 of 19 84, s. 5]  
Rajasthan  
Amendment of section 25N, Central Act No. 14 of 1947. - In section 25N of the principal Act, - 
(a) in clause (a) of sub -section (1), the existing expression “, or the workman has been paid in 
lieu of such notice, wages for the period of the n otice” shall be deleted; and  
(b) in sub -section (9), after the existing expression “six months” and before the existing 
punctuation mark “.”, appearing at the end, the expression “and an amount equivalent to his 
three months average pay” shall be inserted.  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 21 of 2014, s. 8]  
Gujarat  
Amendment of section 25N of XIV of 1947 .— In the principal Act, in section  25N, - 
(i) in sub-section  (1), in clause  (a), the words  “or the workman  has been paid in lieu of such 
notice, wages for the period of the  notice” shall be  deleted;  
(ii) in sub -section (9), the words “and an amount equivalent to his last three months average pay” 
shall be added at the  end. 
[Vide Gujarat Act 1 of 2021, s. 3]  
1
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 47]
 last three months average pay” 
shall be added at the  end. 
[Vide Gujarat Act 1 of 2021, s. 3]  
1[25-O. Procedure fo r closing down an undertaking .—(1) An employer who intends to close down 
an undertaking of an industrial establishment to which this Chapter applies shall, in the prescribed 
manner, apply, for prior permission at least ninety days before the date on which the intended closure is to 
become effective, to  the appropriate Government, stating clearly the reasons for the intended closure of 
the undertaking and a copy of such application shall also be served simultaneously on the representatives 
of the wo rkmen in the prescribed manner:  
Provided that nothing in  this sub -section shall apply to an undertaking set up for the construction of 
buildings, bridges, roads, canals, dams or for other construction work.  
(2) Where an application for perm ission has been made under sub -section ( 1), the appropriate 
Government, after making such enquiry as it thinks fit and after giving a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard to the employer, the workmen and the persons interested in such closure may, having regard to the 
genuineness and adequacy of the reasons stated by the empl oyer, the interests of the general public and all 
other relevant factors, by order and for reasons to be recorded in writing, grant or refused to grant such 
permission and a copy of such order shall be communicated t o the employer and the workme n. 
(3) Wher e an application has been made under sub -section ( 1) and the appropriate Government does 
not communicate the order granting or refusing to grant permission to the employer within a period of 
sixty days from the date on which such application is made, the p ermission applied for shall be deemed to 
have been granted on the expiration of  the said period of sixty days.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 14, for section 25 -O (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 47]
          
1. Subs. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 14, for section 25 -O (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 48]
48 
 (4) An order of the appropriate Government granting or refusing to grant permission shall, subject to 
the provisions of sub -section ( 5), be final  and binding on all the parties and shall remain in force for one 
year from the date of such order.  
(5) The appropriate Government may, either on its own motion or on the application made by the 
employer or any workman, review its order granting or refusin g to grant permission under sub -section ( 2) 
or refer the matter to a Tribunal for adjudication:  
Provided that where a reference has been made to a Tribunal under this sub -section, it shall pass an 
award within a period of thirty days from the date of such reference.  
(6) Where no application for permission under sub -section ( 1) is made within the period specified 
therein, or where the permission for closure has been refused, the closure of the undertaking shall be 
deemed to be illegal from the date of closur e and the workmen shall be entitled to all the benefits under 
any law for the time being in force as if the undert aking had not been closed down.  
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this section, the appropriate 
Government  may, if it is satisfied that owing to such exceptional circumstances as accident in the 
undertaking or death of the employer or the like it is necessary so to do, by order, direct that the 
provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall not apply in relation to such undertaking for such period as  may be 
specified in the order.  
(8) Where an undertaking is permitted to be closed down under sub -section ( 2) or where permission 
for closure is deemed to be granted under sub -section ( 3), every workman who is employed in that  
undertaking immediately before the date of application for permission under this section, shall be entitled 
to receive compensation which shall be equivalent to fifteen days ’ average pay for every completed year 
of continuous service or any part thereof i n excess o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 48]
 days ’ average pay for every completed year 
of continuous service or any part thereof i n excess of six months.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Orissa  
Amendment of section 25 -O.—For section 25 -o of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substitute namely: — 
25-O. Procedure or closing down an undertaking .—(1) An employer who intends to close down an 
undertaking of an industrial establishment  to which this Chapter applies shall, in the prescribed manner, 
apply, for prior permission at least ninety  days before the date on which the intended closure is to 
become effective, to the appropriate Governm ent , stating clearly the reasons for the intended closure of 
the undertaking and  a copy of such application shall also be served simultaneously  on the representatives 
of the workman in the prescribed manner:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section sha ll apply to an undertaking set up for the construction of 
buildings, bridges, roads, canals, dams or for other construction work.  
(2) where an application for permission has been made  under sub -section (1), the appropriate 
Government , after making such e nquiry as it thinks fit and after giving  a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard to the employer, the workmen and the persons interested in such closure may,  having regard to the 
genuineness  and adequacy  of the reasons stated by the employer, the inter ests of the general public and 
all other relevant factors, by order and for reasons to be recorded in writing , grant or refuse to grant such 
permission and a copy of such order shall be communicated to the employer and the workmen.  
(3) Where an applicatio n has been made under sub -section (1) and the appropriate Government does 
not communicate the order granting or refusing to grant permission to the employer within a period of 
sixty days from the date on which such application is made, th e permission appli ed for shall be deemed to 
have been granted on the expiration of the said per
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 48]
th e permission appli ed for shall be deemed to 
have been granted on the expiration of the said period of sixty days.  
(4) An order of the appropriate Government  granting or refusing to grant permission shall, subject to 
the provisions of sub -section (5), be final and binding on all the  parties and shall remain in force for one 
year from the date of such order.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 49]
49 
 (5) The appropriate Government may, either on its  own motion or on the application made by the 
employer or any workman, review its order granting or refusing to grant permission under sub -section (2) 
or refer the matter to a Tribunal for adjudication:  
Provided that where a reference has been made to a Tribun al under this sub section, it shall pass an 
award within a period of thirty days from the date of such reference.  
(6) Where no application for permission under sub -section (1) is made within the period specified 
therein, or where the permission for closur e has been refused , the closure of the undertaking shall be 
deemed to be illegal from the date of closure and the w orkmen shall b e entitled to all the benefits under 
any law for the time being in force as if the undertaking had not been closed down.  
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this section, the appropriate 
Government may, if it  is satisfied that owing to such exceptional circumstances as accident in the 
undertaking or death of the employer or the like it is necessary so to do, by order, direct that the 
provisions of sub -section (1) shall not apply in  relation to such undertaking  for such period as may be 
specified in the order.  
(8) Where an undertaking is permitted to be close down under sub -section (2) or where permission for 
closure is deemed to be granted under sub -section (3) every workman who is employed in that 
undertaki ng immediately before the date of application for  permission under this section shall be  
entitled to receive compensation which shall be equivalent to fifteen day’s a verage pay for every 
completed year of continuous service or any part thereof in excess of s ix months.”.  
[Vide the Orissa Act 6 of  1983, s. 3]  
Substitution of section 25 -O, Central Act No. 14 of 1947: -For section 25 -O of the principle Act, the 
following section shall be substituted, namely: - 
“25-O. Procedure for closing down an und
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 49]
ct, the 
following section shall be substituted, namely: - 
“25-O. Procedure for closing down an undertaking. -(1) A n employer who intends to close 
down an undertaking of an industrial establishment to which this Chapter applies including an 
employer who has served a notice under sub -section (1) of section 25 -FFA on the State Government 
of his intention to close down su ch an undertaking but the period of such a notice has not expired at 
the commencement of the Industrial Disputes(Rajasthan Amendment) Ordinance, 1983 shall apply 
for prior permission at least ninety days before the date on which the intended closure is to become 
effective, to the State Government, stating clearly the reasons for the intended closure of the 
undertaking and a copy of such application shall also be served simultaneously on the representatives 
of the workmen by registered post with acknowledgme nt due.  
(2) where an application for permission has been made under sub -section (1), and the State 
Government after making such enquiry as it thinks fit and after giving reasonable opportunity of 
being heard to the employer, the workmen and the person inte rested in such closure may, having 
regard to the genuineness and adequacy of the reasons stated by employer, the interests of the general 
public and all other relevant factors, by order and for reasons to be recorded in writing, grant or refuse 
to grant su ch permission and a copy of such order shall be communicated to the employer and the 
workmen.  
(3) Where an application has been made under sub -section (1), and the State Government does 
not communicate the order granting or refusing to grant permission to the employer  within a period 
of sixty days from the date on which such application is made, the permission applied for shall be 
deemed to have been granted on the expiration of the said period of sixty days.  
(4) An order of the State Government granting o r refusing to grant permission shall, subject to the 
provi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 49]
order of the State Government granting o r refusing to grant permission shall, subject to the 
provision of sub -section (5), be final and binding on all the parties and shall remain in force for one 
year from the date of such order.  
(5) The State Government may, either on its own motion or on the application made by the 
employer or any workman, review its order granting or refusing to grant permission under sub -section 
(2) or refer the matter to a Tribunal for adjudication:  
Provided that where a reference has been made to a Tribunal under this sub -section, it shall pass 
an award within a period of thirty days from the date of such reference.  
(6) Where no application for permission under sub -section (1) is made within the period specified 
therein, or where the permission for closure has been refused,  the closure of the undertaking shall be 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 50]
50 
 deemed to be illegal from the date of closure and the workmen shall be entitled to all the benefits 
under any law for the time being in force as if the undertaking had not been closed down.  
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provision of this section, the State 
Government may, If it is satisfied that owing to such exceptional circumstance as accident in the 
undertaking or death of the employer or the like it is necessary so to do, by order, direct that the 
provisions of sub -section (1) shall not apply in relation to such undertaking for such period as may be 
specified in the order . 
(8) Where an undertaking is permitted to be closed down under sub -section (2) or where 
permission for closure is  deemed to be granted under sub -section (3), every workman who is 
employed in that undertaking immediately before the date of application for permission under this 
section, shall be entitled to receive compensation which shall be equivalent to fifteen days ' average 
pay for every completed year of continuous service or any part thereof in excess of six months.”.  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 8 of 1984, s. 6]  
Rajasthan  
Amendment of section 25 -O, Central Act No. 14 of 1947. - In sub -section (8) of section 25 -O of the 
principal Act, after the existing expression “six months” and before the existing punctuation mark “.”, 
appearing at the end, the expression “and an amount  equivalent to his three months average pay” shall be 
inserted.  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 21 of 2014, s. 9 ] 
25P. Special provision as to restarting of undertakings closed down before commencement of 
the Industrial D isputes (Amendment) Act, 1976 .—If the appropriate Government is of opinion in 
respect of any undertaking of an industrial establishment to which th is Chapter applies and which closed 
down before the commencement of the Industrial Disputes (Amend ment) Act, 1976 (32 of 1976), — 
(a) that such undertaking was closed  down otherwise than on account of unavoid
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 50]
976 (32 of 1976), — 
(a) that such undertaking was closed  down otherwise than on account of unavoidable 
circumstances beyo nd the control of the employer;  
(b) that there are possibilities  of restarting the undertaking;  
(c) that it is necessary for the rehabilitation of the workmen employed in such undertaking before 
its closure or for the maintenance of supplies and services essential to the life o f the community to 
resta rt the undertaking or both; and  
(d) that the restarting of the undertaking will not result in hardship to the employer in relation to 
the undertaking,  
it may, after giving an opportunity to such employer and workmen, direct, by orde r published in the 
Official Gazette, that the undertaking shall be restarted within such time (not being less than one month 
from the date of the order) as  may be specified in the order.  
Rajasthan  
Substitution of section 25 -P, Central Act No. 14 of 1947: - For section 25 -P of the principle Act, the 
following section shall be substituted, namely: - 
“25-P. Special provision as to restarting of undertaking closed down before commencement of the 
Industrial Disputes (Rajasthan Amendment) Act, 1984. - (1) Where the  undertaking of 
an industrial establishment to which this Chapter applies had been closed down before 
the commencement of the Industrial Disputes (Rajasthan Amendment) Act, 1984 and 
the State Government, after giving reasonable opportunity of being heard t o the 
employer, workmen and the office bearer of the representative union of the concerned 
industrial establishment and after making such enquiry as it thinks fit, is satisfied that, - 
(a) such undertaking was closed down otherwise than on account of unavoi dable 
circumstances, beyond the control of the employer;  
(b) there are possibilities of restarting the undertaking;  
 (c) it is necessary for the rehabilitation of the workmen employed in such undertaking 
before its  closure or for the maintenance of suppli es and services
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 50]
n employed in such undertaking 
before its  closure or for the maintenance of suppli es and services essential to the 
life of the community or both to restarted the undertaking ; and  
  (d) the restarting of the undertaking will not result in hardship to the employer in 
relation to the undertaking,  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 51]
51 
 It may direct, by order published in the O fficial Gazette, that the undertaking shall be 
restarted within such time (not being less than one months from the date of the 
order) as may be specified in the order.  
(2) An order of the State Government directing the restarting of the undertaking under 
sub-section (1) shall, subject to the provisions of sub -section (3), be final and binging 
on all the parties.  
 (3) The State Government may either on its own motion or on the application made by the 
employer and after giving to such employer, the workmen an d the office -bearer of the 
representative union of the concerned industrial establishment an opportunity of being 
heard, review its order directing the restarting of the undertaking under sub -section (1) 
or refer the matter to a Tribunal for adjudication:  
Provided that where a reference has been made to a Tribunal under this sub -section, it shall pass 
and award within a period of sixty days from the date of such reference and pending award by the 
Tribunal, the undertaking shall continue to remain restarted. ” 
[Vide Rajasthan Act 8 of 1984, s. 7]  
Insertion of new section 25 -PP, Central Act No. 14 of 1947 :- After section 25 -P of the principle 
Act as so substituted, the following new section shall be added, namely: - 
“25 PP. Special provision as to reinstatement of workmen retrenched before  the 
commencement of the Industrial Disputes (Rajasthan Amendment) Act, 1984 .-(1) 
Notwithstanding any award or order of a Tribunal or any judgement , order or direction of any Court 
upholding the validity of retrenchment of any  workman employed is any industrial establishment to 
which this Chapter applies who is retrenched at any time during six months immediately before the 
commencement of the Industrial Disputes (Rajasthan Amendment) Act, 1984, the State Government 
shall, eith er on its own motion or on the application made by any such retrenched workman or by the 
office -bearer of the represen
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 51]
 or on the application made by any such retrenched workman or by the 
office -bearer of the representative union of the concerned industrial establishment, examine the 
validity of retrenchment of such workman and if, after making such enq uiry as it thinks fit and after 
giving reasonable opportunity of being heard to the employer, the retrenched workman, or, as case 
may be, to such office -bearer, it is satisfied that, - 
(a) the retrenchment of the workman was without genuine or adequate reasons;  
(b) the retrenchment was by way of victimisation and unfair labour practice; and  
(c) the reinstatement of the workman is required for maintaining industrial peace in the 
industrial establishment,  
 it shall by order and for reasons to be recorded in writing, dire ct the employer to reinstate 
the retrenched workman within such time as may be specified in the order and if it is not 
so satisfied, it shall by such reasoned order uphold the validity of retrenchment of the 
workman and shall communicate its order to the e mployer and the workman.  
  (2) An order of the State Government under sub -section (1), subject to the order passed by it 
as a result of review under sub -section (3) and, where a reference has been made by it to a Tribunal 
under the said sub -section, subjec t to the award passed by the Tribunal, shall be final and binding 
on the employer and the workman.  
(3) The State Government may, either on its own motion or on the application made by the 
employer or the retrenched workman, review its order directing rein statement of the retrenched 
workman or, as the case may be, the order upholding the validity of retrenchment of the workman 
under sub section (1) or refer the matter to a Tribunal for adjudication:  
Provided that where a reference has been made to a Tribuna l under this sub -section , it shall 
pass an award within a period of thirty days from the date of such reference.”.  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 8   of 1984, s. 8]  
Gujarat  
Amendmen
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 51]
ays from the date of such reference.”.  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 8   of 1984, s. 8]  
Gujarat  
Amendment of section 25 -O of XIV of 1947 .—In the principal Act, in section 25 -O, in sub -sectio n 
(8), the words “and an amount equivalent to his last three months average pay” shall be added at the end.  
[Vide Gujarat Act 1 of 2021, s. 4]  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 52]
52 
 25Q. Penalty for lay -off and retrenchme nt without previous permission .—Any employer who 
contravenes the provisions of secti on 25M or 1*** of section 25N shall be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to one  thousand rupees, or 
with both.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Rajasthan  
Substitution of section 25 -Q Cent ral Act No 14 of 1947. - For section 25 -Q of the principle Act, the following 
section shall be substituted, namely: - 
“25-Q.  Penalties for lay -off and retrenchment without previous  permission .- Any employer who - 
(a) lays off a workman without complying with the  provisions of sub -section (1) or sub -
section (2) of section 25 -M; or  
(b) Contravenes an order refusing to grant permission to lay -off or to continue the lay -off 
of a workman under sub -section (4) of section 25 -M; or  
(c) Contravenes such an order as is referred to  in clause (b) passed as a result of review 
under sub -section (7) of section 25 -M; or  
(d) Contravenes the provisions of clause (c) of sub -section (1) or sub section (4) of section 
25-N; or  
(e) Contravenes an order refusing to grant permission to retrench a workman  under sub -
section (2) or an order under sub -section (9) of section 25 -N; or  
(f) Contravenes such an order as is referred to in clause (e) passed as a result of review 
under sub -section (7) or sub section (9) of section 25 -N; or  
 Contravenes the direction to r einstate a retrenched workman given under sub -section (1) of section 25 -
pp or such a direction given as a result of review under sub -section (3) of the said section, Shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or wit h fine which may 
extend to two thousand rupees or with both.” . 
[Vide Rajasthan Act 8 of 1984, s. 9]  
25R. Penalty for closure .—(1) Any employer who closes down an undertaking without complying 
with the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 25 -O shall 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 52]
n an undertaking without complying 
with the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 25 -O shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five  thousand rupees, or with both.  
(2) Any employer, who contravenes 2[an order refusing to grant permission to close down an 
undertaking under sub-section ( 2) of section 25 -O or a direction given under section 25P], shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to 
five thousand rupees, or with both, and where the contravention is a co ntinuing one, with a further fine 
which may extend to two thousand rupees for every day during which the contravention continues after 
the conviction.  
3*     *    *    *   * 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Orissa  
Amendment of section 25 -R.—In section 25 -R of the principal Act; — 
(a) in sub -section (2), for the words, brackets, figures and letters, “a direction given under sub -section 
(2) of section 25 -O or section 25 -P”, the words, brackets, figures and letters “an order refusing to grant 
permi ssion to close down an undertaking under sub -section (2) of section 25 -O or a direction given under 
section 25 -P” shall be substituted;  
(b) Sub-section  (3) shall be omitted.  
[Vide the Orissa Act 6 of  1983, s. 4]  
  
                                                           
1. Certain words omitted by Act 49 of 1984, s. 6 (w.e.f. 18 -8-1984).  
2. Subs. by Act 46 of 1982,  s. 15, for certain words (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
3. Sub -section ( 3) omitted by s. 15, ibid. (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 53]
53 
  
Rajasthan  
Amendment of section 25 -R, Cen tral Act  No. 14 of 1947: - In section 25 -R of the principle Act, - 
(a)  for sub -section (2), the following sub -section shall be substituted, namely: - 
 “(2) Any employer, who contravenes an order refusing to grant permission to close  down an 
undertaking und er sub -section (2) of section 25 -0 or a direction given under section 25 -P, 
shall be punishable with an imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with 
fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both, and where the contravention 
is a continuing  one, with a further fine which may extend to two thousand rupees for every 
day during which the contravention continues after the conviction.”; and  
(b)  sub section (3) shall be omitted.  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 8 of 1984, s. 10]  
25S. Certain provisions of Chapter VA to apply to an industrial establishment to which this 
Chapter applies. —The provisions of sections 25B, 25D, 25FF, 25G, 25H, and 25J in Chapter VA shall, 
so far as may be, apply also in relation to an industrial establi shment to which the pro visions of this 
Chapter apply.]  
Rajasthan  
Amendment of section 25 -S, Central Act No. 14 of 1947: -In section 25 -S of the principle Act, after 
the expression “provisions of this Chapter apply”, the expression “or are applied under sub -section (1 -A) 
of section 25 -k” shall be added . 
[Vide Rajasthan Act 8 of 1984, s. 11]  
1[CHAPTER VC  
UNFAIR LABOUR PRACTICES  
25T. Prohibit ion of unfair labour practice .—No employer or workman or a trade union, whether 
registered under the Trader Unions Act, 1926 (1 8 of 1926), or not, shall com mit any unfair labour 
practice.  
25U. Penalty for comm itting unfair labour practices .—Any person who commits any unfair labour 
practice shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or wi th fine 
which may extend to one  thousand rupees or with both.]  
CHAPTER VI  
PENALTIES  
26. Penalty for ille
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 53]
ch may extend to one  thousand rupees or with both.]  
CHAPTER VI  
PENALTIES  
26. Penalty for illegal strikes and lock -outs.—(1) Any workman who commences, continues or 
otherwise acts in furtherance of, a strike which is illegal under this Act, shall  be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend  to fifty rupees, 
or with both.  
(2) Any employer who commences, continues, or otherwise acts in furtherance of a lock -out which is 
illegal under this Ac t, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, 
or with fine which may extend to one  thousand rupees, or with both.  
27. Penalty for instigation, etc .—Any person who instigates or incites others to take part in, or 
otherwise acts in furtherance of, a strike or lock -out which is illegal under this Act, shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one  
thousand rupees, or with both.  
28. Penalty for giv ing financial aid to illegal strikes and lock -outs.—Any person who knowingly 
expends or applies any money in direct furtherance or support of any illegal strike or lock -out shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or  with fine which may extend 
to one  thousand rupees, or with both.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 16 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 54]
54 
 1[29. Penalty for breach of settlement or award .—Any person who commits a breach of any term 
of any settlement or award, which is binding on him under this Act, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with  fine, or with both 2[and where the 
breach is a continuing one, with a further fine which may extend to two hundred rupees for every day 
during which the breach continues after the conviction f or the first] and the Court trying the offence, if it 
fines the offender, may direct that the whole or any part of the fine realised from him shall be paid, by 
way of compensation, to any person who, in its opinion, ha s been injured by such breach.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Kerala  
Insertion of new section 2 9A.—After section 29 of the principal Act, the following sec tion shall be 
inserted, namely: — 
“29A. Penalty for failure to comply with an order issued under section 10B .—Any person 
who fails to comply with any provisions contained in any order made under sub -section ( 1) of section 
10B shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but 
which may extend to one year and with fine."]  
[Vide Kerala Act 30 of 1979, s. 3] 
30. Pe nalty for disclo sing confidential information .—Any person who wilfully discloses any such 
information as is referred to in section 21 in contravention of the provisions of that section shall, on 
complaint made by or on behalf of the trade union or individu al business affected, be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one  thousand 
rupees, or with both.  
3[30A. Penal ty for closure without notice .—Any employer who closes down  any undertaking 
without complying with the provisions of section 25FFA shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with 
both.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Rajasth
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 54]
, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with 
both.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Rajasthan  
Insertion of new section 30A in Central Act 14 of 1947. — After section 30 of the principal Act, the 
following new section shall be inserted, namely: - 
"30A.  Penalty for contravention of an order made under section 10K. ---Any person who 
contravenes an order issued by the State Government in pursuance of section 10K of the Act shall, on 
conviction, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine 
which may extend to two thousand rupees or with both.".  
[Vide Rajasthan Act  14 of 1970, s. 7]  
31. Penalty for other offences .—(1) Any employer who contravenes the provisions of section 33 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which 
may extend to one  thousand rupees, or with both . 
(2) Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or any rule made thereunder shall, if no 
other penalty is elsewhere provided by or under this Act for such contravention, be punishable with fine 
which ma y extend to one hundred rupees.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh  
Insertion of new section ---After section  31, insert - 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 20, for section 29 (w.e.f. 17 -9-1956).  
2. Ins. by Act 35 of 1965, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1 -12-1965).  
3. Ins. by Act 32 of 1972, s. 3 . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 55]
55 
 "31A. Compounding of offences. --(1) Any offence punishable under 
sections  25Q, 25R, 25U, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30A and sub -sections (1) and (2) of sect ion 31 may, either before 
or after the institution of the prosecution, on an application by the alleged offender, be compounded by 
such officer or authority as the appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
specify in this behalf for such amount as specified in the Table below: - 
Table  
S.N. Section  Compounding amount  
1 2 3 
1 25Q 25 days wages last drawn by each workman.  
2 25R 60 days wages last drawn by each workman.  
3 25U (i) By each workman Rs. 150/ - per day but not exceeding Rs. 3000/ - in 
aggregate;  
(ii) By employer Rs. 300/ - per day but not exceeding the amount in 
aggregate as shown below:  
Number of workmen employed in the 
industry  Amount not exceeding  
1 to 50  Rs. 5000/ - 
51 to 100  Rs. 8000/ - 
101 to 500  Rs. 12000/ - 
More than 500  Rs. 16000/ - 
4 26 (i) In case of illegal strike, Rs. 150/ - per day by each workman but not 
exceeding Rs. 3000/ - in aggregate;  
(ii) In case of illegal lock -out, Rs. 300/ - per day by an employer but not 
exceeding the amount in aggregate as shown below:  
    Number of workmen employed 
in the industry  Amount not exceeding  
1 to 50  Rs. 5000/ - 
51 to 100  Rs. 8000/ - 
101 to 500  Rs. 12000/ - 
More than 500  Rs. 16000/ - 
5 27 and 
28 As per section  26 above for illegal strike and lockout.  
6 29 Rs. 200/ - per day in respect of each of the workman.  
7 30A 25 days wages last drawn by each workman.  
8 31(1)  Number of workmen For first For For third 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 56]
56 
 employed in the industry  occasion  second 
occasion  occasion  
1 to 50  Rs. 
5000/ - Rs. 
10,000/ - Rs. 15,000/ - 
51 to 100  Rs. 
8000/ - Rs. 
16,000/ - Rs. 24,000/ - 
101 to 500  Rs. 
12000/ - Rs. 
24,000/ - Rs. 36,000 - 
More than 500  Rs. 
16000/ - Rs. 
32,000 - Rs. 48,000/ - 
9 31(2)  For each workman, for the first offence Rs. 1000/ - for the second offence Rs. 
2000/ - and for the third offence Rs. 3000/ - 
(ii) For employer:  
Number of workmen 
employed in the industry  For first 
occasion  For 
second 
occasion  For third 
occasion  
1 to 50  Rs. 
1500  Rs. 3000  Rs. 6000  
51 to 100  Rs. 
3000  Rs. 6000  Rs. 10000  
101 to 500 Rs. 
4000  Rs. 8000  Rs. 15000  
More than 500  Rs. 
5000  Rs. 10000  Rs. 20000:  
Provided that the appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the said 
specified compounding amount:  
Provided further that the offences of the same nature committed by the same offender for more than 
three occasions shall not be compoundable:  
Provided also that such offences shall be compoundable only after the alleged offender has acted to 
the satisfaction of such officer or authority that such offence is not continued any further:  
Provided also that when an offence is compounded on an application by the employer, then the 
compounding amount received from him, shall be paid to the concerned workman or equally amongst the 
workman and if any workme n are not identifiable, then the remaining amount shall be deposited in such 
manner as may be notified by the appropriate Government.  
(2) Where an offence has been compounded under sub -section (1), no further proceedings shall be 
taken against the offender  in respect of such offence and the offender, if in custody, shall be released or 
discharged.”  
[Vide Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Second 
Order, 2020, Notification No. S.O. 3465(E), dated (5 -10-2020) and Vide Union Territory of Ladakh 
Reorganisati
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 56]
, Notification No. S.O. 3465(E), dated (5 -10-2020) and Vide Union Territory of Ladakh 
Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, Notific ation No. S.O. 3774(E), dated  (23-10-
2020).]  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 57]
57 
  CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
32. Offence by companies, etc .—Where a person committing an offence under this Act is a company, or other 
body corporate, or an association of persons (whether incorporated or not), every director, manager, secretary, agent 
or other officer or person concerned with the management thereof shall, unless he proves that the offence was 
committed without his knowledge or consent, be deeme d to be guilty of such offence.  
1[33. Conditions of service, etc., to remain unchanged under certain circumstances d uring pendency of 
proceedings .—(1) During the pendency of any conciliation proceeding before a con ciliation officer or a Boar d or of 
any proceeding before 2[an arbitrator or] a Labour Court or Tribunal or National Tribunal in respect of an industri al 
dispute, no employer shall ,— 
(a) in regard to  any matter connected with the dispute, alter, to the prejudice of the workmen concerned in 
such dispute, the conditions of service applicable to them immediately before the comm encement of such 
proceeding; or  
(b) for any misconduct connected with the disp ute, discharge or punish, whether by dismissal or otherwise, 
any workmen concerned in such dispute,  
save with the express permission in writing of the authority before w hich the proceeding is pending.  
(2) During the pendency of any such proceeding in resp ect of an industrial dispute, the employer may, in 
accordance with the standing orders applicable to a work man concerned in such dispute 3[or, where there are no 
such standing orders, in accordance with the terms of the contract, whether express or implied , between him and the 
workman], — 
(a) alter, in regard to any matter not connected with the dispute, the conditions of service applicable to that 
workman immediately before the comm encement of such proceeding; or  
(b) for any misconduct not connected with the dispute, or discharge or punish, whether by dismis sal or 
otherwise, that workman:  
Provided that
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 57]
 dispute, or discharge or punish, whether by dismis sal or 
otherwise, that workman:  
Provided that no such workman shall be discharged or dismissed, unless he has been paid wages for one 
month and an application has been made by the employer to the author ity before which the proceeding is 
pending for approval of th e action taken by the employer.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), no employer shall, during the pendency of any such 
proceeding in respect of an industrial dispute, take any action against any protected work man concerned in such 
dispute — 
(a) by altering, to the prejudice of such protected workman, the conditions of service applicable to him 
immediately before the commencement of such proceeding s; or 
(b) by discharging or p unishing, whether by dismissal or otherwise, such protected workman,  
save with the express permission in writing of the authority before which the proceeding is pending.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, a “protected workman ”, in relation to an establishmen t, 
means a workman who, being 4[a member of the executive or other office bearer] of a registered trade union 
connected with the establishment, is recognised as such in accordance with rules made in this beh alf. 
(4) In every establishment, the number of workmen to be recognised as protected workmen for the purposes of 
sub-section ( 3) shall be one per cent. of the total number of workmen employed therein subject to a minimum 
number of five protected workmen and a max imum number of one hundred protected workmen and for the aforesaid 
purpose, the appropriate Government may make rules providing for the distribution of such protected workmen 
among various trade unions, if any, connected with the establishment and the mann er in which the workmen may be 
chosen and r ecognised as protected workmen.  
(5) Where an employer makes an application to a  conciliation officer, Board, 2[an arbitrator, a] labour Court, 
Tri
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 57]
loyer makes an application to a  conciliation officer, Board, 2[an arbitrator, a] labour Court, 
Tribunal or National Tribunal under the proviso to sub -section ( 2) for  approval of the action taken by him, the 
authority concerned shall, without delay, he ar such application and pass, 5[within a period of three months from the 
date of receipt of such application], such order in rel ation thereto as it deems fit:]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 21, for section 33 (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
2. Ins. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 18 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
3. Ins. by s. 18,  ibid. (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
4. Subs. by Act 45 of 1971, s. 5, for “an officer” (w.e.f. 15 -12-1971).  
5. Subs. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 17, for “as expeditiously as possible” (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 58]
58 
 1[Provided  that where any such authority considers it necessary or expedient so to do, it may, for 
reasons to be recorded in writing, extend such period by such furt her period as it may think fit:  
Provided further that no proceedings before any such authority shall lapse merely on the ground that 
any period specified in this sub -section had expired without suc h proceedings being completed.]  
2[33A. Special provision for adjudication as to whether con ditions of service, etc., changed 
during pendency of proceedings .—Where an employer contravenes the provisions of section 33 durin g 
the pendency of proceedings 3[before a conciliation officer, Board, an arbitrator, a Labour Court, Tribunal 
or National Trib unal], any employee aggrieved by such contravention , may make a camplaint in writing,  
5[in the prescribed manner, — 
(a) to such conciliation officer or Board, and the conciliation officer or Board shall take s uch 
complaint into account in m ediating in, and promoting the settlement of, such industrial dispute; and  
(b) to such arbitrator, Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal and on receipt of such 
complaint, the arbitrator, Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal, as the case may be, shall 
adjudicat e upon the complaint  as if it were a dispute referr ed to or pending before it, in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act and shall submit his or its award to the appropriate Government and 
the provisions of thi s Act shall apply accordingly.] ] 
4[33B. Power to  transfer certain proceedings .—(1) The appropriate Government may, by order in 
writing and for reasons to be stated therein, withdraw any proceeding under this Act pending before a 
Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal and transfer the same t o another Labour Court, Tribunal or 
National Tribunal, as the case may be, for the disposal of the proceeding and the Labour Court, Tribunal 
or National Tribunal to which the proceeding is so transferred may, subject to 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 58]
our Court, Tribunal 
or National Tribunal to which the proceeding is so transferred may, subject to special directions in the 
order of t ransfer, proceed either de novo  or from the stage at which it was so transferred:  
Provided that where a proceeding under section 33 or section 33A is pending before a Tribunal or 
National Tribunal, the proceeding may also be  transferred to a Labour Court.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), any Tribunal or National Tribunal, if so 
authori sed by the appropriate Government, may transfer any proceeding under section 33 or section 33A 
pending before it to any one of the Labour Courts spe cified for the disposal of such proceedings by the 
appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette and the Labour Court to which the 
proceeding is so transfe rred shall dispose of the same.  
5[33C. Recovery of money due from an employer .—(1) Where any money is due to a workman 
from an employer under a settlement or an awa rd or under the provisions of 6[Chapter VA or Chapter 
VB], the workman himself or any other person authorised by him in writing in this behalf, or, in the case 
of the death of  the workman, his assignee or heirs may, without prejudice to any other mode of recovery, 
make an application to the appropriate Government for the recovery of the money due to him, and if the 
appropriate Government is satisfi ed that any money is so due, i t shall issue a certificate for that amount to 
the Collector who shall proceed to recover the same in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue:  
Provided that every such application shall be made within one year from the date on which the money 
became due to  the workman from the employer:  
Provided further that any such application may be entertained after the expiry of the said period of 
one year, if the appropriate Government is satisfied that the applicant had sufficient cause for not making 
the appl ication within the said period.  
(
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 58]
that the applicant had sufficient cause for not making 
the appl ication within the said period.  
(2) Where any workman is entitled to receive from the employer any money or any benefit which is 
capable of being computed in terms of money and if any question arises as to the amount of money due or 
as to the amount at whic h such benefit should be computed, then the question may, subject to any rules 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 46 of 1982 , s. 17 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
2. Ins. by Act 4 8 of 1950, s. 34 and the Schedule.  
3. Subs. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 18, for certain words (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
4. Ins. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 23 (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
5. Subs. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 19, for section 33C (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
6. Subs. by Act 32 of 1976, s. 4, for “Chapter VA” (w.e.f. 5 -3-1976).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 59]
59 
 that may be made under this Act, be decided by such Labour Court as may be specified in this behalf by 
the appropriate Government; 1[within a peri od not exceeding three months:]  
1[Provided that where the presiding officer of a Labour Court considers it necessary or expedient so to 
do, he may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, extend such period by such furth er period as he may 
think fit.]  
(3) For the purposes of computing the money value of a benefit, the Labour Court may, if it so thinks 
fit, appoint a commissioner who shall, after taking such evidence as may be necessary, submit a report to 
the Labour Court and the Labour Court shall determ ine the amount after considering the report of the 
commissioner and o ther circumstances of the case.  
(4) The decision of the Labour Court shall be forwarded by it to the appropriate Government and any 
amount found due by the Labour Court may be recovered i n the manner provided for in sub -section ( 1). 
(5) Where workmen employed under the same employer are entitled to receive from him any money 
or any benefit capable of being computed in terms of money, then, subject to such rules as may be made 
in this behal f, a single application for the recovery of the amount due may be made on behalf of or in 
respect  of any number of such workmen.  
Explanation .—In this section “Labour Court ” includes any court constituted under any law relating to 
investigation and settleme nt of industrial disputes in force in any State.]]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Assam  
Amendment of Section 33 -C.—In the principal Act, in section 33 -C, in sub -section ( 1), for the 
words “to the collector who shall proceed to recover the same in the same manner as an a rrear of land 
revenue” the words “to the Chief Judicial Magistrate having jurisdiction who shall proceed to realize as if 
it were a fine imposed by such Magistrate” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Assam Act 22 of 200 7, s. 3]  
Rajasthan  
Amendment of section 33C,  Centra
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 59]
be substituted.  
[Vide Assam Act 22 of 200 7, s. 3]  
Rajasthan  
Amendment of section 33C,  Central Act 14 of 1947. -In sub -section (1) of section 33C of the 
principal Act, after the expression "Chapter VA", the expression "or under an order issued by the State 
Government under section 10K of the Act" shall be inserted.  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 14 of  1970, s. 8]  
34. Cognizance of offences .—(1) No Court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under 
this Act or of the abetment of any such offence, save on complaint made by or under the authority  of the 
appropriate Government.  
(2) No C ourt inferi or to that of 2[a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class], 
shall try any off ence punishable under this Act.  
35. Protection of persons .—(1) No person refusing to take part or to continue to take part in any 
strike or lock -out which is illegal under this Act shall, by reason of such refusal or by reason of any action 
taken by him under this section, be subject to expulsion from any trade union or society, or to any fine or 
penalty, or to deprivation of any right or benefit to wh ich he or his legal representatives would otherwise 
be entitled, or be liable to be placed in any respect, either directly or indirectly, under any disability or at 
any disadvantage as compared with other members of the union or society, anything to the co ntrary in the 
rules of a trade un ion or society notwithstanding.  
(2) Nothing in the rules of a trade union or society requiring the settlement of disputes in any manner shall 
apply to any proceeding for enforcing any right or exemption secured by this sect ion, and in any such proceeding the 
Civil Court may, in lieu of ordering a person who has been expelled from membership of a trade union or society to 
be restored to membership, order that he be paid out of the funds of the trade union or society such sum by way of 
compensation or dam ages as that Court thinks just.  
3[36. Represent
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 59]
or society such sum by way of 
compensation or dam ages as that Court thinks just.  
3[36. Representation of p arties .—(1) A workman who is a party to a dispute shall be entitled to be represented 
in any  proceeding under this Act by — 
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 19 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
2. Sub s. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 20, for certain words (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
3. Subs. by Act 48 of 1950, s. 34 and the Schedule, for section 36.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 60]
60 
 (a) 1[any member of the executive or office bearer] of a registered trade  union of which he is a member:  
(b) 2 [any member of the executive or other office bearer] of a federation of trade unions to which the trade 
union referred to in clause ( a) is affiliated;  
(c) where the worker is not a member of any trade union, by 2[any member of the executive or other office 
bearer] of any trade union connected with, or by  any other workman employed in the industry in 
which the worker is employed and authori sed in su ch manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) An employer who is a party to a dispute shall be entitled to be represented in any proceeding  
under this Act by — 
(a) an officer of an association of emp loyers of which he is a member;  
(b) an officer of a federation of association of employers to which the association referred to in 
clause ( a) is affiliated;  
(c) where the employer is not a member of any association of employers, by an officer of any 
association of employers connected with,  or by  any other employer engaged in, the industry in which 
the employer is engaged and authori sed in su ch manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) No party to a dispute shall be entitled to be represented by a legal practitioner in any conciliation 
proceedings under this Act or in any proceedings before a Court.  
(4) In any proceeding 2[before a Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal], a party to a dispute 
may be represented by a legal practitioner with the consent of the other parties to the proceeding s and 
3[with the leave of the Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal, as the case may be].]  
4[36A.  Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If, in the opinion of the appropriate Government , any 
difficulty or doubt arises as to the interpretation of any provision of an award or settlement, it may refer 
the question to such Labour Court, Tribunal or Nationa l Tribunal as it may think fit.  
(2) The Labour  Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal to which su
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 60]
a l Tribunal as it may think fit.  
(2) The Labour  Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal to which such question is referred shall, after 
giving the parties an opportunity of being heard, decide such question and its decision shall be final an d 
binding on all such parties.]  
5[36B. Power to exempt .—Where the  appropriate Government is satisfied in relation to any 
industrial establishment or undertaking or any class of industrial establishments or undertakings carried 
on by a department of that Government that adequate provisions exist for the investigation and  settlement 
of industrial disputes in respect of workmen employed in such establishment or undertaking or class of 
establishments or undertakings, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt, conditionally or 
unconditionally such establishment or undertaking or class of establishments or undertakings from all or 
any o f the provisions of this Act.]  
37. Protection of action taken under the Act .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this 
Act or any rules made thereunder.  
38. Power to make rules .—(1) The appropriate Government may, subject to the condition of 
previous publication, make rules for the purpose of giving effect  to the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) the powers and procedure of conciliat ion officers, Boards, Courts, 6[Labo ur Courts, Tribunals 
and National Tribunals] including rules as to the summoning of witnesses, the production of 
documents relevant to the subject -matter of an inquiry or investigation, the number of members 
necessary to form a quroum and the manner of su bmission of reports and awards;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 1971, s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 60]
 awards;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 1971, s. 6, for “an officer” (w .e.f. 15 -12-1971).  
2. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 24, for “before a Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
3. Subs. by s. 24, ibid., for “with the leave of the Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
4. Ins. by s. 25, ibid. (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
5. Ins. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 21 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
6. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 26, for “and Tribunals” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 61]
61 
 1[(aa) the form of arbitration agreement, the manner in which it  may be signed by the parties, 
2[the manner in which a notification may be issued under sub -section ( 3A) of section 10A,] the 
powers of the arbitrator named in the arbitration agreement and the procedure to be followed by him;  
(aaa) the appointment of assessors in proceedings under this Act;]  
3*   *   *   *  * 
(b) the constitution and functions of and the filling of vacancies in Works Committees, and the 
procedur e to be followed by such Committees in  the discharge of their duties;  
4[(c) the salaries and allowances and the terms and conditions for appointment of the presiding 
officers of the Labour Court, Tribunal and the National Tribunal including the allowances admissible 
to members of Courts, Boards a nd to assessors and witnesses;]  
(d) the ministerial establishment which may b e allotted to a Court, Board, 5[Labour Court, 
Tribunal or National Tribunal] and the salaries and allowances payable to members of such 
establishments;  
(e) the manner in which and the persons by and to whom notice of strike or lock -out may be 
given and the manner in which such  notices shall be communicated;  
(f) the conditions subject to which parties may be represented by legal practitione rs in 
proceedings u nder this Act before a Court, 3[Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal];  
(g) any other matter which  is to be or may be prescribed.  
(3) Rules made under this section may provide that a contravention thereof shall be punishable with 
fine not exceeding fifty rupees.  
6[(4) All rules made under this section shall, as soon as possible after they are made, be laid before the 
State Legislature or, where the appropriate Government is the Central Government, bef ore both Houses of 
Parliament.]  
7[(5) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be laid, as soon as may b e 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total peri
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 61]
s may b e 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days 
which may be c omprised in one session or in 8[two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry 
of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid] both Houses agree 
in making any modification in the rule, or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, 
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything pr eviously 
done under that rule.]  
9[39. Del egation of powers .—The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act or rules made thereunder shall, in relation 
to such matters and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be  specified in the di rection, be exercisable 
also,— 
(a) where the appropriate Government is the Central Government, by such officer or authority 
subordinate to the Central Government or by the State Government , or by such officer or authority 
subordinate to  the State Government, as may be spe cified in the notification; and  
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 36 of 1956,  s. 26 (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
2. Ins. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 20 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
3 Clause ( ab) omitted by Act 24 of 2010, s. 8 (w.e. f. 15-9-2010).  
4. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 15 -9-2010).  
5. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 26, for “or Tribunal” (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
6. Ins. by  Act 36 of 1956,  s. 26 (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
7. Ins. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 20 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
8. Subs. by Act 32 of 1976, s. 5, for certain words (w.e.f. 5 -3-1976).  
9. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 27, for section 39 (w.e.f. 17 -9-1956).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 61]
tion 39 (w.e.f. 17 -9-1956).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 62]
62 
 (b) where the appropriate Government is a State Government, by such officer or authority 
subordinate to the State Government as may be s pecified in the notification.]  
1[40. Power to amend Schedules .—(1) The appropriate Government may, if it is of opinion that it is 
expedient or necessary in the public interest so to do, by notification in the Official Gazette, add to the 
First Schedule any industry, and on any such notification being issued , the First Schedule shall be de emed 
to be amended accordingly.  
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, add to or alter or amend the 
Second Schedule or the Third Schedule and on any such notification being issued, the Second Schedule or 
the Third Schedule, as the case may be, shall be de emed to be amended accordingly.  
(3) Every such notification shall, as soon as possible after it is issued, be laid before the Legislature of 
the State, if the notification has been issue d by a State Government, or before Parliament, if the 
notification has been issued by the Central Government.]  
_______________  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 21, for section 40 (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 63]
63 
 1[THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See section 2( n)(vi)] 
INDUSTRIES WHICH MAY BE DECLARED TO BE PU BLIC UTILITY SERVICE S UNDER SUB -CLAUSE ( vi) OF 
CLAUSE ( n) OF SECTION 2  
1. Transport (other than railways) for the carriage of passengers or goods,  2[by land or water];  
3[2. Banking;  
3. Cement;  
4. Coal;  
5. Co tton textiles;  
6. Food stuffs;  
7. Iron and Steel;  
8. Defence establishments;  
9. Servic e in hospitals and dispensaries;  
10. Fire Brigade Service;  
4[11. India G overnment Mints;]  
 12. India Security Press;  
5[13. Copper Mining;  
14. Lead Mining;  
15. Zinc Mining; ] 
6[16. Iron Ore Mining;]  
7[17. Service in any oilfield,]  
8[***] 
9[19. Service in the Uranium Industry;]  
10[20. Pyrites Mining ;] 
 21. S ecurity Paper Mill, Hoshangabad;  
11[22. Service s in the Bank Note Press, Dewas;]  
12[23. Phosphorite Mining;]  
13[24. Magnesite Mining. ] 
14[25. Currency Note Press;]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 29, for the Sc hedule (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
2. Subs. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 22, for “by land, water or air” (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
3. Declared to be Public utility serv ice for six months effective 17 -04-2010 vide Notification No. S .O. 760(E) , dated 06 -04-2010. 
4. These entries were added to the Schedule from time to time by notifications issued under section 40 of the Act.  
5. Items 13 to 15 added by S.O. 1444, dated 3rd May, 1966.  
6. Ins. by S.O. 726, dated 25th February, 1967.  
7. Ins. by S.O. 1776, dated 10th May, 1967.  
8. Entry 18 omitted by Act 45 of 1971, s. 7 (w.e.f. 15 -12-1971).  
9. Ins. by S.O. 1471, dated 10th April, 1968.  
10. Ins. by S.O. 2061, dated 30th May, 1970.  
11. Ins. by S.O. 4697, dated 26th November, 1976.  
12. Ins. by S.O. 47, dated 17th December, 1976.  
13. Ins. by S.O. 2474, dated 4th September, 1980.  
14. Ins.by S.O. 946, dated 7th March, 1981.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 63]
 March, 1981.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 64]
64 
 1[26. Manufacture or production of mineral oil (crude oil), motor and aviation spirit, diesel oil,  kerosene oil, fuel 
oil, diverse hydrocarbon oils and their blends including synthetic fuels, lubricating oils and the like;]  
2[27. Service in the Airports Authority of India;]  
3[28. Industrial establishme nts manufacturing or producing Nuclear Fuel and components, Heavy Water and 
Allied Chemicals and Atomic Energy.]  
4[29. 'Processing or production or distribution of fuel gases' (coal gas, natural gas and the like)]  
5[30. Manufacturing of Alumina and Aluminium; and  
31. Mining of Bauxite.]  
6[32. Services in the Bank Note Paper Mill India Private Limited, Mysore, Karnataka.]  
7[33. Chemical Fertilizer industry .] 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  
Amendment of the First Schedule .—In the First Schedule to the principal Act, after item No. 10, 
the followi ng item shall be added namely: — 
“11. Oxygen and Acetylene.”  
 
 [Vide Karnataka Act 6 of 1963, s. 3.]  
Manipur  
In the Schedule to the Principal Act, for the word, figures and letter, “Section 120 B”, the words, figures 
and letter, “Sections 120 B, 121 to 130” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Manipur  Act 11 of 1983, s. 4]   
                                                           
1. Ins. by S.O. 4207, dated 20thNovember, 1984.  
2. Subs . by Notification No. S .O.1808(E) , dated 05 -08-2011 . 
3. Ins. by S.O. 967, dated 8th April, 1995 . 
4. Subs . by Notification No. S .O.1955(E) dated 20.06.2017   
5. Ins. by Notifications No. S.O.143(E), dated 27th June, 2012.  
6. Ins. by Notification No. S .O.251(E), dated 25 -01-2017.  
7. Ins. by Notification No. S .O.6362(E) , dated 28 -12-2018.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 65]
65 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 7)  
MATTERS WITHIN THE JU RISDICTION OF LABOUR  COURTS  
1. The propriety or legality of an order passed by an employer  under the standing orders;  
2. The application and interpretation of standing orders;  
3. Discharge or dismissal of workmen including re -instatement of, or grant of relief to, workmen 
wrongfully dismissed;  
4. Withdrawal of any customary concession or privilege;  
5. Illegality or otherwise of a strike or lock -out; and  
6. All matters other than those specified in the Third Schedule.  
____________  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 66]
66 
 THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
(See section 7A)  
MATTERS WITHIN THE JU RISDICTION OF INDUSTRIAL  TRIBUNALS  
1. Wages, includi ng the period and mode of payment;  
2. Compensatory and other allowances;  
3. Hours of work and rest intervals;  
4. Leave with wages and holidays;  
5. Bonus, profit sharing, provident fund and gratuity;  
6. Shift working otherwise than in accordance with standi ng orders;  
7. Classification by grades;  
8. Rules of discipline;  
9. Rationalisation;  
10. Retrenchment of workmen and closure of establishment; and  
11. Any other matter that may be prescribed.  
___________________  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 67]
67 
 THE FOURTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 9A)  
CONDITIONS OF SERVICE  FOR CHANGE OF WHICH  NOTICE IS TO BE GIV EN 
1. Wages, including the period and mode of payment;  
2. Contribution paid, or payable, by the employer to any provident fund or pension fund or for the benefit 
of the workmen under any law for t he time being in force;  
3. Compensatory and other allowances;  
4. Hours of work and rest intervals;  
5. Leave with wages and holidays;  
6. Starting , alteration or discontinuance of shift working otherwise than in accordance with standing 
orders;   
7. Classification by grades;  
8. Withdrawal of any customary concession or privilege or change in usage;  
9. Introduction of new rules of discipline, or alteration of existing rules, except in so far as they are 
provided in standing orders;  
10. Rationalisation,  standardi sation or improvement of plant or technique which is likely to lead to 
retrenchment of workmen;  
11. Any increases or reduction (other than casual) in the number of persons employed or to be  employed 
in any occupation or process or department or s hift, 1[not occasioned by circumstances over which 
the employer has no control].]  
______________  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1964, s. 23, for “not due to forced matters” (w.e.f. 19 -12-1964).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 68]
68 
 1[THE FIFTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 2( ra)] 
UNFAIR LABOUR PRACTIC ES 
I.—On the part of employers  and trade unions of employers  
1. To interfere with, restrain from, or coerce, workmen in the exercise of their right to organise, form, 
join or assist a trade union or to engage in concerted activities for the purposes of collective bargaining or 
other mutual aid or protection, that is  to say: — 
(a) threatening workmen with discharge or dismissal, if they join a trade union;  
(b) threatening a lock -out or closure, if a trade union is organised;  
(c) granting wage increase to workmen at crucial periods of trade union organisation, with a 
view to undermining the efforts of the trade union organisation.  
2. To dominate, interfere with or contribute support, financial or otherwise, to an y trade union, that is 
to say: — 
(a) an employer taking an active interest in organising a trade union of his  workmen; and  
(b) an employer showing partiality or granting favour to one of several trade unions attempting 
to organise his workmen or to its members, where such a trade union is not a recognised trade 
union.  
3. To establish employer sponsored trade unions of workmen.  
4. To encourage or discourage membership in any trade union by discriminating agains t any 
workman, that is to say: — 
(a) discharging or punishing a workman, because  he urged other workmen to join or organis e a 
trade union;  
(b) discharging  or dismissing a workman for taking part in any strike (not being as trike which is 
deemed to be an illegal strike under this Act);  
(c) changing seniority rating of workmen because of trade union activities;  
(d) refusing to promote workmen to higher posts on account of their trade union activities;  
(e) giving unmerited promotions to certain workmen with a view to creating discord amongst 
other workmen, or to undermine the strength of their trade union;  
(f) discharging office -bearers or active members of the  trade union on account of th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 68]
rade union;  
(f) discharging office -bearers or active members of the  trade union on account of their trade 
union activities.  
5. To discharge or dismiss workmen — 
(a) by way of victimisation;  
(b) not in good faith, but in the colourable exercise of the employer's rights;  
(c) by falsely implicating a workman in a criminal case on false evidence or on concocted 
evidence;  
(d) for patently false reasons;  
(e) on u ntrue or trumped up allegation of absence without leave;  
(f) in utter disregard of the principles of natural justice in the conduct of domestic enquiry or with 
undue h aste; 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 46 of 1982, s. 23 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1984).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 69]
69 
 (g) for misconduct of a minor or technical character, without having any regard to the nature of 
the particular misconduct or the past record or service of the workman, thereby leading to a 
disproportionate punishment.  
6. To abolish the work of a reg ular nature being done by workmen, and to give such work to 
contractors as a measure of breaking a strike.  
7. To transfer a workman mala fide  from one place to another, under the guise of following 
management policy.  
8. To insist upon individual workmen, w ho are on a legal strike to sign a good conduct bond, as a 
pre-condition to allowing them to resume work.  
9. To show favouritism or partiality to one set of workers regardless of merit.  
10. To employ workmen as “badlis ”, casuals or temporaries and to continue them as such for years, 
with the object of depriving them of the status and privileges of permanent workmen.  
11. To discharge or discriminate against any workman for filing charges or testifying against an 
employer in any enquiry or proceeding relating to any industrial dispute.  
12. To recruit workmen during a strike which is not an illegal strike.  
13. Failure to implement award, settlement or agreement.  
14. To indul ge in acts of force or violence.  
15. To refuse to bargain collectively, in good faith with the recognised trade unions.  
16. Proposing or continuing a lock -out deemed to be illegal under this Act.  
II.—On the part of workmen and trade unions of workmen  
1. To advise or actively support or instigate any strike deemed to be illegal under t his Act.  
2. To coerce workmen in the exercise of their right to self -organisation or to join a trade union or 
refrain from joining an y trade union, that is to say: — 
(a) for a trade union or its members to picketing in such a manner that non -striking workme n are 
physically debarr ed from entering the work place ; 
(b) to indulge in acts of force or violence or to hold out threats of intimidation in connection with 
a str
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 69]
ndulge in acts of force or violence or to hold out threats of intimidation in connection with 
a strike against non -striking workmen or against managerial staff.  
3. For a recognised union to refuse to bargain collectively in good faith with the employer.  
4. To indulge in coercive activities against certification of a bargaining representative.  
5. To stage, encourage or instigate such forms of corrective  actions as willful “go slow ”, squatting on 
the work premises after working hours or “gherao ” of any of the members of the managerial or other 
staff.  
6. To stage d emonstrations at the residence of the employers or the managerial staff members.  
7. To incite or indulge in willful damage to employer 's property connected with the industry.  
8. To indulge in acts of force or violence or to hold out threats of intimidation against any workman 
with a view to p revent him from attending work. ] 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947.pdf - page 70]
70 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
Andhra Pradesh  
In Schedule V  
In the Fifth Schedule, under the heading II on the part of workmen and trade unions of workmen, 
to item 5, the following exp lanation shall be added namely: — 
“Explanation :—For the purpose of this paragraph, 'go slow' means any such activity by any 
number of persons, emp loyed in any industry, acting in combination or with common understanding, 
to slow down or to delay the process of production or work purposely whether called by work to rule 
or by any other name so as the fixed or average or normal level of production or work or output of 
workman or workmen of the establishment is not achieved:  
Provided that all necessary ingredients or inputs for standard quality production or work are made 
available in time and in sufficient quantity. ”. 
[Vide Andhra Pradesh Act 12 of 201 5, s. 4]  
Rajasthan  
Amendment of Fifth Schedule, Central Act No. 14 of 1947. - After the existing paragraph 5 of Part 
II to the Fifth Schedule of the principal Act, the following shall be added, namely: - 
Explanation .- For the purpose of this paragraph, ‘go slow’ means any such activity by any number of 
persons, employed in any industry, acting in combination or with common understanding, to slow down 
or to delay the process of production or work purposely whether called by work to rule or by any other 
name, so as the fixed or average or normal level of production or work or output of workman or workmen 
of the establishment is not achieved:  
Provided that all necessary ingredients or inputs for standard quality production or work are made 
available in time and in sufficient quantity.”.  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 21 of 2014, s. 10]  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT (STANDING ORDERS) ACT, 1946.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT (STANDING ORDERS) ACT, 1946  
_______  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTION  
_______  
SECTION  
1.  Short title, extent and application.  
2.   Interpretation.  
3.  Submission of draft standing orders.  
4.  Conditions for certification of standing orders.  
5.  Certification of standing orders.  
6.  Appeals.  
7.  Date of operation of standing orders.  
8.  Register of standing orders.  
9.  Posting of standing orders.  
10.  Duration and modification of standing orders.  
10A. Payment of subsistence allowance.  
11.  Certifying Officers and appellate authorities to have powers of civil court.  
12.  Oral evidence in contradiction of standing orders not admissible.  
12A. Temporary application of model standing orders.  
13.  Penalties and procedure.  
13A. Interpretation,  etc., of standing orders.  
13B. Act not to apply to certain industrial establishments.  
14. Power to exempt.  
14A. Delegation of powers.  
15. Power to make rules.  
THE SCHEDULE  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT (STANDING ORDERS) ACT, 1946.pdf - page 2]
2 
 THE INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT (STANDING ORDERS) ACT, 1946  
ACT NO. 20 OF 19461 
[23rd April , 1946 .] 
An Act to require employers in industrial establishments formally to define conditions of 
employment under them . 
WHEREAS  it is expedient to require employers in industrial establishments to define with sufficient 
precision the conditions of employment under them and to make the said conditions known to workmen 
employed by them;  
It is hereby enacted as follows: — 
STATE  AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of long title of Act XX of 1946. —In the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 
1946 (hereinafter referred to as “the said Act” ) for the long title the following shall be substituted, 
namely: -- 
“An Act to provide for defining with sufficient precision certain conditions of employment in 
industrial  establishment in the State of Bombay.”  
[Vide Bombay Act XXI of 1958, s. 2]  
Amendment of preamble of Act XX of 1946 .—In the preamble of the said Act, for the portion 
beginnin g with the words “to require” and ending with the words “by them”, the words “to provide for 
defining with sufficient precision certain conditions of employment in industrial establishment in the 
State of Bombay, and for certain other matters” shall be sub stituted.  
[Vide Bombay Act XXI of 1958, s. 3]  
1. Short title, extent and application .—(1) This Act may be called the Industrial Employment 
(Standing Orders) Act, 1946.  
(2) It extends to2[the whole of India  3***]. 
4[(3) It applies to every industrial establishment wherein one hundred or more workmen are 
employed, or were employed on any day of the preceding twelve months:  
Provided that the appropriate Government may, after giving not less than two months ’ notice of its 
intention so to do, by notificati on in the Official Gazette, apply the provisions of this Act to any industrial 
establishment employing such number of persons less than one hundred as may be specified in the 
notification.  
5*   *   *   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT (STANDING ORDERS) ACT, 1946.pdf - page 2]
ch number of persons less than one hundred as may be specified in the 
notification.  
5*   *   *        *   * 
6[(4) Nothing in this Act  shall apply to — 
                                                           
1. Th is Act has been extended to — 
    (i) Goa, Daman and Diu by Reg.  12 of 1962, s. 3 and the Sch . 
(ii) Pondicherry by Regulation 7 of 1963, s. 3 and the Sch . I (w.e.f. 1 -10-1963) , and  
(iii) the whole of the Union territory of Lakshadweep, vide Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 and the Sch.  
The Act has been amended in its ap plication to — 
(i) Maharashtra by Maharashtra Act 54 of 1974.  
(ii) Mysore by Mysore Act 37 of 1975.  
(iii) Madras by Madras Act 24 of 1960, and  
(iv) Andhra Pradesh by A. P. Act 9 of 1969.  
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “all the Provinces of India ”. 
3. The wo rds “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 51 of 1970, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -9-1971).  
4. Subs. by Act 16 of 1961, s. 2, for sub -section ( 3). 
5. Second proviso omitted by Act 39 of 1963, s. 2 (w.e.f. 23 -12-1963).  
6. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 23-12-1963 ). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT (STANDING ORDERS) ACT, 1946.pdf - page 3]
3 
 (i) any industry to which the  provisions of Chapter VII of the Bombay Industrial Relations Act, 
1946 (Bombay Act 11 of 1947) apply; or  
(ii) any industrial establishment to which the provisions of the Madhya Pradesh Industrial 
Employment (Standing Orders) Ac t, 1961 (Madhya Pradesh Act 26 of 1961) apply:  
Provided that notwithstanding anything contained in the Madhya Pradesh Industrial Employment 
(Standing Orders) Act, 1961 (Madhya Pradesh Act 26 of 1961), the provisions of this Act shall apply 
to all industria l establishments under the control of the Central Government.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 1. —In section 1 of the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946 
(Central Act 20 of 1946) in its application to the State of Karnataka, for the words “one hundred” 
occurring in sub -section (3) and in the proviso to it, the word “fifty”, shall be subst ituted . 
[Vide Karnataka Act 37 of 1975, s. 2]  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 1 of Act XX of 1946 .—In sub -section (3) of section 1 of the said Act, for the 
words “one hundred” the word “fifty” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Bombay Act XXI of 1958, s. 4]  
2.  Interpretation .—In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context, — 
1[(a) “appellate authority ” means an authority appointed by the appropriate Government by 
notification in the Official Gazette to exercise in such area as may be s pecified in the notification the 
functions of an appellate authority under this Act:  
Provided that in relation to an appeal pending before an Industrial Court or other authority 
immediately before the commencement of the Industrial Employment (Standing Ord ers) Amendment 
Act, 1963 (39 of 1963), that court or authority shall be deemed to be the appellate authority;]  
(b) “appropriate Government ” means in respect of industrial establishments under the control of 
the Central Government or a  2[Railway administration] or in a major port, mine or oil -f
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT (STANDING ORDERS) ACT, 1946.pdf - page 3]
ontrol of 
the Central Government or a  2[Railway administration] or in a major port, mine or oil -field, the 
Central Government, and in all other cases, the State Government:  
3[Provided that where any question arises as to whether any industrial establishment is under the 
control of the Central Government , that Government may, either on a reference made to it by the 
employer or the workman or a trade union or other representative body of the workmen, or on its own 
motion and after giving the parties an opportunity of being heard, decide the question and su ch 
decision shall be final and binding on the parties;]  
4[(c) “Certifying Officer ” means a Labour Commissioner or a Regional Labour Commissioner, 
and includes any other officer appointed by the appropriate Government, by notification in the 
Official Gazett e, to perform all or any of the functions of a Certifying Officer under this Act;]  
(d) “employer ” means the owner of an industrial establishment to which this Act for the time 
being applies, and includes — 
(i) in a factory, any person named under  5[clause ( f) of sub -section ( 1) of section 7, of the 
Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948)], as manager of the factory;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 39 of 1963, s. 3,  for cl. ( a) (w.e.f. 23 -12-1963).  
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “Federal railway”.  
3. Added by Act 18 of 1982, s. 2 (w.e.f. 17 -5-1982).  
4. Subs. by Act 16 of 1961, s.3, for c l. (c). 
5. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., “for clause ( e) of  sub-clause ( 1) of section 9 of Factories Act, 1934 (25 of 1934)”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT (STANDING ORDERS) ACT, 1946.pdf - page 4]
4 
 (ii) in any industrial establishment under  the control of any department of any Government in 
India, the authority appointed by such Government in this  behalf, or where no authority is so 
appointed, the head of the department;  
(iii) in any other industrial establishment, any person responsible to the owner for the 
supervision and control of the industrial establishment;  
(e) “industrial establishment ” means— 
(i) an industrial establishment as defined in clause ( ii) of section 2 of the Payment of Wages 
Act, 1936 (4 of 1936), or  
1[(ii) a factory as defined in clause ( m) of section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948), 
or] 
(iii) a railway as defined in clause ( 4) of section 2 of the Indian Railways Act; 1890 (9 of 
1890), or  
(iv) the establishment of a person who, for the purpose of fulfilling a contract with the owner 
of any industrial establishment, employs workmen;  
(f) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made by the appropriate Government under this Act;  
(g) “standing orders ” means rules relating to matters set out in the Schedule;  
(h) “trade union ” means a trade union for the time being registered under the Indian Trade Unions 
Act, 1926 (16 of 1926);  
2[(i) “wages ” and “workman ” have the meanings respectively assigned to them in clauses ( rr) and 
(s) of section 2 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947) .] 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 2 of Act XX of 1946 .—In section 2 of the said Act, -- 
(a) before clause (a), insert the following clause, namely: -- 
"(1a) 'amendments' mean in relation to the model standing orders any amendments proposed 
to such orders under section 3 and includes any alterations, variations  or additions proposed 
thereto;  
(b) in clause (d), for sub -clause (iii), substitute the following sub -clause, namely: -- 
"(iii) in any other industrial establishment -- 
(a) any person responsible to the owner for the supervisions and control of the 
industrial establishme
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT (STANDING ORDERS) ACT, 1946.pdf - page 4]
 any person responsible to the owner for the supervisions and control of the 
industrial establishment;  
(b) where a person who, for the purpose of fulfilling a contract with the owner of the 
industrial establishment, employs workmen on the premises of the establishment for the 
execution of the whole or any part of any work which is ordinarily part of such 
establishment then in relation to such workmen, the owner of the industrial 
establishment;  
(c) in clause (e), delete sub -clause (iv)  shall be del eted; 
(d) after clause (e), insert the following clauses, namely: -- 
"(ee) 'model standing orders' mean s tanding orders prescribed under section 15;  
 (ef) 'modification' includes in relation to a standing order, any alteration, variation, 
addition or deletion in, or to, such order;"  
[Vide Bombay Act XXI of 1958, s. 5]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 16 of 1961,  s. 3, for sub -clause ( ii) 
2. Subs. by Act 18 of 1982, s. 2 for cl . (i) (w.e.f. 17-5-1982).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT (STANDING ORDERS) ACT, 1946.pdf - page 5]
5 
 Insertion of new section 2A in  Act XX of 1946. —After section 2 of the said Act, the following 
section shall be inserted, namely: -- 
"2A. Application of model standing orders to every industrial establishment .--(1) Where this 
Act applies to an industrial establishment, the model standing  orders for every matter set out in the 
Schedule applicable to such establishment shall apply to such establishment from such date as the 
State Government may by notification in the Official Gazette appoint  in this behalf:  
Provided that nothing in this sec tion shall be deemed to affect any standing orders which are 
finally certified under this Act and have come into operation under this Act in respect of any 
industrial establishment before the date of the coming into force of the Industrial Employment 
(Stan ding Orders) Bombay Amendment) Act, 1957."  
[Vide Bombay Act XXI of 1958, s. 6]  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 2 of Act XX of 1946 .—In section 2  of the Industrial Employment (Standing 
Orders) act, 1946, in clause (d), -- 
(1) for sub -clause (iii) the following shall be substituted, namely: -- 
“(iii) in any other industrial establishment — 
(a) any person responsible to the owner for the supervision and control of the industrial 
establishment;  
(b) where a person who for the purpose of fulfilling a contract  with the owner  of the 
industrial establishment employs workmen on the premises of the establishment for the 
execution of the whole or any part of any work which is ordinarily part of such establishment 
then in relation to such workmen, the owner of the in dustrial establishment;  
(2) sub -clause (iv) shall be, deleted;  
[Vide Bombay Act XXXVI of 1956, s. 2]  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 2A of Act XX of 1946. —In the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) 
Act, 1946, in its application to the State of Maharashtra (hereinafter, referred to as the “Principal Act”), 
section 2A shall be renumbered as sub -section (1) of that section, a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT (STANDING ORDERS) ACT, 1946.pdf - page 5]
d to as the “Principal Act”), 
section 2A shall be renumbered as sub -section (1) of that section, and after sub -section (1) so 
renumbered, the following new sub -section shall be added, namely: -- 
“(2) Notwithstanding anything  contained in the proviso to sub -section (1), model standing orders 
made in respect of additional matters included in the Schedule after the coming into force of the Act 
referred to in that proviso (being additional matters relating to probationers or badlis  or temporary or 
casual workmen) shall unless such model standing orders are in the opinion of Certifying Officer less 
advantageous to them than the corresponding standing orders applicable to them under the said 
proviso also apply in relation to suc h workmen in the establishments referred to in the said proviso 
from such date as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this 
behalf. "  
[Vide Maharashtra Act LIV of 1974, s. 2]  
3. Submission of draft standing orders .—(1) Within six months from the date on which this Act 
becomes applicable to an industrial establishment, the employer shall submit to the Certifying Officer five 
copies of the draft standing orders proposed by him for adoption in his industrial establishme nt. 
(2) Provision shall be made in such draft for every matter set out in the Schedule which may be 
applicable to the industrial establishment, and where model standing orders have been prescribed, shall 
be, so far as is practicable, in conformity with suc h model.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT (STANDING ORDERS) ACT, 1946.pdf - page 6]
6 
 (3) The draft standing orders su bmitted under this section shall be accompanied by a statement giving 
prescribed particulars of  the workmen employed in the industrial establishment including the name of the 
trade union, if any, to which they belong.  
(4) Subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, a group of employers in similar industrial 
establishments may submit a joint dra ft of standing orders under this section.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  
Substitution of section 3 .—For section 3 of the Industrial  Empl oyment (Standing Orders) Act, 19 46 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the following shall be substituted, namely: -- 
“3. Submission of Standing Orders .—(1) Within six months from the date on which the 
Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) (Karnataka Amendmen t) Act, 2005 becomes applicable  to 
an industrial establishment, the employer shall prepare the Standin g Orders proposed by him for 
adoption in his industrial establishment.  
(2) The Standing Order prepared as required under sub -section ( 1) shall refer to every matter set 
out in the schedule which may be applicable to the Industrial establishment and where Mo del 
Standing Orders have been prescribed sh all be so far as is practicable in conformity with such Mode l 
Standing Order.  
(3) The Standing Orders so prepared shall be discussed with the Trade unions existing in the 
Industrial establishment or representatives of the workmen, before adoption and the employee 
providing proof thereof:  
Provided no Standing Order adopted under this sub -section shall be effective unless a copy 
thereof as adopted is sent to the Certifying Officer by Registered Post Ack nowledgement due and the 
acknowledgement therefor is received and filed.  
(4) If there is no dispute with regard to the clauses and matters set out in the Standing Orders 
drafted by the employer of the Industrial Establishment, then it shall be adopted in t he Industrial 
Establishment as if it is cert
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT (STANDING ORDERS) ACT, 1946.pdf - page 6]
ndustrial Establishment, then it shall be adopted in t he Industrial 
Establishment as if it is certified under this Act and a copy thereof shall be sent immediately to the 
Certifying Authority by Registered Post Acknowledgement Due.  
(5) If there is any dispute or disagreement with regard to the adoption of any  clauses or matter set 
out in the schedule between the employer and the trade Union or workmen representatives, then such 
Standing Orders drafted by the employer shall be submitted to the Certifying Officer notified under 
the rules with thirty days from th e date of dispute, for adoption in the Industrial establishment.”  
[Vide Karnataka Act 12 of 2014, s. 2] 
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 3 of Act XX of 1946 .—In section 3 of the said Act, -- 
(a) for sub -section (1), the following shall be substituted, namely: -- 
"(1) Within six months from the date on which the model standing orders apply to any 
industrial establishment under section 2A, the employer or any workman employed therein may 
submit to the Certifying Officer five copies of the draft amendments for adoption in such 
industrial establishment:  
Provided that no amendment which provides for the deletion or omission of any rule in the 
model standing orders relating to any matter set out in the Schedule shall be submitted under this 
section;"  
(b) sub -section (2) shall be deleted.  
(c) in sub -section (3), for the words "draft standing orders, substitute "draft amendments"  
shall be substit uted. 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT (STANDING ORDERS) ACT, 1946.pdf - page 7]
7 
 (d) in sub -section  (4), for the words "draft of standing orders", substitute "draft of 
amendments".  
(e) for the marginal note,  the marginal note "Submission of amendments."  Shall be 
substituted.  
[Vide Bombay XXI of 1958, s. 7]  
4. Conditions for certification of standing orders .—Standing orders shall be certifiable under this 
Act if — 
(a) provision is made therein for every matter set out in the Schedule which is  applicable to the 
industrial establishment, and  
(b) the standing orders are otherwise in conformity with the provisions of this Act;  
and it1[shall be the function] of the Certifying Officer or appellate authority to adjudicate upon the 
fairness or reasonableness of the provisions of any standing orders.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 4 .-In section 4 of the principal Act, for the words “Standing Orders shall be 
certifiable”, the words, brackets and figures “In the event of submitting the draft Standing Order under 
sub-section ( 5) of the section 3, the Standing Orders shall be certifiable” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Karnataka Act 12 of 2014, s. 3]  
Maharashtra  
Dele tion of section 4 of Act XX of 1946 .—Section 4 of the said Act shall be deleted.  
[Vide Bombay Act XXI of 1958, s. 8]  
5. Certification of standing orders .—(1) On receipt of the draft under section 3, the Certifying 
Officer shall forward a copy thereof to the trade union, if any, of the workmen, or where there is no such 
trade union, to the workmen in such manner as may be prescribed, together with a notice in the prescribed 
form requiring objections, if any, which the workmen may desire to make to the draft standing orders to 
be submitted to him within fifteen days from the rec eipt of the notice.  
(2) After giving the employer and the trade union or such other representatives of the workmen as 
may be prescribed an opportunity of being heard, the Certifying Officer shall decide whether or not any 
modification of or addition to the
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT (STANDING ORDERS) ACT, 1946.pdf - page 7]
ng heard, the Certifying Officer shall decide whether or not any 
modification of or addition to the  draft submitted by the employer is necessary to render the draft standing 
orders certifiable under this Act, and shall make an order in writing accordingly.  
(3) The Certifying Officer shall thereupon certify the draft standing orders, after making any 
modifications therein which his order under sub -section ( 2) may require, and shall within seven days 
thereafter send copies of the certified standing orders authenticated in the prescribed manner and of his 
order under sub -section ( 2) to the employer and to t he trade union or other prescribed representatives of 
the workmen.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 5 .-In section 5 of the principal Act, in sub -section ( 1), for the word and the 
figure “section 3”, the words, brackets and figure “sub -section  (5) of section 3” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Karnataka Act 12 of 2014, s. 4]  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 32 for “ shall not be the function” (w.e.f.17 -9-1956).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT (STANDING ORDERS) ACT, 1946.pdf - page 8]
8 
 Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 5 of Act XX of 1946. —In section 5 of the said Act, -- 
(a) in sub -section (1), -- 
(i) after the words "as may be prescribed", insert "or the employer, as the case may be", 
and after the word "workmen" where it occurs for the third time, insert "or employer";  
(ii) for the words "draft standing orders", substitute the words "draft amendments ". 
(b) in sub -section (2), -- 
(i) after the words "giving the employer", insert "the workmen submitting the 
amendments";  
(ii) delete the words "or addition to";  
(iii) for the words "the draft submitted by the employer is necessary to render the draft 
standi ng orders certifiable under this Act", substitute "the draft submitted under sub -section 
(1) of section 3 is necessary".  
(c) in sub -section (3), -- 
(i) for the words "certify the draft standing orders", substitute "certify the draft 
amendments";  
(ii) for th e words "certified standing orders", substitute "model standing orders together 
with copies of the certified amendments thereof".  
(d) in the marginal note, for the words "standing orders", substitute the word "amendments".  
[Vide Bombay Act XXI of 1958, s. 9] 
6. Appeals .—(1)1[Any employer, workmen, trade union or other prescribed representatives of the 
workmen] aggrieved by the order of the Certifying Officer under sub -section ( 2) of section 5 may, 
within2[thirty days] from the date on which copies are sent under sub -section ( 3) of that section, appeal to 
the appellate authority, and the appellate authority, whose decision shall be final, shall by order in writing 
confirm the standing orders either in the form certified by the Certifying Officer or after amen ding the 
said standing orders by making such modifications thereof or additions thereto as it thinks necessary to 
render the standing orders certifiable under this Act.  
(2) The appellate authority shall, within seven days of its order under sub -section ( 1), send copies 
thereof  to the Ce
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT (STANDING ORDERS) ACT, 1946.pdf - page 8]
ority shall, within seven days of its order under sub -section ( 1), send copies 
thereof  to the Certifying Officer, to the employer and to the trade union or other prescribed 
representatives of the workmen, accompanied, unless it has confirmed without amendment the standing 
orders as certified by the Certifying Officer, by copies of the standing orders as certified by it and 
authenticated in the prescribed manner.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 6 of Act XX of 1946 .—In section 6 of the said Act, -- 
(a) in sub -section (1) for the portion beginning with "confirm the standing orders" and ending 
with "certifiable under this Act", substitute the following, namely: -- "confirm the amendments 
either in the form certified by the Certifying Officer or after further modifying the same as the 
appellate authority th inks necessary."  
(b) in sub -section (2), -- 
(i) for the  words "unless it has confirmed without amendment the standing orders", 
substitute "unless it has confirmed without further modifications the amendments";  
(ii) for the words "by copies of the standing orders", substitute " by copies of the model 
standing orders together with the amendments".  
[Vide Bombay Act XXI of 1958, s. 10]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 1982, s. 3, for “Any person” (w.e.f. 17 -5-1982).  
2. Subs. by Act 16 of 1961, s. 4, for “twenty -one days” . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT (STANDING ORDERS) ACT, 1946.pdf - page 9]
9 
 7. Date of operation of stan ding orders .—Standing orders shall, unless an appeal is preferred under 
section 6, come into operation on the expiry of thirty days from the date on which authenticated copies 
thereof are sent under sub -section (3) of section 5, or where an appeal as aforesaid is preferred, on the 
expiry of seven days from the date on which copies of the order of the appellate authority are  sent under 
sub-section (2) of section 6.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 7 .-Section 7 shall be renumbered as sub -section (2), thereof and before sub -
section (2) as so renumbered, the following shall be inserted, namely: - 
“(1) Standing Orders ass adopted under sub -section (4) of section 3 shall come into operation on the 
expiry of 30 days from the date on with the employer and the trade union or workmen representatives 
agree to adopt the standing orders.”  
[Vide Karnataka Act 12 of 2014, s. 5] 
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 7 of Act XX of 1946 . –In section 7 of the said Act and in the marginal note 
thereto, after the words “standing orders” the words “or amendments” shall be inserted.  
[Vide Bombay Act XXI of 1958, s. 11]  
8. Register of standing orders .—A copy of all standing orders as finally certified under this Act 
shall be filed by the Certifying Officer in a register in the prescribed form maintained for the purpose, and 
the Certifying Officer shall furnish a copy thereof to any pers on applying therefore on payment of the 
prescribed fee.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 8 .-In section 8 of the principal Act, after the words “finally certified”, the 
words “or adopted” shall be inserted.  
[Vide Karnataka Act 12 of 2014, s. 6] 
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 8 of Act XX of 1946 .—In section 8 of the said Act, -- 
(a) After the words "all standing orders", insert the words "or model standing orders together with 
all the amendments"  shall be inserted ; 
(b) in the marginal note, after 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT (STANDING ORDERS) ACT, 1946.pdf - page 9]
ing orders together with 
all the amendments"  shall be inserted ; 
(b) in the marginal note, after the words "standing orders", insert "and model standing orders 
together with all certified amendments"  shall be inserted . 
[Vide Bombay Act XXI of 1958, s. 12]  
9. Posting of standing orders .—The text of the standing orders as finally certified un der this Act 
shall be prominently posted by the employer in English and in the language understood by the majority of 
his workmen on special boards to be maintained for the purpose at or near the entrance through which the 
majority of the workmen enter the  industrial establishment and in all departments thereof where the 
workmen are employed.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT (STANDING ORDERS) ACT, 1946.pdf - page 10]
10 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 9 .—In section 9 of the principal Act, after the words “finally certified”, the 
words “or adopted” shall be inserted.  
[Vide Karnataka Act 12 of 2014, s. 7] 
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 9 of Act XX of 1946 .—In section 9  of the said Act, -- 
(a) after the words "standing orders", insert the words "or model standing orders together with all 
the amendments";  
(b) in the marginal note, after the words "standing orders", insert the words "and model standing 
orders together with all certified amendments " 
[Vide Bombay Act XXI of 1958, s. 13]  
10. Duration and modification of standing orders .—(1) Standing orders finally certified under this 
Act shall not, except on agreement between the employer and the workmen1[or a trade union or other 
representative body of the workmen] , be liable to modification until the expiry of six months from the 
date on which the standing orders  or the last modifications thereof came into operation.  
2[(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), an employer or workman1[or a trade union or other 
representative body of the workmen] may apply to the Certifying Officer to have the standing order s 
modified , and such application shall be accompanied by five copies of  3*** the modifications proposed to 
be made, and where such modifications are proposed to be made by agreement between the employer and 
the workmen1[or a trade union or other representative body of the workmen] , a certified copy of that 
agreement shall be filed along with the application.]  
(3) The foregoing provisions of this Act shall apply in respect of an application under sub -section ( 2) 
as they apply to the certification o f the first standing orders.  
4[(4) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 2) shall apply to an industrial establishment in respect of 
which the appropriate Government is the Government of the State of Gujarat or the Government of the 
State of Maharashtra.]  
STAT E A
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT (STANDING ORDERS) ACT, 1946.pdf - page 10]
s the Government of the State of Gujarat or the Government of the 
State of Maharashtra.]  
STAT E AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 10 .-In section 10 of the principal Act, - 
(i) in sub -section (1), after the words finally certified”, the words “or adopted” shall be inserted;  
(ii) after sub -section (2) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely: - 
“Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall be applicable in case of modifications 
mutually agreed by an employer, workmen or a trade union or other representative body of the 
workmen and such modifications shall be effected under sub -section s (3) and (4) of section 3. ” 
[Vide Karnataka Act 12 of 2014, s. 8]  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 10 of Act XX of 1946 .—In section 10 of the said Act, -- 
(a) in sub -section (1), -- 
                                                           
1.  Ins. by Act 18 of 1982, s. 4 (w.e.f. 17 -5-1982).  
2. Subs. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 32, for sub-section ( 2) (w.e.f. 17 -9-1956).  
3. Certain word s omitted by Act 39 of 1963, s. 4 (w.e.f. 23 -12-1963).  
4. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -12-1963).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT (STANDING ORDERS) ACT, 1946.pdf - page 11]
11 
 (i) after the words "standing orders", at both the places where they occur, "or the 
amendments";  shall  be inserted;  
(ii) after the words "came into operation", add the following: -- 
"and where model standing orders have not been amended as aforesaid, the model 
standing orders shall not be liable to such modification until the expiry of one year from the 
date on which they were applied under section 2A".  
(b) for sub -section (2), substitute the following sub -section, namely: -- 
"(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), an employer, workman or any prescribed 
representatives of workmen desiring to modify the standing orders or the model standing 
orders together with the amendments, as finally certified under this Act, or the model 
standing orders applied u nder section 2A, as the case may be, shall make an application to the 
Certifying Officer in that behalf, and such application shall be accompanied by five copies of 
the standing orders, or the model standing orders, together with all amendments thereto as 
certified under this Act or model standing orders in which shall be indicated the 
modifications proposed to be made and where such modifications are proposed to be made by 
agreement between the employer and workmen a certified copy of the agreement shall b e 
filed along with the application"  
[Vide Bombay Act XXI of 1958, s. 14]  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 10 of Act XX of 1946. —In section 10 of the principal Act in sub -section (4), 
the words “or the Government of the State of Maharashtra” shall be delete d. 
[Vide Maharashtra Act LIV of 1974, s. 3]  
1[10A.  Payment of subsistence allowance .—(1) Where any workmen is suspended by the employer 
pending investigation or inquiry into complaints or charges of misconduct against him, the employer shall 
pay to such workman subsistence allowance — 
(a) at the rate of fifty per cent . of the wages which the workman was entitled to immediately 
preceding the date of such suspe
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT (STANDING ORDERS) ACT, 1946.pdf - page 11]
 cent . of the wages which the workman was entitled to immediately 
preceding the date of such suspension, for the first ninety days of suspension; and  
(b) at the rate of seventy -five per cent . of such wages for the remaining period of suspension if 
the delay in the completion of disciplinary proceedings against such workman is not directly 
attributable to the conduct of such workman.  
(2) If any dispute arises regarding the subsistence allowance pay able to a workman under sub -section 
(1) the workman or the employer concerned may refer the dispute to the Labour Court, constituted under 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the industrial 
establis hment wherein such workman is employed is situate and the Labour Court to which the dispute is 
so referred shall, after giving the parties an opportunity of being heard, decide the dispute and such 
decision shall be final and binding on the parties.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this section, where provisions 
relating to payment of subsistence allowance under any other law for the time being in force in any State 
are more beneficial than the provisions of this section , the provisions of such other law shall be applicable 
to the payment of subsistence allowance in that State.]  
11. Certifying Officers and appellate authorities to have powers of civil court .—2[(1)] Every 
Certifying Officer and appellate authority shall  have all the powers of a Civil Court for the purposes of 
receiving evidence, administering oaths, enforcing the attendance of witnesses, and compelling the 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 18 of 1982, s. 5 (w.e.f. 17 -5-1982).  
2.  S. 11 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act  39 of 1963, s. 5 (w.e.f. 23 -12-1963).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT (STANDING ORDERS) ACT, 1946.pdf - page 12]
12 
 discovery and production  of documents, and shall be deemed to be a civil court within the meaning o f 
1[sections 345 and 346 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974). ] 
2[(2) Clerical or arithmetical mistakes in any order passed by a Certifying Officer or appellate 
authority, or errors arising therein from any accidental slip or omission may, at any time, be corrected by 
that Officer or authority or the successor in office of  such Officer or authority, as the case may be.]  
12. Oral evidence in contradiction of standing orders not admissible .—No oral evidence having 
the effect of adding to or otherwise varying or contradicting standing orders as finally certified under this 
Act shall be admitted in any Court.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 12 .-In section 12 of the principal Act, after the words “finally certified”, the 
words “or adopted” shall be inserted.  
[Vide Karnataka Act 12 of 2014, s. 9]  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 12 of Act XX of 1946 .—In section 12 of the said Act, -- 
(a) for the words " standing orders as finally certified under this Act ” the words “standing orders  
or the model standing orders , or model standing standing orders ” with all the amendments as finally  
under th is Act , as case may be,” shall be substituted.  
(b) in the marginal note , for the words “standing order ” the words “standing ord ers, etc ,” shall be 
substitute d. 
[Vide Bombay Act XXI of 1958, s. 15]  
3[12A. Temporary application of model standing orders .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained 
in sections 3 to 12, for the period commencing on the date on which this Act becomes applicable to an 
industrial establishment and ending with the date on which the standing orders as finally certified under 
this Act come into operation under section 7 in that establishment, the prescribed model standing orders 
shall be deemed to be adopted in that e stablishment, and the provisions of section 9, sub -section ( 2) of 

<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT (STANDING ORDERS) ACT, 1946.pdf - page 12]
deemed to be adopted in that e stablishment, and the provisions of section 9, sub -section ( 2) of 
section 13 and section 13A shall apply to such model standing orders as they apply to the standing orders 
so certified.  
(2) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) shall apply to an industrial establishment in respect of which 
the appropriate Government is the Government of the State of Gujarat or the Government of the State of 
Maharashtra.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 12A .- In section 12A of the principal Act, after the words  “finally certified”, 
the words “or adopted” shall be inserted.  
[Vide Karnataka Act 12 of 2014, s. 10]  
13. Penalties and procedure .—(1) An employer who fails to submit draft standing orders as required 
by section 3, or who modifies his standing orders otherwise than in accordance with section 10, shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, and in the case of a continuing offence 
with a further fine which may extend to two hundred rupees for every day after the first during wh ich the 
offence continues.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 1982, s. 6, for “sections 480 and 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898)”                        
(w.e.f. 17 -5-1982).  
2. Ins. by Act 39 of 1963, s. 5 (w.e.f. 23 -12-1963).  
3. Ins. by Act 39 of 1963, s. 6 (w.e.f. 23 -12-1963).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT (STANDING ORDERS) ACT, 1946.pdf - page 13]
13 
 (2) An employer who does any act in contravention of the standing orders finally certified under this 
Act or his industrial establishment shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees, 
and in the case of a continuing offence with a further fine which may extend to twenty -five rupees for 
every day after the first during which the offence continues.  
(3) No prosecution for an offence punishable under this section shall be instituted except with the 
previous san ction of the appropriate Government.  
(4) No Court inferior to that of  1[a Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate of the second class] 
shall try any offence under this section.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 13 .-In section 13 of the principal Act, - 
(i) in sub -section (1), after the words and figure “ Standing  Orders as required by section 3”, the 
words and figures “or who fails to adopt Standing Orders as required by sub -section (4) of section 3” 
shall be inserted;  
(ii) in sub -section (2), after the words “finally certified”, the words “or adopted” shall be inserted.  
[Vide Karnataka Act 12 of 2014, s. 11]  
Maharas htra 
Ame ndment of section 1 3 of Act XX of 1946 .—(a) in sub -section ( 1),-- 
(i) for "who fails to submit draft standing orders as required by section 3, or who modifies his 
standing orders", substitute "who modifies the standing o rders, model standing orders or 
amendments";  
(ii) for "section 10", substitute "the provisions of this Act";  
(iii) for "shall be punishable", substitute "shall on conviction, be punished".  
(b) in sub -section (2), for the words "the standing orders finally certified under this Act for his 
industrial establishment shall be punishable", substitute the words "the standing orders, model 
standing orders or the amendments as finally certified under th is Act for his industrial establishment, 
as the case may be, shall, on conviction, be punished"  shall be substituted.  
(c) after sub -
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT (STANDING ORDERS) ACT, 1946.pdf - page 13]
nt, 
as the case may be, shall, on conviction, be punished"  shall be substituted.  
(c) after sub -section (2), insert the following sub -sections, namely: -- 
"(2A) Whoever contravenes the provisions of this Act or of any rule made thereunder in cases 
other than those falling under sub -section (1) or sub -section (2), shall, on conviction, be punished 
with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees and in the event of such person being 
previously convicted of an offence under this Act, with fine w hich may extend to two hundred 
rupees and in the case of a continuing offence with a further fine which may extend to twenty -
five rupees for every day after the first during which the offence continues.  
(2B) The Court convicting an employer under sub -section (1) or sub -section (2) may direct 
such employer to pay such compensation as it may determine to any workman directly and 
adversely affected by the modification or contravention of the standing orders, model standing 
orders or amendments, as the case may be. 
(2C) The compensation awarded under sub -section (2B) may be recovered as if it were a fine 
and if it cannot be so recovered, the person by whom it is payable shall be sentenced to 
imprisonment of either  description for a term not exceeding three months  as the Court thinks fit".  
[Vide Bombay Act XXI of 1958, s. 1 5] 
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 1982, s. 7, for “a Metropolitation Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate of the second class”  (w.e.f. 17 -5-1982).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT (STANDING ORDERS) ACT, 1946.pdf - page 14]
14 
  
1[13A. Interpretation, etc., of standing orders .—If any question arises as to the application or 
interpretation o f a standing order certified under this Act, any employer or workman  2[or a trade union or 
other representative body of the workmen] may refer the question to any one of the Labour  Courts 
constituted under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), and specified for the disposal of such 
proceeding by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette, and the Labour Court 
to which the question is so referred sha ll, after giving the parties an opportunity of being heard, decide the 
question and such decision shall be fi nal and binding on the parties.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 13 -A.-In section 13 -A of the p rincipal Act, after the words “Standing Orders 
Certified the words “or adopted” shall be inserted.  
[Vide Karnataka Act 12 of 2014, s. 12]  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 13A of Act XX of 1946 .— In section 13A, after the words "standing order" 
and in the marginal note thereto after the  words "standing orders", insert the words "model standing order 
or amendments"; and after the word "workman", insert "or any prescribed representatives of workmen".  
[Vide Bombay Act XXI of 1958, s. 17]  
13B. Act not to apply to certain industrial establishments .—Nothing in this Act shall apply to an 
industrial establishment in so far as the workmen employed therein are persons to whom the Fundamental 
and Supplementary Rules, Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, Civil Services 
(Temporary Services) Rules, Revised Leave Rules, Civil Service Regulations, Civilians in Defence 
Service (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules or the Indian Railway Establishment Code or any 
other rules or regulations that may be notified in this beha lf by the appropriate Government in the Official 
Gazette, apply.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh (UTs). — 
Insertion of
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT (STANDING ORDERS) ACT, 1946.pdf - page 14]
e Official 
Gazette, apply.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh (UTs). — 
Insertion of new section —After section 13B, insert — 
“13C. Compounding of offences .—(1) Any offence punishable under the Act may, either before or 
after the institution of the prosecution, on an application by the alleged offender, be compounded by 
payment of compounding amount of not more than rupees fifty thousand, by such officer or authority as 
the appropriate Government may, by notific ation in the official Gazette, specify in this behalf for the 
amount of rupees fifty thousand:  
Provided that the appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the said 
specified compounding amount:  
Provided further that the off ences of the same nature committed by the same offender for more than 
three occasions shall not be compoundable:  
Provided also that such offences shall be compounded only after the alleged offender has acted to the 
satisfaction of such officer or authority  that such offence is not continued any further.  
(2) Where an offence has been compounded under sub -section (1), no further proceedings shall be 
taken against the offender in respect of such offence and the offender, if in custody, sh all be released or 
discharged.”.  
[Vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification 
No. S.O.  3774(E), dated (23 -10-2020)  and Vide Union Territory of  Jammu and Kashmir  Reorganisation 
(Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, not ification No. S.O.  3465(E), dated (5 -10-2020) .] 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 36 of 1956, s. 32 (w.e.f. 10 -3-1957).  
2. Ins. by Act 18 o f 1982, s. 8 (w.e.f. 17 -5-1982).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT (STANDING ORDERS) ACT, 1946.pdf - page 15]
15 
 14. Power to exempt .—The appropriate Government may by notification in the Official Gazette 
exempt, conditionally or unconditionally, any industrial establishment or class of industrial 
establishments from all or any of the provisions of this Act.  
1[14A. Delegation of powers .—The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act or any rules made thereunder shall, in 
relation to such m atters and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the direction, be 
exercisable also — 
(a) where the appropriate Government is the Central Government, by such officer or authority 
subordinate to the Central Government or by the State Government or by such officer or authority 
subordinate to the State Government, as may be specified in the notification ; 
(b) where the appropriate Government is a State Government, by such officer or authority 
subordinate to the State Government as may be specified in the notification.]  
15. Power to make rules .—(1) The appropriate Government may, after previous publication, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to t he generality of the foregoing power, such rules may — 
(a) prescribe additional matters to be included in the Schedule, and the procedure to be followed 
in modifying standing orders certified under this Act in accordance with any such addition;  
(b) set out model standing orders for the purposes of this Act;  
(c) prescribe the procedure of Certifying Officers and appellate authorities;  
(d) prescribe the fee which may be charged for copies of standing orders entered in the register of 
standing orders;  
(e) provide for any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed:  
Provided that before any rules are made under clause ( a) representatives of both employers and 
workmen shall be consulted by the appropriate Government.  

<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT (STANDING ORDERS) ACT, 1946.pdf - page 15]
 representatives of both employers and 
workmen shall be consulted by the appropriate Government.  
2[(3) Every rule made by the Centr al Government under this section shall be laid as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or  3[in two or more successive sessions, and i f, before the expiry 
of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid] , both Houses agree 
in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule 
shall thereafter have effe ct only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however 
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of secti on 15 of Act  XX of 1946. —In section 15 of the said Act, in sub -section (2), -- 
(a) in clause (a), after the words “standing orders” the words “or amendments” shall be inserted;  
(b) in clause (d), for the words “copies of standing orders entered in the register of standing 
orders” the words and figure “copies of standing orders or model standing orders together with all the 
amendments  filed in the register under section 8” shall b e substituted.  
  [Vide Bombay Act XXI of 1958, s. 1 8] 
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 39 of 1963, s. 7, for s. 14A (w.e.f. 23 -12-1963).  
2. Ins. by Act 16 of 1961, s. 6.  
3. Subs. by Act 18 of 1982, s. 9, for certain words (w.e.f. 17 -5-1982).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT (STANDING ORDERS) ACT, 1946.pdf - page 16]
16 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See sections 2( g) and 3( 2)] 
MATTERS  TO BE PROVIDED IN  STANDING  ORDER  UNDER  THIS ACT 
1.Classification of workmen, e.g., whether permanent, temporary, apprentices, probationers,  or 
badlis . 
2. Manner of intimating to workmen periods and hours of work, holidays, pay -days and wage rates.  
3. Shift working.  
4. Attendance and late coming.  
5. Conditions of, procedure in applying for, and the authority which may grant, leave and holidays.  
6. Requir ement to enter premises by certain gates, and liability to search.  
7. Closing and re -opening of sections of the industrial establishment, and temporary stoppages of 
work and the rights and liabilities of the employer and workmen arising  therefrom.  
8. Termi nation of employment, and the notice thereof to be given by employer and workmen.  
9. Suspension or dismissal for misconduct, and acts or omissions which constitute misconduct.  
10. Means of redress for workmen against unfair treatment or wrongful exactions by the employer or 
his agents or servants.  
11. Any other matter which may be prescribed.  
 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of Schedule to Act XX of 1946. —In the Schedule appended to the said Act, -- 
(a) in the heading — 
(i) for the word, figures, brackets and letter “sections 2(g) and 3(2)” the word, figure and letter 
“section 2A” shall be substituted;  
(ii) after the words “Standing Orders” the words “, model standing orders and amendments” 
shall be inserted;  
(b) after item 10, the following new it em shall be inserted, namely: -- 
“10A. Age for retirement or superannuation.”  
[Vide Bombay Act XXI of 1958, s. 19]  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of Schedule to Act XX of 1946 .—In the Schedule appended to the principal Act, after 
item 10 -B the following new item shall be inserted, namely: -- 
“10C. Employment or re -employment of probationers or badlis  or temporary or casual workmen 
and their conditions of service."  
[Vide Maharashtra Act LIV of 1974, s.
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT (STANDING ORDERS) ACT, 1946.pdf - page 16]
mporary or casual workmen 
and their conditions of service."  
[Vide Maharashtra Act LIV of 1974, s. 4]  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000  
––––––––– 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
––––––– –– 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
DIGITAL SIGNATURE  AND ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE  
3. Authentication of electronic records.  
3A. Electronic signature.  
CHAPTER  III 
ELECTRONIC  GOVERNANCE  
4. Legal recognition of electronic records.  
5. Legal recognition of electronic signatures.  
6. Use of electronic records and electronic signatures in Government and its agencies.  
6A. Delivery of services by service provider.  
7. Retention of electronic records.  
7A. Audit of documents , etc., maintained in electronic form.  
8. Publication of rule, regulation, etc., in Electronic Gazette.  
9. Sections 6, 7 and 8 not to confer right to insist document  should be accepted in electronic form.  
10. Power to make rules by Central Government in respect of electronic signature.  
10A. Validity of contracts formed through electronic means.  
CHAPTER  IV 
ATTRIBUTION, ACKNOWLEDGEMENT AND DESPATCH OF ELECTRONIC RECORDS  
11. Attribution of electronic records.  
12. Acknowledg ment of receipt.  
13. Time and place of despatch and receipt of electronic record.  
CHAPTER  V 
SECURE ELECTRONIC RECORDS AND SECURE ELECTRONIC  SIGNATURE  
14. Secure electronic record.  
15. Secure electronic signature.  
16. Security procedure and p ractices.  
CHAPTER VI  
REGULATION OF  CERTIFYING  AUTHORITIES  
17. Appointment of Controller and other officers.  
18. Functions of Controller.  
19. Recognition of foreign Certifying Authorities.  
20. [Omitted .] 
21. Licence to issue electronic  signature Certificates.  
22. Application for licence.  
23. Renewal of licence.  
24. Procedure for grant or rejection of licence.  
25. Suspension of licence.  
26. Notice of suspension or revocation of licence.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 2]
2 
 SECTIONS  
27. Power to delegate.  
28. Power to investigate contraventions.  
29. Access to computers and data.  
30. Certifying Authority to follow certain procedures.  
31. Certifying Authority to ensure compliance of the Act, etc.  
32. Display of licence.  
33. Surrender of licence.  
34. Disclosure.  
CHAPTER VII  
ELECTRONIC  SIGNATURE CERTIFICATES  
35. Certifying authority to issue electronic signature Certificate.  
36. Representations upon issuance of Digital signature Certificate.  
37. Suspension of Digital Signature Certificate.  
38. Revocation of Digital Signature Certificate.  
39. Notice of suspension or revocation.  
CHAPTER VIII  
DUTIES OF SUBSCRIBERS  
40. Generatin g key pair.  
40A. Duties of subscriber of Electronic Signature Certificate.  
41. Acceptance of Digital Signature Certificate.  
42. Control of private key.  
CHAPTER IX  
PENALTIES AND ADJUDICATION  
43. Penalty and compensation for damage to computer, computer system, etc.  
43A. Compensation for failure to protect data.  
44. Penalty for failure to furnish information, return, etc.  
45. Residuary penalty.  
46. Power to adjudicate.  
47. Factors to be taken into account by the adjudicating officer.  
CHAPTER X  
APPELLATE TRIBUNAL  
48. Establishment of Appellate Tribunal.  
49. [Omitted .] 
50. [Omitted .] 
51. [Omitted .] 
52. [Omitted .] 
52A. [Omitted .] 
52B. [Omitted .] 
52C. [Omitted .] 
52D. Decision by majority.  
53.  [Omitted .] 
54. [Omitted .] 
55. Orders constituting Appellate Tribunal to be final and not to invalidate its proceedings.  
56. [Omitted .] 
57. Appeal to Appellate Tribunal.  
58. Procedure and powers of the Appellate Tribunal.  
59. Right to legal representation.  
60. Limitation.  
61. Civil court not to have jurisdiction.  
62. Appeal to High Court.  
63. Compounding of contraventions.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 3]
3 
 SECTIONS  
64. Recovery of penalty.  
CHAPTER XI  
OFFENCES  
65. Tampering with computer source documents.  
66. Computer related offences.  
66A. [Omitted .]. 
66B. Punishment for dishonestly receiving stolen computer resource or communication device.  
66C. Punishment for identity theft.  
66D. Punishment for ch eating by personation by using computer resource.  
66E. Punishment for violation of privacy.  
66F. Punishment for cyber terrorism.  
67.   Punishment for publishing or transmitting obscene material in electronic form.  
67A. Punishment for publishing or transmitting  of material containing sexually explicit act, etc., in 
electronic form.  
67B. Punishment for publishing or transmitting of material depicting children in sexually explicit act, 
etc., in electronic form.  
67C. Preservation and retention of information by intermediaries.  
68. Power of Controller to give directions.  
69. Power to issue directions for interception or monitoring or decryption of any information through 
any computer resource.  
69A. Power to issue directions for blocking for public access of any informatio n through any 
computer resource.  
69B. Power to authorise to monitor and collect traffic data or information through any computer 
resource for cyber security.  
70. Protected system.  
70A. National nodal agency.  
70B. Indian Computer Emergency Response Team to serv e as national agency for incident response.  
71. Penalty for misrepresentation.  
72. Penalty for Breach of confidentiality and privacy.  
72A. Penalty  for disclosure of information in breach of lawful contract.  
73. Penalty for publishing electronic signature Certificate f alse in certain particulars.  
74. Publication for fraudulent purpose.  
75. Act to apply for offence or contravention committed outside India.  
76. Confiscation.  
77. Compensation, penalties or confiscation not to interfere with other punishment.  
77A. Compounding of offences.  
77B. Offences with three years imprisonment to
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 3]
h other punishment.  
77A. Compounding of offences.  
77B. Offences with three years imprisonment to be bailable.  
78. Power to investigate offences.  
CHAPTER XII  
INTERMEDIARIES NOT  TO BE LIABLE IN CERTAIN CASES  
79. Exemption from liability of intermediary in certain cases.  
CHAPTER XIIA  
EXAMINER OF ELECTRONIC EVIDENCE  
79A. Central Government to notify Examiner of Electronic Evidence.  
CHAPTER XIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
80. Power of police officer and other officers to enter, search, etc.  
81. Act to have overriding effect.  
81A. Application of the Act to electronic cheque and truncated ch eque.  
82. Chairperson, Members, officers and employees to be public servants . 
83. Power to give directions.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 4]
4 
 SECTIONS  
84. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
84A. Modes or methods for encryption.  
84B. Punishment for abetment of offences.  
84C. Punishment for attempt to commit offences.  
85. Offences by companies.  
86. Removal of difficulties.  
87. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
88. Constitution of Advisory Committee.  
89. Power of Controller to make regulations.  
90. Power of State Government to make rules.  
91. [Omitted ]. 
92. [Omitted ]. 
93. [Omitted ]. 
94. [Omitted ]. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.  
THE THIRD SCHEDULE.  [Omitted. ] 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE.  [Omitted. ] 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 5]
5 
 THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000  
ACT NO. 21 OF 2000  
[9th June , 2000 .] 
An Act to provide legal recognition for transactions carried out by means of electronic data 
interchange and other means of electronic communication, commonly referred to as 
“electronic commerce ”, which involve the use of alternatives to paper -based method s of 
communication and storage of information, to facilitate electronic filing of documents with 
the Government agencies and further to amend the Indian Penal Code, the Indian Evidence 
Act, 1872, the Banker ’s Books Evidence Act, 1891 and the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto;  
WHEREAS  the General Assembly of the United Nations by resolution A/RES/51/162, dated  the 30th 
January, 1997 has adopted the Model Law on Electronic Commerce adopted by the United  Nations 
Commission on International Trade Law;  
AND WHEREAS  the said resolution recommends inter alia , that all States give favourable 
consideration to the said Model Law when they enact or revise their laws, in view of the need for 
uniformity of the law a pplicable to alternatives to paper -based methods of communication and storage of 
information;  
AND WHEREAS  it is considered necessary to give effect to the said resolution and to promote efficient 
delivery of Government services by means  of reliable electro nic records.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -first Year of the  Republic of India as follows: – 
CHAPTER 1  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application. –(1) This Act may be called the Information 
Technology Act, 2000.  
(2) It shall  extend to the whole of India and, save as otherwise provided in this Act, it applies also to 
any offence or contravention thereunder committed outside India by any person.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notifi cation, appoint and 
different dates may be appointed for different provi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 5]
 Government may, by notifi cation, appoint and 
different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and any reference in any such 
provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the commencement of that 
provision.  
2[(4) Nothing in this  Act shall apply to documents or transactions specified in the First Schedule : 
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the First 
Schedule by way of addition  or deletion of entries thereto.  
(5) Every notifica tion issued under sub -section ( 4) shall be laid before each House of Parliament.]  
2. Definitions .–(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, – 
(a) “access ” with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions means gaining entry into, 
instructing or communicating with the logical, arithmetical , or memory function resources of a 
computer, computer system or computer network;  
(b) “addressee ” means a person who is intended by the originator to receive the electronic record 
but does not inc lude any intermediary;  
(c) “adjudicating officer ” means an adjudicating officer appointed under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 46;  
 
                                                           
1. 17 th October, 2000, vide notification No. G.S.R. 788 (E), dated 17 th October, 2000, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,      
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
2. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 3, for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 6]
6 
 (d) “affixing 1[electronic signature] ” with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions 
means adoption of any methodology  or procedure by a person for the purpose of authenticating an 
electronic record by means of 1[electronic  signature ]; 
2[(da) “Appellate Tribunal ” means the Appellate Tribunal referred to in sub-section ( 1) of              
section 48; ] 
(e) “appropriate Government ” means as respects any matter, – 
(i) enumerated in List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution;  
(ii) relating to any State law enacted under List III of the Sevent h Schedule to the 
Constitution,  
the State Government and in any other case,  the Central Government;  
(f) “asymmetric crypto system ” means a system of a secure key p air consisting of a private key 
for creating a digital signature and a public key to verify the digital signature;  
(g) “Certifying Authority ” means a person who has be en granted a licence to issue a 1[electronic 
signature] Certificate under section 24;  
(h) “certification practice statement ” means a statement issued by a Certifying Authority to 
specify the practices that the Certifyi ng Authority employs in issuing 1[electronic signature] 
Certificates;  
3[(ha) “communication device ” means cell phones, personal digital assistance or combination of 
both or any other device used to communicate, send or transmit any text, video, audio or image;]  
(i) “computer ” means any electronic, magnetic, optical or other high -speed data processing device 
or system which performs logical, arithmetic , and memory functions by manipulations of electronic, 
magnetic or optical impulses, and includes all input, output, processing,  storage, computer software or 
communication facilities which are connected or related to the computer in a computer system or 
computer network;  
4[(j) “computer network ” means the inter -connection of one or more compute rs or computer 
systems  or communicati on device  through – 
(i) the use of sa
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 6]
 one or more compute rs or computer 
systems  or communicati on device  through – 
(i) the use of satellite, microwave, terrestrial line, wire, wireless or other communication 
media; and  
(ii) terminals or a complex consisting of two or more interconnected computers or 
communic ation  device  whether or not  the inter -connecti on is continuously maintained;]  
(k) “computer resource ” means computer, computer system, computer network, data, computer 
data base or software;  
(l) “computer system ” means a device or collection of devices, including input and output support 
devices and excluding calculators which are not programmable and capable of being used in 
conjunction with external files , which contain computer programmes, electronic instructio ns, input 
data and output data , that performs logic, arithmetic, data storage and retrieval, communication 
control and other functions;  
(m) “Controller ” means the Controller of Certifying Authorities appointed under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 17;  
5*   *   *  *   * 
 3[(na) “cyber cafe ” means any facility from where access to the internet is offered by any person 
in the ordinary course of busine ss to the members of the public ; 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for “digital signature” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Ins. by 7 of 2017, s . 169 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017) . 
3. Ins. by 10 of 2009, s. 4 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
4. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for clause ( j) (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
5. Clause ( n) omitted by 7 of 2017, s.169 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017)  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 7]
7 
 (nb) “cyber security means protecting information, equipment , devices, computer, co mputer 
resource, communication device and information stored therein from unauthorised access, use, 
disclosure, disruption, modification  or destruction; ] 
(o) “data” means a representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts or instructions 
which are  being prepared or have been prepared in a formalised manner, and is intended to be 
processed, is being processed or has been processed in a computer system or computer network, and 
may be in any form (including computer printouts magnetic or optical stora ge media, punched cards, 
punched tapes) or stored internally in the memory of the computer;  
(p) “digital signature ” means authentication of any electronic record by a subscriber by means of 
an electronic method or procedure in accordance with the provisions of section 3;  
(q) “Digital Signature Certificate ” means a Digital Signature Certificate issued under sub -section 
(4) of section 35;  
(r) “electronic form ” with reference to information, means any information generated, sent, 
received or stored in media, magnetic, optical, computer memory, micro film, computer generated 
micro fiche or similar device;  
(s) “Electronic Ga zette ” means the Official Gazette published in the electronic form;  
(t) “electronic record ” means data, record or data generated, image or sound stored, received or 
sent in an electronic form or micro film or computer generated micro fiche;  
1[(ta) “electro nic signature ” means authentication of any electronic record by a subscriber by 
means of the electronic technique specified in the Second Schedule and includes digital signature;  
(tb) “Electronic Signature Certificate ” means an Electronic Signature Certifi cate issued under 
section 35 and includes Digital Signature Certificate; ] 
(u) “function ”, in relation to a computer, includes logic, control, arithmetical process, deletion, 
storage and retrieval and communication
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 7]
r, includes logic, control, arithmetical process, deletion, 
storage and retrieval and communication or telecommunication from or within a computer;  
1[(ua) Indian Computer Emergency Response Team ” means an agency established under sub -
section ( 1) of Section 7 0B;] 
(v) “information ” includes 2[data, message, text,] images, sound, voice, codes, computer 
programmes, software and data bases or micro film or computer generated micro fiche;  
3[(w) “intermediary ”, with respect to any particular electronic records, means any person who on 
behalf of anot her person receives, stores or transmits that record or provides any service with respect 
to that record and includes telecom service providers, network service providers, internet service 
providers, web -hosting service providers, search engines, online pa yment sites, online -auction sites, 
onlin e-market places and cyber cafes; ] 
(x) “key pair ”, in an asymmetric crypto system, means a private key and its mathematically 
related public key, which are so related that the public key can verify a digital signature  created by the 
private key;  
(y) “law” includes any Act of Parliament or of a State Legislature, Ordinances promulgated by the 
President or a Governor, as the case may be, Regulations made by the President under article 240, 
Bills enacted as President's Ac t under sub -clause ( a) of clause ( 1) of article 357 of the Constitution 
and includes rules, regulations, bye -laws and orders issued or made thereunder;  
(z) “licence ” means a licence granted to a Certifying Authority under section 24;  
(za) “originator ” means a person who sends, generates, stores or t ransmits any electronic message  
or causes any electronic message to be sent, generated, stored or transmitted to any other person but 
does not include an intermediary;  
(zb) “prescribed ” means prescribed by r ules made under this Act;  
(zc) “private key ” means the key of a key pair used to create a digital signature;  
          
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 7]
;  
(zc) “private key ” means the key of a key pair used to create a digital signature;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 4 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “data, text” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for clause ( w) (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 8]
8 
 (zd) “public key ” means the key of a key pair used to verify a digital signature and listed in the 
Digital Signature Certificate;  
(ze) “secure syst em” means computer hardware , software, and procedure that – 
(a) are reasonably secure from unauthorised access and misuse;  
(b) provide a reasonable level of reliability and correct operation;  
(c) are reasonably suited to performing the intended functions; a nd 
(d) adhere to generally accepted security procedures;  
(zf) “security procedure ” means the security procedure prescribed under section 16 by the Central 
Government;  
(zg) “subscriber ” means a person in whose name the 1[electronic signature] Certificate is  issued;  
(zh) “verify ”, in relation to a digital signature, electronic record or public key, with its 
grammatical variations and cognate expressio ns, means to determine whether – 
(a) the initial electronic record was affixed with the digital signature by th e use of private key 
corresponding to the public key of the subscriber;  
(b) the initial electronic record is retained intact or has been altered since such electronic 
record was so affixed with the digital signature.  
(2) Any reference in this Act to any enactment or any provision thereof shall, in relation to an area in 
which such enactment or such provision is not in force, be construed as a reference to the corresponding 
law or the relevant provision of the corresponding law, if any, in force in that ar ea. 
CHAPTER II  
2[DIGITAL SIGNATURE  AND ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE ] 
3. Authentication of electronic records. –(1) Subject to the provisions of this section any subscriber 
may authenticate an electronic record by affixing his digital signature.  
(2) The authentication of the electronic record shall be effected by the use of asymmetric crypto 
system and hash function which envelop and transform the initial electronic record into another electronic 
record.  
Explanation .–For the purposes of this sub -section, “hash function ”
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 8]
 another electronic 
record.  
Explanation .–For the purposes of this sub -section, “hash function ” means an algorithm mapping or 
translation of one sequence of bits into another, generally smaller, set known as “hash result ” such that an 
electronic record yields the same hash result every time the algorithm is executed with the sam e electronic 
record as its input making  it computationally infeasible – 
(a) to derive or reconstruct the original electronic record from the hash result produced by the 
algorithm;  
(b) that two electronic records can produce the same hash result using the al gorithm.  
(3) Any person by the use of a public key of the subscriber can verify the electronic record.  
(4) The private key and the public key are unique to the subscriber and constitute a functioning key 
pair. 
3[3A. Electronic signature. –(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3, but subject to the 
provisions of sub -section ( 2), a subscriber may authenticate any electronic record by such electronic 
signature or electronic authentication technique which – 
(a) is considered reliable; an d 
(b) may be specified in the Second Schedule.  
(2) For the purposes of this section any electronic signature or electronic authentication technique 
shall be considered reliable if – 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for “digital signature” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for the heading “D IGITAL  SIGNATURE ” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
3. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 9]
9 
 (a) the signature creation data or the authentication data are, within the context in which they are 
used, lin ked to the signatory or, as the case may be, the authenticator and to no other person;  
(b) the signature creation data or the authentication data were, at the time of signing, under the 
control of the signatory or, as the  case may be, the authenticator and of no other person;  
(c) any alteration to the electronic signature made after affixing such signature is detectable;  
(d) any alteration to the information made after its authentication by electronic signature is 
detectab le; and  
(e) it fulfils such other conditions which may be prescribed.  
(3) The Central Government may prescribe the procedure for the purpose of ascertaining whether 
electronic signature is that of the person by whom it is purported to have been affixed or authenticated.  
(4) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, add to or omit any 
electronic signature or electronic authentication technique and the procedure for affixing such signature 
from the Second Schedule:  
Provided that no electronic signature or authentication technique shall be specified in the Second 
Schedule unless such signature or technique is reliable.  
(5) Every notification issued under sub -section ( 4) shall be laid before each House of Parliament.]  
CHAPTER III  
ELECT RONIC GOVERNANCE  
4. Legal recognition of electronic records .–Where any law provides that information or any other 
matter shall be in writing or in the typewritten or printed form, then, notwithstanding anything contained 
in such law, such requirement shall  be deemed to have been satisfied if  such information or matter is – 
(a) rendered or made available in an electronic form; and  
(b) accessible so as to be usable for a subsequent reference.  
5. Legal recognition of 1[electronic signatures ].–Where any law prov ides that information or any 
other matter shall be authenticated by affixing the
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 9]
Where any law prov ides that information or any 
other matter shall be authenticated by affixing the signature or any document shall be signed or bear the 
signature of any person, then, notwithstanding anything contained in such law, such requirement shall be 
deemed to have b een satisfied, if such information or matter is authenticated by means of 1[electronic  
signature ] affixed in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
Explanation .–For the purposes of this section, “signed ”, with its grammatical variations and cognate 
expressions, shall, with reference to a person, mean affixing of his hand written signature or any mark on 
any document and the expression “signature ” shall be construed accordingly.  
6. Use of electronic record s and 1[electronic signatures ] in Government and its agencies .–(1) 
Where any law provides for – 
(a) the filing of any form, application or any other document with any office, authority, body or 
agency owned or controlled by the appropriate Government in a p articular manner;  
(b) the issue or grant of any licence, permit, sanction or approval by whatever name called in a 
particular manner;  
(c) the receipt or payment of money in a particular manner,  
then, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, such requirement 
shall be deemed to have been satisfied if such filing, issue, grant, receipt or payment, as the case may be, 
is effected by means of such electronic for m as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government.  
(2) The appropriate Government may, for the purposes of sub -section ( 1), by rules, prescribe – 
(a) the manner and format in which such electronic records shall be filed, created or issued;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for “digital signatures”  (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 10]
10 
 (b) the manner  or method of payment of any fee or charges for filing, creation or issue any 
electronic record under clause ( a). 
1[6A. Delivery of services by service provider .–(1) The appropriate Government may, for the 
purposes of this Chapter and for efficient deliver y of services to the public through electronic means 
authorise, by order, any service provider to set up, maintain and upgrade the computerised facilities and 
perform such other services as it may specify, by notification in the Official Gazette.  
Explanation .–For the purposes of this section, service provider so authorised includes any individual, 
private agency, private company, partnership firm, sole proprietor firm or any such other body or agency 
which has been granted permission by the appropr iate Government to offer services through electronic 
means in accordance with the policy governing such service sector.  
(2) The appropriate Government may also authorise any service provider authorised under sub -
section ( 1) to collect, retain and appropriate such service charges, as may be prescribed by the appropriate 
Government for the purpose of providing such services, from the person availing such service.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), the appropria te Government may authorise the service 
providers to collect, retain and appropriate service charges under this section notwithstanding the fact that 
there is no express provision under the Act, rule, regulation or notification under which the service is 
provided to collect, retain and appropriate e -service charges by the service providers.  
(4) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify the scale of 
service charges which may be charged and collected by the service pro viders under this section:  
Provided that the appropriate Government may specify different scale of service charges for different 
types of services.]  
7. Retention of electronic records .–(1) Wh
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 10]
 of service charges for different 
types of services.]  
7. Retention of electronic records .–(1) Where any law provides that documents, records or 
information shall  be retained for any specific period, then, that requirement shall be deemed to have been 
satisfied if such documents, records or information are retai ned in the electronic form, if – 
(a) the information contained therein remains accessible so as to be usab le for a subsequent 
reference;  
(b) the electronic record is retained in the format in which it was originally generated, sent or 
received or in a format which can be demonstrated to represent accurately the information originally 
generated, sent or receive d; 
(c) the details which will facilitate the identification of the origin, destination, date and time of 
despatch or receipt of such electronic record are available in the electronic record:  
Provided  that this clause does not apply to any information which  is automatically generated 
solely for the purpose of enabling an electronic record to be despatched or received.  
(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to any law that expressly provides for the retention of 
documents, records or information in the form of electronic records.  
2[7A. Audit of documents , etc., maintained in electronic form .–Where in any law for the time 
being in force, there is a provision for audit of documents, records or information, that provision shall also 
be applicable for audit of do cuments, records or information processed and main tained in the electronic 
form.]  
8. Publication of rule, regulation, etc., in Electronic Gazette .–Where any law provides that any 
rule, regulation, order, bye -law, notification or any other matter shall be p ublished in the Official Gazette, 
then, such requirement shall be deemed to have been satisfied if such rule, regulation, order, bye -law, 
notification or any other matter is published in the Official Gazette or Electronic Gazette:  
Provided that where any r
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 10]
other matter is published in the Official Gazette or Electronic Gazette:  
Provided that where any rule, regulation, order, by -law, notification or any other matter is published 
in the Official Gaze tte or Electronic Gazette, the date of publication shall be deemed to be the date of the 
Gazette which was first published in any form.  
9. Sections 6, 7 and 8 not to confer right to insist document should be accepted in electronic 
form .–Nothing contained in sections 6, 7 and 8 shall confer a right upon any person to insist that any 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 7 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 11]
11 
 Ministry or Department of the Central Government or the State Government or any  authority or body 
established by or under any law or controlled or funded by the Central or State Government should 
accept, issue, create, retain and preserve any document in the form of electronic records or effect any 
monetary transaction in the electro nic form.  
10. Power to make rules by Central Government in respect of 1[electronic signature ].–The 
Central Government may, for the purposes of  this Act, by rules, prescribe – 
(a) the type of 1[electronic signature];  
(b) the manner and format in which the 1[electronic  signature] shall be affixed;  
(c) the manner or procedure which facilitates identification of the person affixing the 1[electronic 
signature];  
(d) control processes and procedures to ensure adequate integrity, security and confidentiality of 
electronic records or payments; and  
(e) any other matter which is ne cessary to give legal effect to 1[electronic  signatures].  
2[10A. Validity of contracts formed through electronic means .–Where in a contract formation, the 
communication of proposals, the acceptance of proposals, the revocation of proposals and acceptances , as 
the case may be, are expressed in electronic form or by means of an electronic records, such contract shall 
not be deemed to be unenforceable solely on the ground that such electronic  form or means was used for 
that purpose.]  
CHAPTER IV  
ATTRIBUTION, ACKNOWLEDGMENT AND DESPATCH OF ELECTRONIC RECORDS  
11. Attribution of electronic records .–An electronic record shall be  attributed to the originator – 
(a) if it was sent by the originator him self; 
(b) by a person who had the authority to act on behalf of the originator in respect of that 
electronic record; or  
(c) by an information system programmed by or on behalf of the originator to operate 
automatically.  
12. Acknowledg ment of receipt .–(1) Where the originator has not 3[stipulated ] that the 
acknowledg ment of rec
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 11]
g ment of receipt .–(1) Where the originator has not 3[stipulated ] that the 
acknowledg ment of receipt of electronic record be given in a particular form or by a p articular method, an 
acknowledg ment may be given by – 
(a) any communication by the addressee, automated or otherwise;  or 
(b) any conduct of the addressee, sufficient to indicate to the originator that the electronic record 
has been received.  
(2) Where the originator has stipulated that the electronic record shall be binding only on receipt of an 
acknowledgment of such el ectronic record  by him, then unless acknowledg ment has been so received, the 
electronic record shall he deemed to have been never sent by the originator.  
(3) Where the originator has not stipulated that the electronic record shall be binding only on re ceipt 
of such acknowledgment, and the acknowledg ment has not been received by the originator within the 
time specified or agreed or, if no time has been specified or agreed to within a reasonable time, then the 
originator may give notice to the addressee  stating that no acknowledg ment has been received by him and 
specifying a reasonable time by which the acknowledgement must be recei ved by him and if no 
acknowledg ment is received within the aforesaid time limit he may after giving notice to the addressee, 
treat the electronic record as though it has never been sent.  
13. Time and place of despatch and receipt of electronic record .–(1) Save as otherwise agreed to 
between the originator and the addressee, the despatch of an electronic record occurs when it ente rs a 
computer resource outside the control of the originator.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for “ digital  signature” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
3. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for “agreed with the addressee ” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 11]
see ” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 12]
12 
 (2) Save  as  otherwise   agreed   between the originator and   the  addressee, the   time  of  receipt of an  
electronic record shall be determined as follows, namely: – 
(a) if the addressee has designated a computer resource for the purpose of  receiving electronic 
records, – 
(i) receipt occurs at the time when the electronic record enters the designated computer 
resource; or  
(ii) if the electronic record is sent to a computer resource of the addre ssee that is not the 
designated computer resource, receipt occurs at the time when the electronic record is retrieved 
by the addressee;  
(b) if the addressee has not designated a computer resource along with specified timings, if any, 
receipt occurs when th e electronic record enters the computer resource of the addressee.  
(3) Save as otherwise agreed to between the originator and the addressee, an electronic record is 
deemed to be despatched at the place where the originator has his place of business, and is  deemed to be 
received at the place where the addressee has his place of business.  
(4) The provisions of sub -section ( 2) shall apply notwithstanding that the place where the computer 
resource is located may be different from the place where the electronic record is deemed to have been 
received under sub -section ( 3). 
(5) For  the purposes of this section, – 
(a) if the originator or the addressee has more than one place of business, the principal place of 
business, shall be the place of business;  
(b) if the ori ginator or the addressee does not have a place of business, his usual place of 
residence shall be deemed to be the place of business;  
(c) “usual place of residence ”, in relation to a body corporate, means the place where it is 
registered.  
CHAPTER V  
SECURE ELECTRONIC RECORDS ANS SECURE 1[ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE]  
14. Secure electronic record .–Where any security procedure has been applied to an electronic record 
at a specific point of time, then such record shall he deem
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 12]
as been applied to an electronic record 
at a specific point of time, then such record shall he deemed to be a secure electronic record from such 
point of time to the time of verification.  
2[15. Secure electronic signature .– An electronic signature shall be deemed to be a secure electronic 
signature if – 
(i) the signature creation data, at the time of affixing signature, was under the exclusive control of 
signatory and no other person; and  
(ii) the signature creation data was stored and affixed in such exclusive manner as may be 
prescribed.  
Explanation. –In case of digital signature, the “signature creation data ” means the  private key of  the 
subscriber.  
16. Security procedure s and p ractices .–The Central Government may, for the purposes of sections 
14 and 15, prescribe the security procedures and practices:  
Provided that in prescribing such security procedures and practices, the Central Go vernment shall 
have regard to the commercial circumstances, nature of transactions and such other related factors as it 
may consider appropriate.]  
CHAPTER VI  
REGULATION OF CERTIFYING AUTHORITIES  
17. Appointment of Controller and other officers .–(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint a Controller of Certifying Authorities for the purposes of this  
Act and may also by the same or subsequent notification appoint suc h number of Deputy Controllers  
3[, Assistant Control lers, other officers and employees]   as it deems fit.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for “ digital  signature s” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Subs. by s 11 , ibid.,  for sections 15 and 16 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
3. Subs. by s. 12, ibid., for “and Assistant Controllers ” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 13]
13 
 (2) The Controller shall discharge his functions under this Act subject to the general control and 
directions of the Central Government.  
(3) The Deputy Controllers and Assistant Controllers shall perfor m the functions assigned to them by 
the Controller under the general superintendence and control of the Controller.  
(4) The qualifications, experience and terms and conditions of service of Controller, Deputy 
Controllers 1[, Assistant Controllers, other of ficers and employees] shall be such as may be prescribed by 
the Central Government.  
(5) The Head Office and Branch Office of the office of the Controller shall be at such places as the 
Central Government may specify, and these may be established at such pl aces as the Central Government 
may think fit.  
(6) There shall be a seal of the Office of the Controller.  
18. Functions of Controller .–The Controller may perform all or any of th e following functions, 
namely: – 
(a) exercising supervision over the activities of the Certifying Authorities;  
(b) certifying public keys of the Certifying Authorities;  
(c) laying down the standards to be maintained by the Certifying Authorities;  
(d) specifying the qualifications and experience which employees of the Certifying Author ity 
should possess;  
(e) specifying the conditions subject to which the Certifying Authorities shall conduct their 
business;  
(f) specifying the contents of written, printed or visual materials and advertisements that may be 
distributed or used in respect of  a 2[electronic signature] Certificate and the public key;  
(g) speci fying the form and content of a 2[electronic signature] Certificate and the key;  
(h) specifying the form and manner in which accounts shall be maintained by the Certifying 
Authorities;  
(i) specifying the terms and conditions subject to which auditors may be appointed and the 
remuneration to be paid to them;  
(j) facilitating the establishment of any electronic system by a Certifying Authority 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 13]
id to them;  
(j) facilitating the establishment of any electronic system by a Certifying Authority either solely 
or jointly with other Certifying Au thorities and regulation of such systems;  
(k) specifying the manner in which the Certifying Authorities shall conduct their dealings with the 
subscribers;  
(l) resolving any conflict of interests between the Certifying Authorities and the subscribers;  
(m) laying down the duties of the Certifying Authorities;  
(n) maintaining a data  base containing the disclosure record of every Certifying Authority 
containing such particulars as may be specified by regulations, which shall be accessible to public.  
19. Recogni tion of foreign Certifying Authorities .–(1) Subject to such conditions and restrictions as 
may be specified by regulations, the Controller may with the previous approval of the Central 
Government, and by notification in the Official Gazette, recognise any foreign Certifying Authority as a 
Certifying Authority for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Where any Certifying Authority is recognised under sub -section ( 1), the 2[electronic signature] 
Certificate issued by such Certifying Authority shall be valid for the purposes of this Act.  
(3) The Controller may, if he is satisfied that any Certifying Authority has contravened any of the 
conditions and restrictions subject to which it was granted recognition under sub -section ( 1) he may, for 
reasons to be recorded in wr iting, by notification in the Official Gazette, revoke such recognition.   
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 12, for “ Assistant Controllers ” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “digital signature” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 14]
14 
 20. [Controller to act as repository .] Omitted by the Information Technology  (Amendment ) Act, 2008 
(10 of 2009), s. 13 ( w.e.f. 27-10-2009).  
21. Licence to issue 1[electronic  signature ] Certificates .–(1) Subject to the provisions of                        
sub-section ( 2), any person may make an application , to the Controller , for a licence to issue 1[electronic  
signature ] Certificates.  
(2) No licence shall be issued under sub-section ( 1), unless the applicant fulfil ls such requirements 
with respect to qualification, expertise, manpower, financial resources and other infrastructure facilities, 
which arc  necessary to issue 1[electronic signature]  Certificates as may be presc ribed by the Central 
Government.  
(3) A licence gr anted under this section shall – 
(a) be valid for such period as may be prescribed by the Central Government;  
(b) not be transferable or heritable;  
(c) be subject to such terms and conditions as may be specified by the regulations.  
22. Application for licence .–(1) Every application for issue of a licence shall be in such form as may 
be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(2) Every application for issue of a licence shall be accompanied by – 
(a) a ce rtification practice statement;  
(b) a statement including the procedures with respect to i dentification of the applicant;  
(c) payment of such fees, not exceeding twenty -five thousand rupees as may be prescr ibed by the 
Central Government;  
(d) such other doc uments, as may be prescr ibed by the Central Government.  
23. Renewal of licence .–An application for renewal of a licence shall be – 
(a) in such form;  
(b) accompanied by such fees, not exceeding five thousand rupees, as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government and shall be made not less than forty -five days before the date of expiry of the 
period of validity of the licence.  
24. Procedure for grant or rejection of licence .–The Controller may, on receipt of an application 
under sub -
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 14]
re for grant or rejection of licence .–The Controller may, on receipt of an application 
under sub -section ( 1) of sectio n 21, after considering the documents accompanying the application and 
such other factors, as he deems fit, grant the licence or reject the application:  
Provided that no application shall be rejected under this section unless the applicant has been given a  
reasonable opportunity of presenting his case.  
25. Suspension of licence .– (1) The Controller may, if he is satisfied after making such inquiry, as he 
may think fit, t hat a Certifying Authority has – 
(a) made a statement in, or in relation to, the applicat ion for the issue or renewal of the licence, 
which is incorrect or false in material particulars;  
(b) failed to comply with the terms and conditions subject to which the licence was granted;  
2[(c) failed to maintain the procedures and standards specified in section 30;]  
(d) contravened any provisions of this Act, rule, regu lation or order made thereunder,  
revoke the licence:  
Provided that no licence shall be revoked unless the Certifying Authority has been given a reasonable 
opportunity of showing cause ag ainst the proposed revocation.  
(2) The Controller may, if he has reasonable cause to believe that there is any ground for revoking a 
licence under sub -section ( 1), by order suspend such licence pending the completion of any enquiry 
ordered by him:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for “ digital signature” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Subs. by notification No. S.O. 1015(E)  (w.e.f. 19 -9-2002 ). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 15]
15 
 Provided  that no licence shall be suspended for a period exceeding ten days unless the Certifying 
Authority has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the proposed suspension.  
(3) No Certifying Authority whose licence has been suspended shall  issue any 1[electronic signature] 
Certificate during such suspension.  
26. Notice of suspension or revocation of licence .–(1) Where the licence of the Certifying Authority 
is suspended or revoked, the Controller shall publish notice of such suspension or r evocation, as the case 
may be, in t he data base maintained by him.  
(2) Where one or more repositories are specified, the Controller shall publish notices of such 
suspension or revocation, as the case ma y be, in all such repositories:  
Provided that the data  base containing the notice of such suspension or revocation, as the case may 
be, shall be made available through a web site which shall be accessible round the clock:  
Provided further that the Controller may, if he considers necessary, publicise the contents of data base 
in such electronic or other media, as he may consider appropriate.  
27. Power to delegate .–The Controller may, in writing, authorise the Deputy Controller, Assistant 
Controller or any officer to exercise any of the powers of the Contro ller under this Chapter.  
28. Power to investigate contraventions .–(1) The Controller or any officer authorised by him in this 
behalf shall take up for investigation any contravention of the provisions of this Act, rules or regulations 
made thereunder.  
(2) The Controller or any officer authorised by him in this behalf shall exercise the like powers which 
are conferred on Income -tax authorities under Chapter XIII of the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), and 
shall exercise such powers, subject to such limita tions laid down under that Act.  
29. Access to computers and data .–(1) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 69, the Controller
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 15]
d data .–(1) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 69, the Controller or any person authorised by him shall, if he has reasonable cause to suspect that 
2[any contravention of the provisions of this Chapter] has been committed, have access to any computer 
system, any apparatus, data or any other material connected with such system, for the purpose of 
searching or causing a search to be made for obtaining any information or da ta contained in or available 
to such computer system.  
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), the Controller or any person authorised by him may, by order, 
direct any person in charge of, or otherwise concerned with the operation of, the computer system, data 
apparatus or material, to provide him with such reasonable technical and other assistance as he may 
consider necessary.  
30. Certifying Authority to follow certain procedures .–Every Certifying Authority shall, – 
(a) make use of hardware, software and pr ocedures that are secure from intrusion and misuse;  
(b) provide a reasonable level of reliability in its services which are reasonably suited to the 
performance of intended functions;  
(c) adhere to security procedures to ensure that the secrecy and privacy of the 1[electronic 
signatures] are assured; 3*** 
4[(ca) be the repository of all electronic signature Certificates issued under this Act;  
(cb) publish information regarding its practices, electronic signature Certificates and current 
status of such certificates; and  ] 
(d) observe such other standards as may be specified by regulations.  
31. Certifying Authority to ensure compliance of the Act, e tc.–Every Certifying Authority shall 
ensure that every person employed or otherwise engaged by it complies, in the course of his employment 
or engagement, with the provisions of this Act, rules, regulations and orders made thereunder.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for “ di
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 15]
                                                         
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for “ digital signature” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for “any contravention of the provisions of this Act, rules and regulations  made  thereunder”                
(w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
3. The word “and” omitted by s. 15 , ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
4. Ins. by s. 15, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 16]
16 
 32. Display of licenc e.–Every Certifying Authority shall display its licence at a conspicuous place of 
the premises in which it carries on its business.  
33. Surrender of licence .–(1) Every Certifying Authority whose licence is suspended or revoked 
shall immediately after such suspension or revocation, surrender  the licence to the Controller.  
(2) Where any Certifying Authority fails to surrender a licence under sub -section ( 1), the person in 
whose favour a licen ce is issued, shall be guilty of an offence and shall be 1[liable to  penalty which may 
extend to five lakh  rupees ]. 
34. Disclosure .–(1) Every Certifying Authority shall disclose in the m anner specified by regulations – 
(a) its 2[electronic signature] Certificate 3***; 
(b) any certification practice statement relevant thereto;  
(c) notice of the revocation or suspension of its Certifying Authority certificate, if any; and  
(d) any other fact that materially and adversely affects either the reliability of a 2[electronic signature] 
Certificate, which that Authority has issued, or the Authority's ability to perform its services.  
(2) Where in the opinion of the Certifying Authority any event has occurred or any situation has 
arisen which may materially and adversely affect the integrity of its computer system or the condit ions 
subject to which a 2[electronic signature] Certificate was granted, then, the Certifying Authority shall – 
(a) use reasonable efforts to notify any person who is likely to be affected by that occurrence; or  
(b) act in accordance with the procedure spec ified in its certification practice statement to deal 
with such event or situation.  
CHAPTERVII  
2[ELECTRONIC  SIGNATURE ] CERTIFICATE S 
35. Certifying authority to issue 2[electronic signature ] Certificate .–(1) Any person may make an 
application to the Certifying Authority for the issue of a 2[electronic signature] Certificate in such form as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(2) Every
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 16]
nic signature] Certificate in such form as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(2) Every such application shall be accompanied by such fee not exceeding t wenty -five thousand 
rupees as may be prescribed by the Central Government, to be paid to the Certifying Authority:  
Provided that while prescribing fees under sub -section ( 2) different fees may be prescribed for 
different classes of applicants.  
(3) Every such application shall be accompanied by a certification practice statement or where there is 
no such statement, a statement containing such particulars, as may be specified by regulations.  
(4) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1), th e Certifying Authority may, after 
consideration of the certification practice statement or the other statement under sub -section ( 3) and after 
making such enquiries as it may deem fit, grant the 2[electronic signature] Certificate or for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, reject the application:  
4*   *   *   *   * 
5[Provided] that no application shall be rejected unless the applicant has been given a reasonable 
opportunity of showing cause against the proposed rejection.  
36. Representations upon issuance of Digital Signature Certificate .–A Certifying Authority while 
issuing a Digital Signature Certificate shall cert ify that – 
(a) it has complied with the provisions of this Act and the rules and regulations made thereunder;  
(b) it has published the Digital Signature Certificate or otherwise made it available to such person 
relying on it and the subscriber has ac cepted it;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 2023, s. 2 and Schedule for certain words (w.e.f. 30 -11-2023).  
2. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for “ digital signature” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
3. Certain words omitted by s. 16, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).  
4. The first proviso omitted by s. 17, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
5. Subs. by s. 17, ibid., for “Provided further
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 16]
viso omitted by s. 17, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
5. Subs. by s. 17, ibid., for “Provided further” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 17]
17 
 (c) the subscriber  holds the private key corresponding to the public key, listed in the Digital 
Signature Cer tificate;  
1[(ca) the subscriber holds a private key which is capable of creating a digital signature;  
(cb) the public key to be listed in the certificate can be used to verify a digital signature affixed by 
the private key held by the subscriber;]  
(d) the subscriber's public key and private key constitute a functioning key pair;  
(e) the information contained in the Digital Signature Certificate is accurate; and  
(f) it has no knowledge of any material fact, which if it had been included in the Digital Signat ure 
Certificate would adversely affect the reliability of the representations in clauses ( a) to ( d). 
37. Suspension of Digital Signature Certificate .–(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), the 
Certifying Authority which has issued a Digital Sign ature Certificate may suspend such Digital Signature 
Certificate, – 
(a) on receipt of a request to that effect from – 
(i) the subscriber listed in the Di gital Signature Certificate; or  
(ii) any person duly authorised to ac t on behalf of that subscriber;  
(b) if it is of opinion that the Digital Signature Certificate should be suspended in public interest.  
(2) A Digital Signature Certificate shall not be suspended for a period exceeding fifteen days unless 
the subscriber has been given an opportunity of being h eard in the matter.  
(3) On suspension of a Digital Signature Certificate under this section, the Certifying Authority shall 
communicate the same to the subscriber.  
38. Revocation of Digital Signature Certificate .–(1) A Certifying Authority may revoke a Digital 
Signature Certificate issued by it – 
(a) where the subscriber or any other person authorised by him mak es a request to that effect; or  
(b) upon the death of the subscriber; or  
(c) upon the dissolution of the fir m or winding up of the company where the subscriber is a firm 
or a company.  
(2
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 17]
olution of the fir m or winding up of the company where the subscriber is a firm 
or a company.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3) and without prejudice to the provisions of                            
sub-section ( 1), a Certifying Authority may revoke a Digital Signature Certificate which has been issued 
by it at any time, if it is of opini on that – 
(a) a material fact represented in the Digital Signature Certificate is false or has been concealed ; 
(b) a requirement for issuance of the Digital Signature  Certificat e was not satisfied;  
(c) the Certifying Authority's private key or security system was compromised in a manner 
materially affecting the Digital Signa ture Certificate's reliability;  
(d) the subscriber has been declared insolvent or dead or where a subscribe r is a firm or a 
company, which has been dissolved, wound -up or otherwise ce ased to exist.  
(3) A Digital Signature Certificate shall not be revoked unless the subscriber has been given an 
opportunity of being heard in the matter.  
(4) On revocation of a Dig ital Signature Certificate under this section, the Certifying Authority shall 
communicate the same to the subscriber.  
39. Notice of suspension or revocation .–(1) Where a Digital Signature Certificate is suspended or 
revoked under section 37 or section 38, the Certifying Authority shall publish a notice of such suspension 
or revocation, as the case may be, in the repository specified in the Digital Signature Certificate for 
publication of such notice.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 18  (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 18]
18 
 (2) Where one or more repositories are specified, the Certifying Authority shall publish notices of 
such suspension or revocation, as the case may be, in all such repositories.  
CHAPTER VIII  
DUTIES OF SUBSCRIBERS  
40. Generating key pair .–Where any Digital Signature Certificate the public key of which 
corresponds to the private key of that subscriber which is to be listed in the Digital Signature Certificate 
has been accepted by a subscriber,  1*** the subscriber shall generate  2[that key] pair by applying the 
security procedure.  
3[40A. Duties of subscri ber of Electronic Signature Certificate .–In respect of Electronic Signature 
Certificate the subscriber shall perform such duties as may be prescribed.]  
41. Acceptance of Digital Signature Certificate .–(1) A subscriber shall be deemed to have accepted 
a Digital Signature Certificate if he publishes or authorises the publication of a  Digital Signature 
Certificate – 
(a) to one or more persons;  
(b) in a repository; or  
otherwise demonstrates his approval of the Digital Signa ture Certificate in any manner.  
(2) By accepting a Digital Signature Certificate the subscriber certifies to all who reasonably rely on 
the information contained in the Digi tal Signature Certificate that – 
(a) the subscriber holds the private key corresponding to the public key listed in the Digital 
Signature Certificate and is entitled to hold the same;  
(b) all representations made by the subscriber to the Certifying Authority and all material relevant 
to the information contained in the Digital Signature Certificate are true;  
(c) all informa tion in the Digital Signature Certificate that is within the knowl edge of the 
subscriber is true.  
42. Control of private key .–(1) Every subscriber shall exercise reasonable care to retain control of 
the private key corresponding to the public key listed in  his Digital Signature Certificate and take all steps 
to prevent its disclosure  4***. 
(2) If the private ke
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 18]
al Signature Certificate and take all steps 
to prevent its disclosure  4***. 
(2) If the private key corresponding to the public key listed in the Digital Signature Certificate has 
been compromised, then, the subscriber shall communicate the same w ithout any delay to the Certifying 
Authority in such manner as may be specified by the regulations.  
Explanation .–For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the subscriber shall be liable till he 
has informed the Certifying Authority that the pri vate key has been compromised.  
CHAPTER IX  
5[PENALTIES,  COMPENSATION AND ADJUDICATION ] 
43. 6[Penalty and compensation ] for damage to computer, computer system, etc .–If any person 
without permission of the owner or any ot her person who is in charge  of a computer, compu ter system or  
computer network, – 
(a)  accesses   or  secures   access  to  such  computer,   compu ter system    or computer   network  
7[or computer resource] ; 
                                                           
1. The word “then” omitted by notification No. S.O. 1 015(E) (w.e.f. 19 -9-2002).  
2. Subs. ibid.,  for “the key” (w.e.f. 19 -9-2002).  
3. Ins. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 19 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
4. The words “to a person not authori sed to affix the digital signature of the subscriber” omitted by notification No. S.O.10 15(E) 
(w.e.f. 19 -9-2002).  
5. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 20,  for “P ENALTIES AND ADJUDICATION ” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
6. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for “Penalty”  (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
7. Ins. by s. 21, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 19]
19 
 (b) downloads, copies or extracts any data, computer data base or information from such 
computer, computer system or computer network including information or data held or stored in any 
removable storage medium;  
(c) introduces or causes to be introduced any computer contaminant or computer virus into any 
computer, computer system or  computer network;  
(d) damages or causes to be damaged any computer, computer system or computer network, data, 
computer data base or any other programmes residing in such computer, computer system or 
computer network;  
(e) disrupts or causes disruption of any computer, computer system or computer network;  
(f) denies or causes the denial of access to any person authorised to access any computer, 
computer system or computer network by any means;  
(g) provides any assistance to any person to facilitate access t o a computer, computer system or 
computer network in contravention of the provisions of this Act, rules or regulations made 
thereunder;  
(h) charges the services availed of by a person to the account of another person by tampering with 
or manipulating any c omputer, compu ter system, or computer network;  
1[(i) destroys, deletes or alters any information residing in a computer resource or diminishes its 
value or utility or affects it injuriously by any means;  
(j) steal, conceal, destroys or alters or causes any  person to steal, conceal, destroy or alter any 
computer source code used for a computer resource with an intention to cause damage ;] 
2[he shall be liable to pay damages by way of compens ation to the person so affected .] 
Explanation .–For the purposes of th is section, – 
(i) “computer contaminant ” means any set of computer  instructions that are designed – 
(a) to modify, destroy, record, transmit data or programme residing within a computer, 
computer system or computer network; or  
(b) by any means to usurp the normal operation of the computer, computer system, or 
computer network;  
(ii
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 19]
ny means to usurp the normal operation of the computer, computer system, or 
computer network;  
(ii) “computer data -base” means a representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts or 
instructions in text, image, audio, video that are being prepared or have been prepared i n a formalised 
manner or have been produced by a computer, computer system or computer network and are 
intended for use in a computer, computer system or computer network;  
(iii) “computer virus ” means any computer instruction, information, data or programm e that 
destroys, damages, degrades or adversely affects the performance of a computer resource or attaches 
itself to another computer resource and operates when a programme, data or instruction is executed or 
some other event takes place in that computer r esource;  
(iv) “damage ” means to destroy, alter, delete, add, modify or rearrange any computer resource by 
any means.  
1[(v) “computer source code ” means the listing of programme, co mputer commands, design and 
layout and programme analysis of c omputer resource in any form.]  
3[43A. Compensation for failure to protect data .–Where a body corporate, possessing, dealing or 
handling any sensitive personal data or information in a computer resource which it owns, controls or 
operates, is negligent in implement ing and maintaining reasonable security practices and procedures and 
thereby causes wrongful loss or wrongful gain to any person, such body corporate shall be liable to pay 
damages by way of compensation to the person so affected.  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 21 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
3. Ins. by s. 22, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 20]
20 
 Explanation .–For the purposes of this section, – 
(i) “body corporate ” means any company and includes a firm, sole proprietorship or other 
association of individuals engaged in commercial or professional activities;  
(ii) “reasonable security practices and procedures ” means security practices and procedures 
designed to protect such information from unauthorised access, damage, use, modification, disclosure 
or impairment, as may be specified in an agreement between the parties or as may be specified in any 
law for the time bei ng in force and in the absence of such agreement or any law, such reasonable 
security practices and procedures, as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation 
with such professional bodies or associations as it may deem fit;  
(iii) “sensitiv e personal data or information ” means such personal information as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with such professional bodies or associations as 
it may deem fit.]  
44. Penalty for failure to furnish information, return, etc .–If any person who is required under this 
Act or any rules or regulations made thereunder to – 
 
(a) furnish any document, return or report to the Controller or the Certifying Authority fails to 
furnish the same, he shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding 1[fifteen lakh ] rupees for each such 
failure;  
(b) file any return or furnish any information, books or other documents within the time specified 
therefor in the regulations fails to file return or furnish the same within the time specified therefor in 
the regulations, he shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding 2[fifty thousand ] rupees for every day 
during which suc h failure continues;  
(c) maintain books of account or records , fails to maintain the same, he shall be liable to a penalty 
not exceeding 3[one lakh] rupees for every day duri ng which the failure continues.  
45. Residuary penalty .–Whoever contravenes any 4[rules, regulations, directions
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 20]
ailure continues.  
45. Residuary penalty .–Whoever contravenes any 4[rules, regulations, directions or orders ] made 
under this Act, for the contravention of which no penalty has been separately provided, shall be liable to 
pay a 5[penalty not exceeding one lakh rupees, in addition to compensation to the person affected by such 
contravention not exceeding — 
(a) ten lakh rupees, by an intermediary, company or body corporate; or  
(b) one lakh rupees, by any other person. ] 
46. Power to adjudicate .–(1) For the purpose of adjudging 6[under this Act ] whether any person has 
committed a contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule, regulation, 7[direction or 
order made thereunder which renders him liable to pay penalty or compensation ,] the Central Government 
shall, subject to the p rovisions of sub -section ( 3), appoint any officer not below the rank of a Director to 
the Government of India or  an equivalent officer of a Stat e Government to be an adjudicating officer for 
holding an inquiry in the manner prescribed by the Central Govern ment.  
8[(1A) The adjudicating officer appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall exercise jurisdiction to 
adjudicate matters in which the claim for 9*** damage do es not exceed rupees five crore:  
Provided that the jurisdiction in respect of the claim for 9*** damage exceeding rupees five crores 
shall vest with the competent court .] 
(2) The adjudicating officer shall, after giving the person referred to in sub -section ( 1) a reasonable 
opportunity for making representation in the matter and if, on such inquiry, he is satisfied that the person 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 2023, s. 2 and Schedule, for “ one lakh and fifty thousand” (w.e.f. 30 -11-2023).  
2. Subs. by ibid., s. 2  and Schedule, for “ five thousand” (w.e.f. 30 -11-2023).  
3. Sub. by ibid., s. 2 and Schedule, for “ ten thousand” (w.e.f. 30 -11-2023).  
4. Subs. by ibid., s. 2 and S
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 20]
 ibid., s. 2 and Schedule, for “ ten thousand” (w.e.f. 30 -11-2023).  
4. Subs. by ibid., s. 2 and Schedule, for “rules or regulations” (w.e.f. 30 -11-2023).  
5. Subs. by ibid., s. 2 and Schedule,  for certain words (w.e.f. 30 -11-2023).  
6. Subs. by ibid., s. 2 and Schedule, for “ under this Chapter” (w.e.f. 30 -11-2023).  
7. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 23, for “direction or order made thereunder” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
8. Ins. by s. 23, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).  
9. Words omitted “ injury or” omitted  by Act 18 of 2023, s. 2 and Schedule (w.e.f. 30 -11-2023).   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 21]
21 
 has committed the contravention, he may impose such penalty or award such compensation as he thinks 
fit in accordance with the provisions of that section.  
(3) No person shall be appointed as an adjudicating officer unless he  possesses such experience in the 
field of Information Technology and legal or judicial experience as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government.  
(4) Where more than  one adjudicating officers are appointed, the Central Government shall specify by 
order th e matters and places with respect to which such officers shall exercise their jurisdiction.  
(5) Every adjudicating officer shall have the powers of a civil court which are conferred on the                       
1[Appellate Tribunal ] under sub -section ( 2) of section 58, and – 
(a) all proceedings before it shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within the meaning of 
sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860);  
(b) shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of sections 345 and 346 of  the Code of 
Crimi nal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974);  
2[(c) shall be deemed to be a civil court for purposes of Order XXI of the Civil Procedure Code , 
1908  (5 of 1908) .] 
47. Factors to be taken into account by the adjudicating officer .–While adjudging the quantum of 
compensation under this Chapter, the adjudicating officer shall have due regard to the  following factors,  
namely: – 
(a) the amount of gain of unfair advantage, wherever quantifiable, m ade as a result of the default;  
(b) the amount of loss caused to any per son as a result of the default;  
(c) the re petitive nature of the default.  
CHAPTER  X 
3[APPELLATE  TRIBUNAL ] 
48. Establishment of 1[Appellate Tribunal ].–4[(1) The Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate 
Tribunal established under section 14 of the  Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997 shall, on 
and from the commencement of Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017, be the Appellate 
Tribunal for the purposes
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 21]
ment of Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017, be the Appellate 
Tribunal for the purposes of this Act and the said Appellate Tribunal shall exercise the jurisdiction,  
powers and authority confer red on it by or under this Act. ] 
(2) The Central Government 5[shall specify, by notification ] the matters and places in relation to 
which the 1[Appellate  Tribunal ] may exercise jurisdiction.  
49. [Composition of Cyber Appellate Tribunal .]—Omitted by the Finance  Act, 2017 (7 of 2017),           
s.  169 ( w.e.f . 26-5-2017).  
50. [Qualifications for appointment as Chairperson and Members of Cyber Appellate 
Tribunal .]—Omitted by s. 169, ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).  
51. [Term of office, conditions of service, etc., of Chairperson and Members .]—Omitted by s. 
169,  ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).  
52. [Salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Chairperson and 
Members .]—Omitted by s. 169, ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).  
52A. [Powers  of superintendence, direction, etc .]—Omitted by s. 169, ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).  
52B. [Distribution of business among Benches. ]—Omitted by s. 169, ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).  
52C. [Power of Chairperson to transfer cases .]—Omitted by s. 169, ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).  
52D. Decision by majority .–If the Members of a Bench consisting of two Members differ in opinion 
on any point, they shall state the point or points on which they differ, and make a reference to the 
Chairperson of the 1[Appellate  Tribunal ] who s hall hear the point or points himself and such point or 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 169, for “Cyber Appellate Tribunal” (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017)  
2. Ins. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 23 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
3. Subs.  by Act 7 of 2017, s. 169, for Chapter heading (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
4. Subs. by s. 169, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
5. Subs. by s, 169, ibid., for “shall also specify, in the notification referred to in s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 21]
-5-2017).  
5. Subs. by s, 169, ibid., for “shall also specify, in the notification referred to in sub -section ( 1)” (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017) . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 22]
22 
 points shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority of the Members who have heard the case, 
including those who first heard it.]  
 53. [Filling up of vacancies .]—Omitted by the Finance  Act, 2017 (7 of 2017), s.  169 ( w.e.f . 26-5-
2017).  
 54. [Resignation and removal .]—Omitted by s . 169 , ibid. (w.e.f . 26-5-2017).  
 55. Orders constituting Appellate Tribunal to be final and not to invalidate its proceedings .–No 
order of the Central Government appointing any person as the 1[Chairperson or the Member] of a                         
2[Appellate Tribunal ] shall be called in question in any manner and no act or proceeding before a  
2[Appellate Tribunal ] shall be calle d in question in any manner on the ground merely of any defect in the 
constitution of a  2[Appellate Tribunal ]. 
 56. [Staff of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal .]—Omitted by the Finance  Act, 2017 (7 of 2017), s. 169 
(w.e.f . 26-5-2017).  
57. Appeal to 2[Appellate Tribunal ].–(1) Save as provided in sub -section ( 2), any person aggrieved 
by an order made by controller or an adjudicating officer under this Act may prefer an appeal to a 
2[Appellate Tribunal ] having jurisdict ion in the matter.  
(2) No appeal shall lie to the 2[Appellate Tribunal ] from an order made by an adjudicating officer 
with the consent of the parties.  
(3) Every appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be filed within a period of forty -five days from the date 
on which a copy of the order made by the Controller or the adjudicating officer is received by the person 
aggrieved and it shall be in such form and be accompanied by  such fee as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the 2[Appellate Tribunal ] may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period  of 
forty -five days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that period.  
(4) On receipt of an appeal under sub -section ( 1), the 2[Appellate Tribunal ] may, after giving the 
parties to the appeal, an opp
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 22]
r sub -section ( 1), the 2[Appellate Tribunal ] may, after giving the 
parties to the appeal, an opportunity of being h eard, pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit, confirming, 
modifying or setting as ide the order appealed against.  
(5) The 2[Appellate Tribunal ] shall send a copy of every order made by it to the parties to the appeal 
and to the concerned Cont roller or ad judicating officer.  
(6) The appeal filed before the 2[Appellate Tribunal ] under sub -section ( 1) shall be dealt with by it as 
expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made by it to dispose of the appeal finally within six 
months from the  date of rec eipt of the appeal.  
58. Procedure and powers of the 2[Appellate Tribunal ].–(1) The 2[Appellate Tribunal ] shall not be 
bound by the procedure laid down by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) but shall be guided 
by the principles of natural justice and, subject to the other provisions of this Act and of any rules, the                 
2[Appellate Trib unal] shall have powers to regulate its own procedure including the place at which it sh all 
have its sittings.  
(2) The 2[Appellate Tribunal ] shall have, for the purposes of discharging its functions under this Act, 
the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), while 
trying a suit, in respect of  the following matters, namely: – 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any pe rson and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documen ts or other electronic records;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) issuing commissions for the examina tion of witnesses or doc uments;  
(e) reviewing its decisions;  
(f) dismissing an application for d efault or deciding it ex parte ; 
(g) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 29, ibid.,  for “Presiding Officer” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 22]
       
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 29, ibid.,  for “Presiding Officer” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Subs. by 7 of 2017, s, 169, for “Cyber Appellate Tribunal” (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 23]
23 
 (3) Every proceeding before the 1[Appellate Tribunal ] shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding 
within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purposes of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code  
(45 of 1860) and the 1[Appellate Tribunal ] shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section  
195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
59. Right to legal representation .–The appellant may either appear in person or authorise one or 
more legal practitioners or any of its officers to present his or its case before the 1[Appellate Tribunal ]. 
60. Limitation .–The provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963), shall, as fa r as may be, 
apply to an appeal made to the 1[Appellate Tribunal ]. 
61. Civil court not to have jurisdiction .–No court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or 
proceeding in respect of any matter which an adjudicating officer appointed under this Ac t or the 
1[Appellate Tribunal ] constituted under this Act is empowered by or under this Act to determine and no 
injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in 
pursuance of any power conferred by  or under this Act.  
62. Appeal to High Court .–Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the 1[Appellate 
Tribunal ] may file an appeal to the High Court within sixty days from the date of communication of the 
decision or order of the 1[Appellate Tribunal ] to him on any question of fact or law arising out of such 
order:  
Provided that the High Court may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause 
from filing the appeal within the said period, allow it to be filed within a further period not exceeding 
sixty days.  
63. Compounding of contraventions .–(1) Any contravention under this  2[Act] may, either before or 
after the institution of adjudication proceedings, be compounded by the Controller or such other officer as 
may be s 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 23]
ion of adjudication proceedings, be compounded by the Controller or such other officer as 
may be s pecially authorised by him in this behalf or by the adjudicating officer, as the case may be, 
subject to such conditions as the Controller or such other officer or the adjudicating officer may specify:  
Provided that such sum shall not, in any case, exceed the maximum amount of the penalty which may 
be imposed under this Act for the contravention so compounded.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall apply to a person who commits the same or similar contravention 
within a period of three years from the date on which the first contravention, committed by him, was 
compounded.  
Explanation .–For the purposes of this sub -section, any second or subsequent contravention 
committed after the expiry of a period of three years from the date on which the contravention was 
previously compounded shall be deemed to be a first contravention.  
(3) Where any contravention has been compounded under sub -section ( 1), no proceeding or further 
proceeding, as the case may be, shall be taken against the person guilty of such contravention in respect of 
the contravention so compounded.  
64. Recovery of 3[penalty  or compensation ].–A 4[penalty imposed or compensation awarded] under 
this Act, if it is not paid, shall he recovered as an arrear of land  revenue and the licence or the 5[electronic 
signature] Certificate, as the case may be, shall be suspended till the penalty is paid.  
CHAPTER XI  
OFFENCES  
65. Tampering with computer source documents .–Whoever knowingly or intentionally conceals, 
destroys or alters or intentionally or knowingly causes another to conceal, destroy, or alter any computer 
source code used for a computer, computer programme, computer system or computer network, when the 
computer source code is required to be kept or maintained by law for the time being in force, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment up to three years, or with fine which may e
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 23]
e being in force, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment up to three years, or with fine which may extend up to two lakh rupees, or 
with both.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  7 of 2017, s. 169, for “Cyber Appellate Tribunal”  (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017) . 
2. Subs. by notification No. S.O. 1015(E) (w.e.f. 19 -9-2002).  
3. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 31, for marginal heading  (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
4. Subs. by s. 31, ibid., for “penalty  imposed ” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
5. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “ digital signature” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 24]
24 
 Explanation. –For the purposes of this section, “computer source code ” means the listing of 
programmes, computer commands, design and layout and programme analysis of computer resource in 
any form.  
1[66. Computer related offences .–If any person, dishonestly or fraudulently, does any act referred to 
in section 43, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or  
with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees or with both.  
Explanation .–For the purposes of this section, – 
(a) the word “dishonestly ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 24 of the Indian Penal 
Code  (45 of 1860);  
(b) the word “fraudulently ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 25 of the  Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 1860).  
266A. [Punishment for sending offensive messages through communication service, etc. ]– 
Omitted by the Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions)  Act, 2023 (18 of 2023), s. 2 and Schedule  (w.e.f . 
30-11-2023). 
66B. Punishment for dishonestly receiving stolen computer resource or communication device .– 
Whoever dishonestly received or retains any stolen computer resource or communication device knowing 
or having reason to bel ieve the same to be stolen computer resource or communication device, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years or with fine 
which may extend to rupees one lakh or with both.  
66C. Punishment for id entity theft .–Whoever, fraudulently or dishonestly make use of the 
electronic signature, password or any other unique identification feature of any other person, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three  years and shall 
also be l iable to fine which may ex tend to rupees one lakh.  
66D. Punishment for cheating by personation by using computer resource .–Whoever, by means 
of any communication device or computer resource cheats by personating, shall be punished  with 

<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 24]
s 
of any communication device or computer resource cheats by personating, shall be punished  with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to 
fine whic h may extend to one lakh rupee s. 
66E. Punishment for violation of privacy .–Whoever, intentionally or knowingly captures, publishes 
or transmits the image of a private area of any person without his or her consent, under circumstances 
violating the privacy of that person, shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to three years 
or with fine not exceeding two lakh rupees, or with  both.  
Explanation .–For the purposes of this section – 
(a) “transmit ” means to electronically send a visual image with the intent that it be viewed by a 
person or persons;  
(b) “capture ”, with respect to an image, means to videotape, photograph, film or record by any 
means;  
(c) “private area ” means the naked or undergarment clad genitals, public area, buttocks or female 
breast:  
(d) “publishes ” means  reproduction in the printed or electronic form and making it available for 
public;  
(e) “under circumstances  violating privacy ” means circumstances in which a person can hav e a 
reasonable expectation that – 
(i) he or she could disrobe in privacy, without being concerned that an image of his private 
area was being captured; or  
(ii) any part of his or her private area would not be visible to the public, regardless of whether 
that person is in a public or private place.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009 , s. 32, for sections 66 and 67  (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Section 66A has been struck down by supreme Court’s Order dated 24 -3-2015 in the Shreya Singhal Vs. Union of India, AIR 
2015 SC. 1523.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 25]
25 
  
66F. Punishment for cyber terrorism .–(1) Whoever, – 
(A) with intent to threaten the unity, integrity, security or sovereignty of India or to strike terror in 
the people or any section of the people by – 
(i) denying or cause the denial of access to any person authoris ed to access computer 
resource; or  
(ii) atte mpting to penetrate or access a computer resource without authorisation or exceeding 
authorised access; or  
(iii) introducing or causing to introduce any computer contaminan t, and by means of such 
conduct causes or is likely to cause death or injuries to pe rsons or damage to or destruction of 
property or disrupts or knowing that it is likely to cause damage or disruption of supplies or 
services essential to the life of the community or adversely affect the critical information 
infrastructure specified under section 70 ; or 
(B) knowingly or intentionally penetrates or accesses a computer resource without authorisation 
or exceeding authorised access, and by means of such conduct obtains access to information, data or 
computer data  base that is restricted for reasons of the security of the State or foreign relations ; or any 
restricted information, data or computer data  base, with reasons to believe that such information, data 
or computer data  base so obtained may be used to cause or likely to cause injury to the interests of the 
sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, 
public order, decency or morality, or in relation to contempt of court, defamation or incitement to an 
offence, or to the advantage of any foreign nation, gro up of individuals or otherwise,  
commits the offence of cyber terrorism.  
(2) Whoever commits or conspires to commit cyber terrorism shall be punishable with imprisonment 
which may e xtend to imprisonment fo r life.  
67. Punishment for publishing or transmitting obscene material in electronic form .–Whoever 
publishes or transmits or causes to
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 25]
g or transmitting obscene material in electronic form .–Whoever 
publishes or transmits or causes to be published or transmitted in the electronic form, any material which 
is lascivious or appeals to the prurient interest or if its effect is such as to tend to deprave and corrupt 
persons who are likely, having regard to all relevant circumstances, to read, see or hear the matter 
contained or embodied in it, shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment of either d escription 
for a term which may extend to three years and with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees and in the 
event of second or subsequent conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to five years and also with fin e which may extend to ten lakh rupees.  
67A. Punishment for publishing or transmitting of material containing sexually explicit act, etc., 
in electronic form .–Whoever publishes or transmits or causes to be published or transmitted in the 
electronic form any  material which contains sexually explicit act or conduct shall be punished on first 
conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years and with 
fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees and in the event of second o r subsequent conviction with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years and also with fine which 
may extend to ten lakh rupees.  
67B. Punishment for publishing or transmitting of material depicting children in sexually 
explicit act, etc., in electronic form .–Whoever, – 
(a) publishes or transmits or causes to be published or transmitted material in any electronic form 
which depicts children engaged in sexually explicit act or conduct; or  
(b) creates text or  digital images, collects, seeks, browses, downloads, advertises, promotes, 
exchanges or distributes material in any electronic form depicting children in obscene or indecent or 
sexually explicit manner; or  
(c) cultivates, entic
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 25]
m depicting children in obscene or indecent or 
sexually explicit manner; or  
(c) cultivates, entices or induces children to on line relationship with one or more children for and 
on sexually explicit act or in a manner that may offend a reasonable adult on the computer resource; 
or 
(d) facilitates abusing children online, or  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 26]
26 
 (e) records in any electronic form own abuse or that of others pertaining to sexua lly explicit act 
with children,  
shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend 
to five years and with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees and in the event of second o r subsequent 
conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years and also 
with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees:  
Provided that provisions of section 67, section 67A and this section does not extend to any b ook, 
pamphlet, paper, writing, drawing, painting representati on or figure in electronic form – 
(i) the publication of which is proved to be justified as being for the public good on the 
ground that such book, pamphlet, paper, writing , drawing, painting repr esentation or figure is the 
interest of science, literature, art or learning or other objects of general concern; or  
(ii) which is kept or used for bona  fide heritage or religious purposes.  
Explanation –For the purposes of this section , “children ” means a person who has not  completed 
the age of 18 years.  
67C. Preservation and retention of information by intermediaries .–(1) Intermediary shall 
preserve and retain such information as may be specified for such duration and in such manner and format 
as the Central Government may prescribe.  
(2) any intermediary who intentionally or knowingly contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) 
shall be 1[liable to penalty which may extend to twenty -five lakh rupees ].] 
68. Power of Controller to give directions .–(1) The Controller may, by order, direct a Certifying 
Authority or any employee of such Authority to take such measures or cease carrying on such activities as 
specified in the order if those are necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this A ct, rules or 
any regulations made thereunder.  
2[(2) Any person who intentionally or knowingly fails to compl
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 26]
r 
any regulations made thereunder.  
2[(2) Any person who intentionally or knowingly fails to comply with any order under sub -section ( 1) 
shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable 1[to penalty which may extend to twenty -five lakh              
rupees ].] 
3[69. Power to issue directions for interception or monitoring or decryption of any information 
through any computer resource .–(1) Where the Central Government or a State Government or any of 
its officer s specially authorised by the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, 
in this behalf may, if satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do , in the interest of the sovereignty 
or integrity of India, defence of India, security o f the State, friendly relations with foreign States or public 
order or for preventing incitement to the commission of any cognizable offence relating to above or for 
investigation of any offence, it may subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), for rea sons to be recorded 
in writing, by order, direct any agency of the appropriate Government to intercept, monitor or decrypt or 
cause to be intercepted or monitored or decrypted any information generated, transmitted, received or 
stored in any computer resou rce. 
(2) The procedure and safeguards subject to which such interception or monitoring or decryption may 
be carried out, shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(3) The subscriber or intermediary or any person in -charge of the computer resource shall, when 
called upon by any agency referred to in sub -section ( 1), extend all facilit ies and technical assistance to – 
(a) provide access  to or secure access to the computer resource generating , transmitting, receiving 
or storing such information; or  
(b) intercept, monitor, or decrypt the information, as the case may be; or  
(c) provide information stored in computer resource.  
(4) The subscriber or intermediary or any person who fails to assist the agency referred to in sub -
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 26]
(4) The subscriber or intermediary or any person who fails to assist the agency referred to in sub -
section ( 3) shall be punished with imprisonm ent for a term which may extend to seven years and shall 
also be liable to fine.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 2023, s. 2 and Schedule for certain words (w.e.f. 30 -11-2023).  
2. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 33, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
3. Subs. by s. 34, ibid., for section 69 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 27]
27 
 69A. Power to issue directions for blocking for public access of any information through any 
computer resource .–(1) Where the Central Government or any of its officers special ly authorised by it in 
this behalf is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do , in the interest of sovereignty and integrity 
of India, defence of India, security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States or public order or for 
preven ting incitement to the commission of any cognizable offence relating to above, it may subject to the 
provisions of sub -section ( 2), for reasons to be recorded in writing, by order, direct any agency of the 
Government or intermediary to block for access by the public or cause to be blocked for access by the 
public any information generated, transmitted, received, stored or hosted in an y computer resource.  
(2) The procedure and safeguards subject to which such blocking for access by the public may be 
carried out, shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(3) The intermediary who fails to comply with the direction issued under sub -section ( 1) shall be 
punished with an imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years and also be liable to fine.  
69B. Power to authorise to monitor and collect traffic data or information through any 
computer resource for cyber security .–(1) The Central Govern ment may, to enhance cyber security and 
for identification, analysis and prevention of intrusion or spread of computer contaminant in the country, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, authorise any agency of the Government to monitor and collect 
traffi c data or information generated, transmitted, received or stored in any computer resource.  
(2) The intermediary or any person in -charge or the computer resource shall, when called upon by the 
agency which has been authorised under sub -section ( 1), provide technical assistance and extend all 
facilities to such agency to enable online access or to secure and provide onli
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 27]
ance and extend all 
facilities to such agency to enable online access or to secure and provide online access to the computer 
resource generating, transmitting, receiving or storing such traffic data or information.  
(3) The procedure and saf eguards for monitoring and collecting traffic data or information, shall be 
such as may be prescribed.  
(4) Any intermediary who intentionally or knowingly contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 2) 
shall be punished with an imprisonment for a term which  any extend to 1[one year or shall be liable to fine 
which may extend to one crore rupees, or with both ]. 
Explanation .–For the purposes of this section, – 
(i) “computer contaminant ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 43;  
(ii) “traffic data ” means any data identifying or purporting to identify any person, computer 
system or computer network or location to or from which the communication is or may be 
transmitted and includes communications origin, destination, route, time, data, size, duration  or 
type of underlying service and any other information.]  
70. Protected system .–2[(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, declare any computer resource which directly or indirectly affects the facility of Critical 
Information Infrastructure, to be a protected system.  
Explanation .–For the purposes of this section, “Critical Information Infrastructure ” means the 
computer resource, the incapacitation or destruction of which, shall have debilitating impact on national 
security, economy, public health or safety.]  
(2) The appropriate Government may, by order in writing, authorise the persons who are authori sed to 
access protected systems notified under sub -section ( 1). 
(3) Any person who secures access or attempts to secure access to a protected system in contravention 
of the provisions of this section shall be punished with imprisonment of either descriptio n for a term 
which may extend to ten years and
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 27]
l be punished with imprisonment of either descriptio n for a term 
which may extend to ten years and shall also be liable to fine.  
3[(4) The Central Government shall prescribe the information security practices and procedures for 
such protected system.]  
4[70A. National nodal agency .–(1) The Central Government  may, by notification published in the 
Official Gazette, designate any organisation of the Government as the national nodal agency in respect of 
Critical Information Infrastructure Protection.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 2023, s. 2 and Schedule for  “three years and shall also be liable to fine” (w.e.f. 30 -11-2023).  
2. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 35, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
3. Ins. by s. 35, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
4. Ins. by s. 36, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 28]
28 
 (2) The national nodal agency designated under sub -section ( 1) shall be responsible for all measures 
including Research and Development relating to protection of Critical Information Infrastructure.  
(3) The manner of performing functions and duties of the agency referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall 
be such as may be p rescribed.  
70B. Indian Computer Emergency Response Team to serve as national agency for incident 
response .–(1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint an agency of 
the Governmen t to be called the Indian Compu ter Emergency Response Team.  
(2) The Central Government shall provide the agency referred to in sub -section ( 1) with a Director 
General and such other officers and employees as may be prescribed.  
(3) The salary and allowances and terms and conditions of the Di recto r-General and other officers and 
employees shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(4) The Indian Computer Emergency Response Team shall serve as the national agency for 
performing the following functions  in the area of cyber security, – 
(a) collection, an alysis and dissemination of information on cyber incidents;  
(b) forecast and alerts of cyber security incidents;  
(c) emergency measures for handling cyber security incidents;  
(d) coordination of cyber incidents response activities;  
(e) issue guidelines, ad visories, vulnerability notes and white papers relating to information 
security practices, procedures, preventation, response and reporting of cyber incidents;  
(f) such other functions relating to cyber security as may be prescribed.  
(5) The manner of perf orming functions and duties of the agency referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall 
be such as may be prescribed.  
(6) For carrying out the provisions of sub -section ( 4), the agency referred to in sub -section ( 1) may 
call for information and give direction to th e service providers, intermediaries, data centres, body 
corporate and any other perso
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 28]
rection to th e service providers, intermediaries, data centres, body 
corporate and any other person.  
(7) Any service provider, intermediaries, data centres, body corporate or person who fails to provide 
the information called for or comply with the direction under sub -section ( 6), shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which may extend to 1[one crore ] 
rupees or with both.  
(8) No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this section, except on a complaint made b y 
an officer authorised in this behalf by the agency referred to in sub -section ( 1).] 
71. Penalty for misrepresentation .–Whoever makes any misrepresentation to, or suppresses any 
material fact from the Controller or the Certifying Authority for obtaining a ny licence or 2[electronic 
signature] Certificate, as the case may be, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to  one lakh rupees, or with both.  
72. Penalty for Breach of confidentiality and privacy .–Save as otherwise provided in this Act or 
any other law for the time being in force, if any person who, in pursuance of any of the powers conferred 
under this Act, rules or regulations made thereunder, has secured access to any electronic reco rd, book, 
register, correspondence, information, document or other material without the consent of the person 
concerned discloses such electronic record, book, register, correspondence, information, document or 
other material to any other person shall be 3[liable to penalty which may extend to five lakh rupees ]. 
4[72A. 5[Penalty ] for disclosure of information in breach of lawful contract .–Save as otherwise 
provided in this Act or any other law for the time being in force, any person including an intermediary 
who, while providing services under the terms of lawful contract, has secured access to any material 
                                                      
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 28]
contract, has secured access to any material 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of  2023, s. 2 and Schedule, for “ one lakh” (w.e.f. 30 -11-2023).  
2. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for “ digital signature” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
3. Subs. by Act 18 of 2023, s. 2 and Schedule, for certain world (w.e.f. 30 -11-2023).  
4. Ins. by Act 10 of 2009, s.  37, (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
5. Subs. by Act 18 of 2023, s. 2 and Schedule, for “ Punishment” (w.e.f. 30 -11-2023).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 29]
29 
 containing personal information a bout another person, with the intent to cause or knowing that he is likely 
to cause wrongful loss or wrongful gain discloses, without the consent of the person concerned, or in 
breach of a lawful contract, such material to any other person, shall be 1[liable to penalty which may 
extend to twenty -five lakh rupees ].] 
73. Penalty for publishing 2[electronic signature ] Certificate false in certain particulars .–(1) No 
person shall publish a  2[electronic signature] Certificate or otherwise make it available to any other  person 
with the knowledge that – 
(a) the Certifying Authority listed in the certificate has not issued it; or  
(b) the subscriber listed in the certificate has not accepted it; or  
(c) the certificate has been revoked or suspended,   
unless such publ ication is for the purpose of verifying a 2[electronic signature] created prior to such 
suspension or revocation.  
(2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall be punished with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years,  or with fine which may extend to one lakh 
rupees, or with both.  
74. Publication for fraudulent purpose .–Whoever knowingly creates, publishes or otherwise makes 
available a 2[electronic signature] Certificate for any fraudulent or unlawful purpose shall be  punished 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to one lakh 
rupees, or with both.  
75. Act to apply for offence or contravention committed outside India .–(1) Subject to the 
provisions of sub -section ( 2), the provisions of this Act shall apply also to any offence or contravention 
committed outside India by any person i rrespective of his nationality.  
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), this Act shall apply to an offence or contravention committed 
outside  India by any person if the act or conduct constituting the offence or contravention involves a 
computer, computer syste
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 29]
if the act or conduct constituting the offence or contravention involves a 
computer, computer system or com puter network located in India.  
76. Confiscation .–Any computer, computer system, floppies, compact disks, tape drives or any oth er 
accessories related thereto, in respect of which any provision of this Act, rules, orders or regulations made 
thereunder has been or is being contravened, shall be liable to confiscation:  
Provided that where it is established to the satisfaction of the court adjudicating the confiscation that 
the person in whose possession, power or control of any such computer, computer system, floppies, 
compact disks, tape drives or any other accessories relating thereto is found is not responsible for the 
contraventio n of the provisions of this Act, rules, orders or regulations made thereunder, the court may, 
instead of making an order for confiscation of such computer, computer system, floppies, compact disks, 
tape drives or any other accessories related thereto, make  such other order authorised by this Act against 
the person contravening of the provisions of this Act, rules, orders or regulations made thereunder as it 
may think fit.  
3[77. Compensation, penalties or confiscation not to interfere with other punishment .–No 
compensation awarded, penalty imposed or confiscation made under this Act shall prevent the award of 
compensation or imposition of any other penalty or punishment under any other law for the time being in 
force.  
77A. Compounding of offences .–A court of competent jurisdiction may compound offences, other 
than offences for which the punishment for life or imprisonment for a term exceeding three years has  
been provided, under this Act:  
Provided that the court shall not compound such offence where the accused is, by reason of his 
previous conviction, liable to either enhanced punishment or to a punishment of a different kind:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 29]
ment of a different kind:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 2023, s. 2 and Schedule, for certain word (w.e.f. 30 -11-2023).  
2. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for “ digital signature” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
3. Subs. by s. 38,  ibid., for section 77 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 30]
30 
 Provided further that the court shall not compound any offence where such offence affects the socio 
economic conditions of the co untry or has been committed against a child below the age of 18 years or a 
woman.  
(2) The person accused of an offence under this Act may file an application for compounding in the 
court in which offence is pending f or trial and the provisions of  sections 265B and 265C of the Code of 
Crimin al Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974)  shall apply.  
77B. Offences with three years imprisonment to be bailable .–Notwithstanding anything contained 
in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974), the offence punishable with imprisonment of three 
years and above shall be cognizable and the offence punishable with imprisonment of three years shall be 
bailable.]  
78. Power to investigate offences .–Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 19 74), a police officer not below the rank of 1[Inspector] shall investigate any 
offence under this Act.  
2[CHAPTER XII  
INTERMEDIARIES NOT TO BE LIABLE IN CERTAIN CASES  
79. Exemption from liability of intermediary in certain cases .–(1) Notwithstanding anythin g 
contained in any law for the time being in force but subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3), 
an intermediary shall not be liable for any third party information, data, or communication link made 
available or hosted by him.  
(2) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall apply if – 
(a) the function of the intermediary is limited to providing access to a communication system 
over which information made available by third parties is transmitted or temporarily stored or hosted; 
or 
(b) the in termediary does not – 
(i) initiate the transmission,  
(ii) select the receiver of the transmission, and  
(iii) select or modify the information contained in the transmission;  
(c) the intermediary observes due diligence while discharging his duties under this Act and also 
observes suc
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 30]
termediary observes due diligence while discharging his duties under this Act and also 
observes such other guidelines as the Central Government may prescribe in this behalf.  
(3) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall not apply if – 
(a) the intermediary has conspired or abetted or aided or induced, whether by threats or promise 
or otherwise in the commission of the unlawful act;  
(b) upon receiving actual knowledge, or on being notified by the appropriate Government or its 
agency that any information, data or communication link residing in or connected to a computer 
resource contro lled by the intermediary is being used to commit the unlawful act, the intermediary 
fails to expeditiously remove or disable access to that material on that resource without vitiating the 
evidence in any manner.  
Explanation. –For the purposes of this section, the expression “third party information ” means any 
information dealt with by an intermediary in his capacity as an intermediary.  
CHAPTER XIIA  
EXAMINER OF ELECTRONIC EVIDENCE  
79A. Central Government to notify Examiner of Electronic Evidence .–The Central Government 
may, for the purposes of providing expert opinion on electronic form evidence before any court or other 
authority specify, by notification in the Official Gazette, any Dep artment, body or agency of the Central 
Government or a State Government as an Examiner of Electronic Evidence.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 39, for “Deputy Superintendent of Police ” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Subs. by, s. 40 , ibid., for Chapter XII  (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 31]
31 
 Explanation. –For the purposes of this section, “electronic form evidence ” means any information of 
probative value that is either stored or trans mitted in electronic form and includes computer evidence, 
digital audio, digital video, cel l phones, digital fax machines. ] 
CHAPTER XIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
80. Power of police officer and other officers to enter, search, etc .–(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contai ned in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), any police o fficer, not below the rank of a 
1[Inspector], or any other officer of the Central Government or a State Government authorised by the 
Central Government in this behalf may enter any public  place and search and arrest without warrant any 
person found therein who is reasonably suspected of having committed or of committing or of being 
about to commit any offence under this Act.  
Explanation. –For the purposes of this sub -section, the expression “public place ” includes any public 
conveyance, any hotel, any shop or any other place intended for use by, or accessible to the public.  
(2) Where any person is arrested under sub -section ( 1) by an office r other than a police officer, such 
officer shall, without unnecessary delay, take or send the person arrested before a magistrate having 
jurisdiction in the case or before the officer -in-charge of a police station.  
(3) The provisions of the Code of Crimin al Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) shall, subject to the 
provisions of this section, apply, so far as may be, in relation to any entry, search or arrest, made under 
this section.  
81. Act to have overriding effect .–The provisions of this Act shall have effect n otwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.  
2[Provided that nothing contained in this Act shall restrict any person from exercising any right 
conferred under the Copyright Act, 1957 (14 of  1957) or  the Patents Act, 1970 (39 of 1970) .] 
3[81A. Application o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 31]
he Copyright Act, 1957 (14 of  1957) or  the Patents Act, 1970 (39 of 1970) .] 
3[81A. Application of the Act to electronic cheque and truncated cheque .–(1) The provisions of 
this Act, for the time being in force, shall apply to, or in relation to, electronic cheques and the truncated 
cheques subject to such modifications and amendments as may be necessary for carrying out the purposes 
of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (26 of 1881) by the Central Government, in consultation with the 
Reserve Bank of India, by notification in the Official G azette.  
(2) Every notification made by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses 
agree in making any modification in the notification or both Houses agree that the n otification should not 
be made, the notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the 
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything pre viously done under that notification.  
Explanation. –For the purposes of this Act, the expressions “electronic cheque ” and “truncated 
cheque ” shall have the same meaning as assigned to them in section 6 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 
1881 (26 of 1881).]  
4[82. Controller, Deputy Controller and Assistant Controller to be public servants .–The 
Controller, the Deputy Controller and the Assistant Controllers shall be deemed to be public servants 
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1 860).] 
83. Power to give directions .–The Central Government may give directions to any State Government 
as to the carrying into execut
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 31]
.–The Central Government may give directions to any State Government 
as to the carrying into execution in the State of any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule, regulation 
or order made thereunder.  
84. Protection of action taken in good faith .–No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie 
against the Central Government, the State Government, the Controller or any pers on acting on behalf of 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act  10 of 2009, s. 41, for “Deputy Superintendent of Police” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Ins. by s. 42, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
3. Ins. by Act 55 of 2002, s. 13 (w.e.f. 26 -2-2003).  
4. Subs. by 7 of 2017, s. 169, for section 82 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 32]
32 
 him, 1[and adjudicating officers ] for anything which i s in good faith done or intended to b e done in 
pursuance of this Act or any rule, regulation or order made thereunder.  
2[84A. Modes or methods for encryption .–The Central Government may, for secure use of the 
electronic medium and for promotion of e-governance and e -commerce, prescribe the modes or methods 
for encryption.  
84B. Punishment for abetment of offences .–Whoever abets any offence shall, if the act abetted is 
committed in consequence of the abetment, and no express provision is made by this Act for the 
punishment of such abetment, be punished with the punishment provided for the offence under this Act.  
Explanation. –An act or offence is said to be committed in consequence of abetment, when it is 
committed in consequence of the instigation, or in pursuance of the conspiracy, or with the aid which 
constitutes the abetment.  
84C. Punishment for attempt to commit offences .–Whoever attempts to commit an offence 
punishable by this Act or causes such an offence to be committed, and in such an attempt does any act 
towards the commission of the offence, shall, where no express provision is made for the punishment of 
such attempt , be punished with imprisonment of any description provided for the offence, for a term 
which may extend to one -half of the longest term of imprisonment provided for that offence, or with such 
fine as is provided for the offence, or with both.]  
85. Offences by companies .–(1) Where a person committing a contravention of any of the provisions 
of this Act or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder is a company, every person who, at the time 
the contravention was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct 
of business of the company as well as the company, shall be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable 
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -sec
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 32]
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -sectio n shall render any such person liable to punishment 
if he proves that the contravention took place without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence 
to prevent such contravention.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where a contravention of any of the 
provisions of this Act or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder has been committed by a 
company and it is proved that the contravention has taken place with the consent or connivance of, or is 
attributable to any neg lect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, 
such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the contravention 
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accord ingly.  
Explanation. –For the purposes of this section, – 
(i) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(ii) “director ”, in relation to a fir m, means a partner in the firm.  
86. Removal of difficulties .–(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, 
the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or exped ient for removing the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period of two years from 
the commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
87. Power of Central Government to make rules .–(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette and in the Electronic Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of 
this Act.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 32]
ons of 
this Act.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 169, for “the Chairperson Members, adjudicating officers and the staff of the Cyber Appellate 
Tribunal”  (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
2. Ins. by 10 of 2009, s. 45 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009 ). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 33]
33 
 (2) In particul ar, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: – 
1[(a) the conditions for considering reliability of electronic signature or electronic authentication 
technique und er sub -section ( 2) of section 3A;  
(aa) the procedure for ascertaining electronic signature or authentication under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 3A;  
(ab) the manner in which any information or matter may be authenticated by means of electronic 
signature under  section 5;]  
(b) the electronic form in which filing, issue, grant or payment shall be effected under sub -section 
(1) of section 6;  
(c) the manner and format in which electronic records shall be filed, or issued and the method of 
payment under sub -section (2) of section 6;  
2[(ca) the manner in which the authorised service provider may collect, retain and appropriate 
service charges under sub -section ( 2) of section 6A;]  
(d) the matters relating to the type of 3[electronic signature], manner and format in which it may 
be affixed under section 10;  
4[(e) the manner of storing and affixing electronic signature creation data under section 15;  
(ea) the security procedures and practices under section 16;]  
(f) the qualifications, experience and terms and condition s of service of Con troller, Deputy 
Controllers 5[, Assistant Controllers, other officers and employees] under section 17;  
6*  *   *   *   * 
(h) the requirements  which an applicant must fulfil under sub -section ( 2) of section 21;  
(i) the period of validity of licence granted under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 3) of section 21;  
(j) the form in which an application for licence may be made under sub -section ( 1) of section 22;  
(k) the amount of fees payable under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2) of section 22;  
(l) such other documents which shall accompany an application for licence under clause ( d) of 
sub-section ( 2) of section 22;  
(m
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 33]
hall accompany an application for licence under clause ( d) of 
sub-section ( 2) of section 22;  
(m) the form and the fee for renewal of a licence and the fee payable thereof under section 23;  
 2[(ma) the form of application and fee for issue of Electronic Signature Certificate under  
section 35 ;] 
(n) the form in which application for is sue of a 3[electronic signature] Certificate may be made 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 35;  
(o) the fee to be paid  to the Cert ifying Authority for issue of a 3[electronic signature] Certificate 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 35;  
2[(oa) the duties of subscribers under section 40A;  
(ob) the reasonable security practices and procedures and sensitive personal data or information 
under section 43A;]  
(p) the manner in which the adjudicating officer shall hold inquiry under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 46;  
(q) the qualification and experience which the adjudicating officer shall possess under sub -section 
(3) of section 46;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 46, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Ins. by  s. 46, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009 ). 
3. Subs. by  s. 2, ibid., for “digital signature” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
4. Subs. by s. 46, ibid., for clause ( e) (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
5. Subs. by s. 46 , ibid., for “and Assistant Controllers ” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
6. Clause ( g) omitted by s. 46, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 34]
34 
 1*   *     *   * 
 (u) the form in which appeal may be filed and the fee thereof under sub -section ( 3) of section 57;  
(v) any other power of a civil court required to be prescribed under clause ( g) of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 58; and  
2[(w) the powers and functions of the Chairperson of the 3[Appellate Tribunal ] under  
section 52A;  
(x) the information, duration, manner and form of such information to be retained and preserved 
under section 67C;  
(y) the procedures and safeguards for interception, monitoring or decryption under sub -section ( 2) 
of section 69A;  
(z) the procedures and safeguards for blocking for access by the public under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 69 B;  
(za) the procedure and safeguards for monitoring and collecting traffic data or information u nder 
sub-section ( 3) of section 69B;  
(zb) the information security practices and procedures for protected system under section 70;  
(zc) manner of performing functions and duties of the agency under sub -section ( 3) of  
 section 70 A;  
(zd) the officers and employees under sub -section ( 2) of section 70B;  
(ze) salaries and allowances and terms and condit ions of service of the Director  General and other 
officers and employees under sub -section ( 3) of section 70B ; 
(zf) the manner in which the functions and dutie s of agency shall be performed under sub -section 
(5) of section 70B;  
(zg) the guidelines to be observed by the intermediaries under sub -section (2) of section 79;  
(zh) the modes or methods for encryption under section 84 A .] 
(3) 4[Every notification made by the Central Government under sub -section  (1)  of section 70 A and 
every rule made by it] shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, 
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 34]
ssive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agre e in making any modification in 5*** the  rule or both 
Houses agree that 5*** the rule should not be made, 5*** the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previ ously done under that notification or 
rule. 
88. Constitution of Advisory Committee .–(1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be 
after the commencement of this Act, constitute a Committee called the Cyber Regulations Advisory 
Committee.  
(2) The Cyber Regulations Advisory Committee shall consist of a Chairperson and such number of 
other official and non -official members representing the interests principally affected or having special 
knowledge of the subject -matter as the C entral Government may d eem fit.  
(3) The Cyber Regulations Advisory Committee shall advise – 
(a) the Central Government either generally as regards any rules or for any other purpose 
connected with this Act;  
(b) the Controller in framing the regulations under this Act.  
                                                           
1. Clauses ( r), (s) and ( t) omitted by Act 7 of 2017, s. 169 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
2. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 46,  for clause ( w) (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
3. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 169, for “Cyber Appellate Tribunal”(w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
4. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009 , s. 46, for certain words, brackets, letter and figures (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
5. The words “the notification or” omitted by s. 46, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 7-10-2009).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 35]
35 
 (4) There s hall be paid to the non -official members of such Committee such travelling and other 
allowances as the Central Government may fix.  
89. Power of Controller to make regulations .–(1) The Controller may, after consultation with the 
Cyber Regulations Advisory C ommittee and with the previous approval of the Central Government, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules made 
thereunder to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejud ice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: – 
(a) the particulars relating to maintenance of data base containing the disclosure record of every 
Certifying Authority under claus e 1[(n)] of section 18;  
(b) the conditions and restrictions subject to which the Controller may recognise any foreign 
Certifying Authority under sub -section ( 1) of section 19;  
(c) the terms and conditions subject to which a licence may be granted under clause ( c) of             
sub-section ( 3) of section 21;  
(d) other standards to be observed by a Certifying Authority under clause ( d) of section 30;  
(e) the manner in which the Certifying Authority shall disclose the matters specified in                     
sub-section ( 1) of section 34;  
(f) the particulars of statement which shall accompany an application under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 35.  
(g) the manner by which the subscriber shall communicate the compromise of private key to the 
Certifying Authority under sub -section ( 2) of section 42.  
(3) Every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one sessio n or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 35]
 if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the regulation or both Houses agree that the regulatio n should not be made, the regulation shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done  
under that regulation.  
90. Power of State Government to make rules .–(1) The State Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following ma tters, namely: – 
(a) the electronic form in which filing, issue, grant, receipt or payment shall be effected under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 6;  
(b) for matters specified in sub -section ( 2) of section 6;  
2*  *   *   *   * 
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of the Stale Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or where such 
Legislatu re consists of one House, before that House.  
91. [Amendment of Act  45 of 1860 .]—Omitted by the Information Technology (Amendment ) Act, 2008 
(10 of 2009) , s. 48 (w.e.f.  27-10-2009).  
92. [Amendment of Act 1 of 1872 .]—Omitted by s.  48, ibid. (w.e.f.  27-10-2009).  
93. [Amendment of Act  18 of 1891 .]—Omitted by s.  48, ibid. (w.e.f.  27-10-2009).  
94. [Amendment of Act  2 of 1934 .]—Omitted by s.  48, ibid. (w.e.f.  27-10-2009).  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by notification No. S.O. 1015(E), for “( m)” (w.e.f. 19-9-2002 ). 
2. Clause ( c) omitted by Act 10 of 2009, s. 47  (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 35]
.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 36]
36 
 1[THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See sub-section ( 4) of section 1]  
DOCUMENTS OR TRANSACTIONS  TO WHICH THE ACT SHALL NOT APPLY  
Sl. No.  Description of documents or transactions  
2[1. A negotiable instrument (other than a cheque, a Demand Promissory Note or a Bill of 
Exchange issued in favour  of or endorsed by an entity regulated by the Reserve Bank of India, 
National Housing Bank, Securities and Exchange Board of India, Insurance Regulatory and 
Development Authority of India and Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority) as 
defined in  Section 13 of the Negotiable Instrument Act, 1881 (26 of 1881).]  
2. A power -of-attorney as defined in section 1A of the Powers -of-Attorney Act, 1882 (7 of 1882)  
3[but excluding those power -of-attorney that empower an entity regulated by the Reserve Bank 
of India, National Housing Bank, Securities and Exchange Board of India, Insurance 
Regulatory and Development Authority of India and Pension Fund Regulatory and 
Development Authority to act for, on behalf of, and in the name of the person executing them.] . 
3. A trust as defined in section 3 of the Indian Trust Act, 1882 (2 of 1882).  
4. A will as defined in clause ( h) of section 2 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925), 
including any other testamentary disposition by whatever name called.  
5. 4[***]  
______________  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 49, for the First Schedule and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Subs . by notification No  S.O. 4720(E), for serial number 1 and the entries relating thereto,  Dated 26 -9-2022.  
3. Ins. by S.O. 4720(E), Dated 26 -9-2022.  
4. Serial number 5 and the entries relating thereto Omitted  by S.O. 4720(E), Dated  26-9-2022.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 37]
37 
  
1[THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
[See sub-section ( 1) of section 3A]  
ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE OR ELECTRONIC AUTHENTICATION TECHNIQUE AND PROCEDURE  
Sl. No.  Description  Procedure  
(1) (2) (3) 
2[1. e-authentication technique using  Aadhaar  3[or 
other] e -KYC services  Authentication of an electronic record 
by e -authentication Technique which 
shall be done by — 
(a) the applicable use of e -
authentication, hash, and asymmetric 
crypto system techniques, leading to 
issuance of Digital Signa ture Certificate 
by Certifying Authority  
(b) a trusted third party service by 
subscriber's key pair -generation, storing 
of key pairs  4[* * *] and creation of 
digital signature provided that the 
trusted third party shall be offered by 
the certifying authority. The trusted 
third party shall send application form 
and certificate signing request to the 
Certifying Authority for issuing a 
Digital Signature Certificate to the 
subscriber.  
(c) Issuance of Digital Signature 
Certificate by Certifying Authority shall 
be based on e -authentication, particulars 
specified in Form C of Schedule IV of 
the Information Technology (Certifying 
Authorities) Rules, 2000, digitally 
signed verified information from 
Aadhaar  5[or other] e -KYC services and 
electronic consent of D igital Signature 
Certificate applicant.  
(d) The manner and requirements for e -
authentication shall be as issued by the 
Controller from time to time.  
(e) The security procedure for creating 
the subscriber ’s key pair  6[and other e -
KYC services] shall be in a ccordance 
with the e -authentication guidelines 
issued by the Controller.  
(f) The standards referred to in Rule 6 of 
the Information Technology (Certifying 
Authorities) Rules, 2000 shall be 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 49, (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Ins. by G.S.R. 61(E), dated 27 -1-2015 (w.e.f. 28 -1-2015).  
3. Ins. by S.O. 1119(E), d ated 1-3-2019.  
4. The words “
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 37]
, dated 27 -1-2015 (w.e.f. 28 -1-2015).  
3. Ins. by S.O. 1119(E), d ated 1-3-2019.  
4. The words “on hardware security module”  omitted  by G.S.R. 539(E), dt. 30 -6-2015 (w.e.f. 6 -7-2015).  
5. Ins.  by S.O. 1119(E), d ated 1-3-2019.  
6. Ins. by S.O. 1119(E), d ated 1-3-2019.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 38]
38 
 complied with, in so far as they relate to 
the certification functi on of public key 
of Digital Signature Certificate 
applicant.  
1[(g) The manner in which  the 
information is authenticated by means 
of digital signature shall comply with 
the manner and standards specified in 
Rules 3 to 12 of the Digital Signature 
(End entity) Rules, 2015 in so far as 
they relate to the creation, storage, and 
verification of D igital Signature]  
2[2. e-authentication technique and procedure for 
creating and accessing subscriber ’s signature 
key facilitated by trusted third party  Authentication of an electronic record 
by e -authentication technique which 
shall be done by — 
(a) the applicable use of                            
e-authentication,  hash and asymmetric 
crypto system techniques leading to 
issuance of Digital Signature Certificate 
by Certifying Authority, provided that 
Certifying Authority shall ensure the 
subscriber i dentity verification, secure 
storage of the keys by trusted third party 
and subscriber ’s sole authentication 
control to the signature key.  
(b) Identity verification of Digital 
Signature Certificate applicant shall be 
in accordance with the Identity 
Verification Guidelines issued by 
Controller from time -to-time.  
(c) The requirement to operate as trusted 
third party shall be specified under e -
authentication guidelines issued by the 
Controller.  
(d) a trusted third party shall  
(i) facilitate Identity verification of 
Digital Signature Certificate applicant;  
(ii) establish secure storage for 
subscriber to have sole control for 
creation and subsequent usage of 
subscriber ’s signature key by sole 
authentication of subscriber;  
(iii) facilitate key pair -gener ation, 
secure storage of subscriber's signature 
key and facilitate signature creation 
functions;  
(vi) facilitate the submission of DSC 
application form and certificate signing 
request to the Certifying Authority for 
issuing a Digital Signature Certi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 38]
 and certificate signing 
request to the Certifying Authority for 
issuing a Digital Signature Certificate to 
the DSC applicant, and  
                                                           
1. Subs . by G.S.R. 446(E), for “(g)”  dated 27-4-2016 (w.e.f. 27 -4-2016).”  
2. Ins. by S.O. 3472(E), dated 29 -9-2020.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 39]
39 
 (v) facilitate revocation of Digital 
Signature Certificate and destruction of 
subscriber ’s signature key.  
(e) The manner and requirements for 
authentication and storage of keys shall 
be as issued by the Controller from time 
to tim e under e -authentication 
guidelines  
(g) The security procedure for creating 
the subscriber's key pair shall be in 
accordance with the e -authentication 
guidelines issued by the Controller.  
(h) The standards referred to in Rule 6 
of the Information Technolog y 
(Certifying Authorities) Rules, 2000 
shall be complied with, in so far as they 
relate to the certification function of 
public key of Digital Signature 
Certificate applicant.  
(i) The manner in which  information is 
authenticated by means of digital 
signature shall comply with the manner 
and standards specified in Rule 3 to 12 
of Digital Signature (End entity) Rules, 
2015 in so far as they relate to the 
creation, storage and verification of 
Digital Sig nature.]  
_______________  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 40]
40 
 [THE THIRD  SCHEDULE. ] Omitted by the Information Technology (Amendment ) Act, 2008 (10 of 
2009) , s. 50 (w.e.f.  27-10-2009).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000.pdf - page 41]
41 
 [THE FOURTH  SCHEDULE .] Omitted by the Information Technology (Amendment) Act,  2008 (10 of 
2009), s. 50 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968                                                                                                                                        
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                            
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Application of other laws not barred.  
3. Definitions.  
4. The Central Insecticides Board.   
5. Registration Committee.  
6. Other committees.  
7. Procedure for Board.  
8. Secretary and other officers.  
9. Registration of insecticides.  
10. Appeal against non-registration or cancellation.  
11. Power of revision of Central Government . 
12. Licensing officers.  
13. Grant of licence.  
14. Revocation, suspension and amendment of licences.  
15. Appeal against the decision of a l icensing officer . 
16. Central Insecticides Laboratory.  
17. Prohibition of import and m anufacture of certain insecticides.  
18. Prohibition of sale, etc., o f certain insecticides.  
19. Insecticide Analyst s. 
20. Insecticide Inspectors.  
21. Powers of Insecticide Inspectors.  
22. Procedure t o be followed b y Insecticide Inspectors.  
23. Persons bound to d isclose place where insecticides are m anufactured or kept. 
24. Report of Insecticide Analyst.  
25. Confiscation.  
26. Notification of poisoning.  
27. Prohibition of sale, etc., of insecticides for reasons o f public safety.  
28. Notification of cancellation of registrat ion, etc. 
29. Offences and p unishment.  
30. Defences which may or may not be allowed in prosecutions under this Act.  
31. Cognizance and trial of o ffence s. 
31A. Special Courts.  
32. [Repealed. ] 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 2]
2 
 SECTIONS  
33. Offences by companies.  
34. Power of Central Government t o give directions.  
35. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
36. Power of Central Governm ent to m ake rules. 
37. Power of the State Government s to make rules. 
38. Exemption.  
THE SCHEDULE . 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 3]
3 
 THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968  
ACT NO. 46 OF 1968  
[2nd September, 1968 .] 
An Act to regulate the import, manufacture, sale, transport, distribution and use of insecticides 
with a view to prevent risk to human beings or animals, and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Nineteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows :— 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Insecticides Act, 1968.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different States and for different 
provisions of this Act.  
2. Application of other laws not barred. —The provisions of this A ct shall be in addition to, and not 
in derogation of, any other law for the time being in force.  
3. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “animals ” means animals useful to human beings and includes fish and fowl, and such kinds 
of wild  life as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify, being 
kinds which , in its opinion s, it is desirable to protect or preserve;  
(b) “Board ” means the Central Insecticides Board constituted under section 4;  
(c) “Central Insecticides Laboratory ” means the Central Insec ticides Laboratory esta blished  or as 
the case may be, the Institution specified, under section 16;  
(d) “import ” means bringing into any place within the territories to which this Act extends from a 
place outside those territories;  
(e) “insecticide ” means — 
(i) any substance specified in the Schedule; or  
(ii) such other substances (including fungicides and weedicides) as the Central Government 
may, after consultation with the Board, by notification in the Official Gazette, include in the 
Schedule from time to time; or  
(iii) any preparation containing any one or more of such substances;  
(f) 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 3]
 from time to time; or  
(iii) any preparation containing any one or more of such substances;  
(f) “Insecticide Analyst ” means an Insecticide Analyst appointed under section 19;  
(g) “Insecticide Inspector ” means an Insecticide Inspector appointed under section 20;  
(h) “label ” means any written, printed or graphic matter on the immediate package and on every 
other co vering in which the package is placed or packed and includes any written, printed or graphic 
matter accompanying the insecticide;  
(i) “licensing officer ” means a licensing officer appointed under section 12;  
(j) “manufacture ”, in relation to any insecticid e, includes — 
(i) any process or part of a process for making, altering, finishing, packing, labelling, 
breaking up or otherwise treating or adopting any insecticide with a view to its sale, distribution 
or use but does not include the packing or breaking u p of any insecticide in the ordinary course of 
retail business; and  
                                                           
1. 1st March, 1971, vide notification No. G.S.R. 300, dated 27th February, 1971, in respect of ss. 4, 7, 8 and 36, see Gazette of 
India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( i). 
1st August, 1971, vide notification No. G.S.R. 1108, dated the 28th July, 1971, in respect of remaining provisions see Gazette of 
India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( i). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 4]
4 
 (ii) any process by which a preparation containing an insecticide is formulated;  
(k) “misbranded ”—an insecticide shall be deemed to be misbranded — 
(i) if its label contains any statement, design or graphic representation relating thereto which 
is false or misleading in any material particular , or if its package is otherwise deceptive in respect 
of its contents; or  
(ii) if it is an imitation of, or is sold under the name of, another insectic ide; or  
(iii) if its label does not contain a warning or caution which may be necessary and sufficient, 
if complied with, to prevent risk to human beings or animals; or  
(iv) if any word, statement or other information required by or under this Act to appea r on the 
label is not displayed thereon in such conspicuous manner as the other words , statements, designs 
or graphic matter have been displayed on the label and in such terms as to render it likely to be 
read and understood by any ordinary individual unde r customary conditions of purchase and    
use; or  
(v) if it is not packed or labelled as required by or under this Act; or  
(vi) if it is not registered in the manner required by or under this Act; or  
(vii) if the label contains any reference to registratio n other than the registration number; or  
(viii) if the insecticide has a toxicity which is higher than the level prescribed or is mixed or 
packed with any substance so as to alter its nature or quality or contains any substance which is 
not included in the  registration;  
(l) “package ” means a box, bottle casket, tin, barrel, case, receptacle, sack, bag, wrapper, or other 
thing in which an insecticide is placed or packed;  
(m) “premises ” means any land, shop, stall or place where any insecticide is sold or man ufactured 
or stored or used, and includes any vehicle carrying insecticide;  
(n) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(o) “registered ”, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions , means 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 4]
nder this Act;  
(o) “registered ”, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions , means regis tered under 
this Act;  
(p) “sale”, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means the sale of any 
insecticide, whether for cash or on credit and whether by wholesale or retail, and includes an 
agreement for sale, an offer for sale, the exposing for sale or having in p ossession for sale of any 
insecticide and include s also an attempt to sell any such insecticide;  
(q) “State Government ”, in relation to a Union territory, means the administrator thereof;  
(r) “worker ” means a person employed under a contract of service or apprenticeship.  
4. The Central Insecticides Board .—(1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, 
constitute a Board to be called the , Central Insecticides Board to advise the Central Government and State 
Governments on technical matters arising out of the administration of this Act and to carry out the other 
functions assigned to the Board by or under this Act.  
(2) The matters on which the Board may advise under sub -section ( 1) shall include matters        
relating to — 
(a) the  risk to human beings or animals involved in the use of insecticides and the safety 
measures necessary to prevent such risk;  
(b) the manufacture, sale, storage, transport and distribution of insecticides with a view to ensure 
safety to human beings or anim als. 
(3) The Board sha ll consist o f the following members, namely :— 
(i) the Director  General of Heath Services, ex officio , who shall be the Chairman;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 5]
5 
 (ii) the Drugs Controller, India, ex officio ; 
(iii) the Plant Protection Adviser to the Government of Ind ia, ex officio ; 
(iv) the Director of Storage and Inspection, Ministry of Food, Agriculture, Community 
Development and Co -operation (Department of Food), ex officio ; 
(v) the Chief Adviser of Factories, ex officio ; 
(vi) the Director, National Institute of Communicable Diseases, ex officio ; 
(vii) the Director  General, Indian Council of Agricultural Research, ex officio ; 
(viii) the Director  General, Indian Council of Medical Research, ex officio ; 
(ix) the Director, Zoological Survey of India, ex officio;  
(x) the Director  General, Indian Standards Institution, ex officio ; 
(xi) the Director -General of Shipping or, in his absence, the Deputy Director  General of Shipping, 
Ministry of Transport and Shipping, ex officio ; 
(xii) the Jo int Director, Traffic (General), Ministry of Railways (Railway Board), ex officio ; 
(xiii) the Secretary, Central Committee for Food Standards, ex officio ; 
1[(xiiia) the Animal Husbandry Commissioner, Department of Agriculture, ex officio ; 
(xiiib) the Joint Commissioner (Fisheries), Department of Agriculture, ex officio ; 
(xiiic) the Deputy Inspector General of Forest s (Wild  Life), Department of Agriculture, ex officio ; 
(xiiid) the Industrial Adviser (Chemicals), Directorate General of Technical De velopment,          
ex officio ;] 
(xiv) one person to represent the Ministry of Petroleum and Chemicals, to be nominated by the 
Central Government;  
(xv) one pharmacologist to be nominated by the Central Government;  
(xvi) one medical texicologist to be nomin ated by the Central Government;  
(xvii) one person who shall be in charge of the department dealing with public health in a State, to 
be nominated by the Central Government;  
(xviii) two persons who shall be Directors of Agriculture in States , to be nominated by the Central 
Government;  
(xix) four persons, one of whom shall be an expert in i
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 5]
o be nominated by the Central 
Government;  
(xix) four persons, one of whom shall be an expert in industrial health and occupational hazards, 
to be nominated by the Central Government;  
(xx) one person to represent the Council of Scientific and Industrial R esearch to be nominated by 
the Central Government;  
1[(xxi) one ecologist to be nominated by the Central Government.]  
(4) The persons nominated under clauses ( xiv) to 2[(xxi)] inclusive, of sub -section ( 3) shall , unless 
their seats become vacant earlier by resignation, death or otherwise, hold office for three years from the 
date of their nomination, but sha ll be eligible for re -nomination : 
Provided that the persons nominated under clauses ( xvii) and ( xviii) shall hold office only for so long 
as they hold th e appointments by virtue of which their nominations were made.  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 24 of 1977, s. 2 (w.e.f. 2 -8-1977) . 
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “(xx)” (w.e.f. 2 -8-1977).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 6]
6 
 1[(5) No act or proceeding of the Board, the Registration Committee or any Committee appointed 
under section 6, shall be called in question on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or 
any defect in the constitution of, the Board, the Registration Committee or such Committee, as the case 
may be.]  
5. Registration Committee .—(1) The Central Government shall constitute a Registration Committee 
consisting of a Chairman, and no t more than five persons who shall be members of the Board (including 
the Drugs Controller, India and the Plant Protection Adviser to the Government of India) — 
(i) to register insecticides after scrutinising their formulae and verifying claims made by the 
importer or the manufacturer, as the case may be, as regards their efficacy and safety to human beings 
and animals; and  
(ii) to perform such other functions as are assigned to it by or under this Act.  
(2) Where the Chairman is not a member of the Board, his term of office and other conditions of 
service shall be such as may be determined by the Central Government.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), a member of the Registration Committee shall hold 
office for so long as he is a member of the  Board.  
(4) The Committee may also co -opt such number of experts and for such purpose or period as it may 
deem fit, but any expert so co -opted shall have no right to vote.  
(5) The Registration Committee shall regulate its own procedure and the conduct of business to be 
transacted by it.  
6. Other committees .—The Board may appoint such committees as it deems fit and may appoint to 
them persons who are not members of the Board, to exercise such powers and perform such duties as 
may, subject to such conditions , if any, as the Board may impose, be delegated to them by the Board.  
7. Procedure for Board .—The Board may , subject to the previous approval of the Central 
Government, make bye -laws for the purpose of regulating its own procedure and
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 6]
roval of the Central 
Government, make bye -laws for the purpose of regulating its own procedure and the procedure of any 
committee thereof and the conduct of all business to be transacted by it or such committee.  
8. Secretary a nd other officers .—The Central Government shall — 
(i) appoint  a person to be the Secretary of the Board who shall also function as Secretary to the 
Registration Committee; and  
(ii) provide the Board and the Registration Committee with such technical and other staff as the 
Central Government considers necessary.  
9. Registration of insecticides .—(1) Any person desiring to import or manufacture any insecticide 
may apply to the Registration Committee for the registration of such insecticide and there shall be a 
separate a pplication for each such insecticide : 
Provided tha t any person engaged in the business of import or manufacture of any insecticide 
immediately before the commencement of this section shall make an application to the Registration 
Committee within a period of  2[seventeen months] from the date of such commencement for the 
registration of any insecticide which he has been importing or  manufacturing before that date:  
3[Provided further that where any person referred to in the preceding proviso fails to make an 
application under that proviso within the per iod specified therein, he may make such application at any 
time thereafter on payment of a penalty of one hundred rupees for every month or part thereof after the 
expiry of such period for the registration of each such insecticide.]  
(2) Every application u nder sub -section ( 1) shall be made in such form and contain such particulars as 
may be prescribed.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 24 of 1977, s. 2, for sub -section ( 5) (w.e.f. 2 -8-1977).  
2. Subs. by Act 46 of 1972, s. 2, for “six months” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1971).  
3. Proviso i ns. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -8-1971).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 6]
-8-1971).  
3. Proviso i ns. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -8-1971).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 7]
7 
 (3) On receipt of any such application for the registration of an insecticide, the Committee may, after 
such enquiry as it deems fit and after satisfying its elf that the insecticide to which the application relates 
conforms to the claims made by the importer or by the manufacturer, as the case may be, as regards             
the efficacy of the insecticide and its safety to human beings and animals, register  1[on such conditions as  
may be specified by it] and on payment of such fee as may be prescribed, the insecticide, allot a 
registration number thereto and issue a certificate of registration in token thereof within a period of twelve 
months from the dat e of r eceipt of the application : 
Provided that the Committee may, if it is unable within the said period to arrive at a decision on the 
basis of the materials placed before it, extend the period by a further period not exceeding six months : 
Provided further that  if the Committee is of opinion that the precautions claimed by the applicant as 
being sufficient to ensure safety to human beings or animals are not such as can be easily observed or that 
notwithstanding the observance of such precautions the use of the i nsecticide involves serious risk to 
human beings or animals, it may refuse to register the insecticide.  
2[(3A) In the case of applications received by it prior to the 31st day of March, 1975, notwithstanding 
the expiry of the period specified in sub -sectio n (3) for the disposal of such applications, it shall be lawful 
and shall be deemed always to have been lawful for the Registration Committee to dispose of such 
applications at any time after such expiry but within a period of one year from the commencemen t of the 
Insecticides (Amendment) Act, 1977  (24 of 1977) : 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall be deemed to make any contravention before 
the commencement of the Insecticides (Amendment) Act, 1977  (24 of 1977) , of a condition of a 
certificate o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 7]
ncement of the Insecticides (Amendment) Act, 1977  (24 of 1977) , of a condition of a 
certificate of registration granted before such commencement, an offence punishable under this Act.  
(3B) Where the Registration Committee is of opinion that the insecticide is being introduced for the 
first time in India, it may, pending any enquiry, register it provisionally for a period of two years on such 
conditions as may be specified by it.  
(3C) The Registration Committee may, having regard to the efficacy of the insecticide and its safety 
to human beings and animals, vary the conditions subject to which a certificate of registration has been 
granted and may for that purpose require the certificate -holder by notice in writing to deliver up the 
certificate to it within such time as may be specified in the notice.]  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in t his section, where an insecticide has been registered on 
the application of any person, any other person desiring to import or manufacture the insecticide or 
engaged in the business of, import or manufacture thereof shall on application and on payment of 
prescribed fee be allotted a registration number and granted a certificate of registration in respect thereof 
on the same conditions on which the insecticide was originally registered.  
10. Appeal against non-registration or cancellation .—Any person aggrieved by a decision of the 
Registration Committee under section  9 may, within a period of thirty days from the date on which the 
decision is communicated to him, appeal in the prescribed manner and on payment of the proscribed fee 
to the Cen tral Government whose decision thereon shall be final : 
Provided that the Central Government may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period, if it 
is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time.  
11. Power of revision o f Central Government .—The Central Government may, at any time, call for 
the rec
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 7]
ower of revision o f Central Government .—The Central Government may, at any time, call for 
the record relating to any case in which the Registration committee has given a decision under section 9 
for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the legality  or propriety of any such decision and may pass any 
such order in relation  there to as it thinks fit : 
Provided that no such order shall be passed after the expiry of one yea r from the date of the decision : 
Provided further that the Central Government shall not pass any order prejudicial to any person unless 
that person has had a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the proposed order.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 24 of 1977, s. 3, for “on such conditions” (w.e.f. 2 -8-1977).  
2. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -8-1977).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 8]
8 
 12. Licensing officers .—The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint 
such persons as  it thinks fit to be licensing officers for the purposes of this Act and define the areas in 
respect of which they shall exercise jurisdiction.  
13. Grant o f licence .—(1) Any person desiring to manufacture or to sell, s tock or exhibit for sale or 
distribute  any insecticide  1[or to undertake commercial pest control operations with the use of any 
insecticide] , may make an application to the licensing off icer for the grant of a licence : 
Provided that any person engaged in the business of manufacturing or selling, s tocking or exhibiting 
for sale or distributing any insecticide immediately before the commencement of this section shall make 
an application to the licensing officer for the grant of a licence within a period of  2[seventeen months] 
from the date of such commencement:  
1[Provided further that any person engaged in the commercial pest control operations immediately 
before the commencement of the Insecticides (Amendment) Act, 1977  (24 of 1977) , shall make an 
application to the licensing officer for th e grant of a licence within a period of six months from the 
commencement of the said Act.]  
(2) Every application under sub -section ( 1) shall be made in such form and shall contain such 
particulars as may be prescribed.  
(3) On receipt of any such applicatio n for the grant of a licence , the licensing officer may grant a 
licence in such form, on such conditions and on payment of such fee as may be prescribed.  
(4) A licence granted under this section shall be valid for the period specified therein and may be 
renewed from time to time for such period and on payment o f such fee as may be prescribed : 
Provided that where a licence has been granted to any person who has made an application            
under  3[the first proviso or, as the case may be, the second provis o] to sub -section ( 1), that licence shall be 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 8]
st proviso or, as the case may be, the second provis o] to sub -section ( 1), that licence shall be 
deemed to be cancelled in relation to any insecticide, the application for registration whereof has been 
refused or the registration whereof has been cancelled, under this Act, with effect from the date on which  
such refusal or cancellation is notified in the Official Gazette.  
1[(5) In prescribing fees for the grant or renewal of licences under this section, different fees may be 
prescribed for the sale or distribution of insecticides for purposes of domestic use  and for other purposes.]  
14. Revocation, suspension and amendment of licences .—(1) If the licensing officer is satisfied, 
either on a reference made to him in this behalf or otherwise, that — 
(a) the licence granted under section 13 has been granted because of misrepresentation as to an 
essential fact; or  
(b) the holder of a licence has failed to comply with the conditions subject to which the licence 
was granted or has contravened any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder,  
then, without prejudice to any other penalty to which the holder of the licence may be liable under this 
Act, the licensing officer may, after giving the holder of the licence an opportunity of showing cause, 
revoke or suspend the licence.  
(2) Subject to any rul es that may be made in this behalf, the licensing officer may also vary or amend 
a licence granted under section 13.  
15. Appeal against the decision of a licensing officer .—(1) Any person aggrieved by a decision of a 
licensing officer under section 13 [exc ept under the proviso to sub -section ( 4)] or section 14 may, within a 
period of thirty days from the date on which the decision is communicated to him, appeal to such 
authority in such manner and on payment of such fee as may be prescribed:  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 24 of 1977, s. 4 (w.e.f. 2 -8-1977).  
2. Subs. by Act 46 o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 8]
                         
1. Ins. by Act 24 of 1977, s. 4 (w.e.f. 2 -8-1977).  
2. Subs. by Act 46 of 1972, s. 3, for “three months” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1971).  
3. Subs. by Act 24 of 1977, s. 4, for “the proviso” (w.e.f. 2 -8-1977).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 9]
9 
 Provided that  the appellate authority may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period if it is 
satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time.  
(2) On receipt of an appeal under sub -section ( 1), the appellate authority shall, after giving the 
appellant an opportunity of showing cause, dispose of the appeal ordinarily within a period of six months 
and the decision of the appellate authority shall be final.  
16. Central Insecticides Laboratory .—The Central Governm ent may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, establish a Central Insecticides Laboratory under the control of a Director to be appointed by the 
Central Government to carry out the functions entru sted to it by or under this Act : 
Provided that if the Ce ntral Government so directs by a notification in the Official Gazette, the 
functions of the Central Insecticide s Laboratory shall, to such extent as may be specified in the 
notification, be carried out at any such institution as may be specified therein an d thereupon the functions 
of the Director of the Central Insecticides Laboratory shall to the extent so specified  be exercised by the 
head of that institution.  
17. Prohibition of i mport and m anufacture of certain insecticides .—(1) No person shall, himself 
or by any person on his behalf, import or manufacture — 
(a) any misbranded insecticide;  
(b) any insecticide the sale, distribution or use of which is for the time being prohibited under     
section 27;  
(c) any  insecticide except in accordance with the conditions on which it was registered;  
(d) any insecticide in contravention of any other provision of this Act  or of any rule made 
thereunder : 
Provided that any person who has applied for registration of an insect icide  1[under any of the 
provisos] to sub -section ( 1) of section 9 may continue to import or manufacture any such insecticide and 
such insecticide shall not be deemed to be a misbranded inse
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 9]
r manufacture any such insecticide and 
such insecticide shall not be deemed to be a misbranded insecticide within the meaning of sub -clause ( vi) 
or sub -clause ( vii) or sub -clause ( viii) of clause ( k) of section 3, until he has been informed by the 
Registration Committee of its decision to refuse to register the said insecticide.  
(2) No person shall, himself or by any person on his behalf, manufacture any insecticide e xcept under, 
and in accordance with the conditions of, a licence issued for such purpose under this Act.  
18. Prohibition of sale, e tc., of certain insecticides .—(1) No person shall, himself or by any person 
on his behalf, sell, s tock or exhibit for sale, distribute,  2[transport, use, or cause to be used] by any 
worker — 
(a) any insecticide which is not registered under this Act;  
(b) any insecticide, the sale, distribution or use of which is for the time being prohibited under   
section 27;  
(c) any  insecticide in contravention of any other provision of this Act or of any rule made 
thereunder.  
(2) No person shall, himself or by any person on his behalf, sell, s tock or exhibit for sale or         
distribute  3[or use for commercial pest control operati ons] any insecticide except under, and in accordance 
with the conditions of, a licence issued for such purpose under this Act.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section an insecticide in respect of which any person has 
applied for a certificate of regi stration  4[under any of the provisos] to sub -section ( 1) of section 9, shall be 
deemed to be registered till the date on which the refusal to register such insecticide is notified in the 
Official Gazette.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 46 of 1972, s. 4, for “under the proviso” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1971).  
2. Subs. by Act 24 of 1977, s. 5, for “transport or cause to be used” (w.e.f. 2 -8-1977).  
3. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -8-1977).  
4. Subs. by Act 46 of 1972, s. 5, 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 9]
w.e.f. 2 -8-1977).  
3. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -8-1977).  
4. Subs. by Act 46 of 1972, s. 5, for “under the proviso” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1971).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 10]
10 
 19. Insecticide Analyst s.—The Central Government or  a State Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, appoint persons in such number as it thinks fit and possessing such technical and 
other qualifications as may be prescribed to be Insecticide Analysts for such areas and in respect of such 
insecticides or class of insecticides as may be sp ecified in the notification:  
Provided that no person who has any financial interest in the manufacture, import or sale of any 
insecticide, shall be so appointed.  
20. Insecticide Inspectors .—(1) The Central Government or a State Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint persons in such number as it thinks fit and possessing such 
technical and other qualifications as may be prescribed to be Insecticide Inspectors for such areas as may 
be specified in the notification : 
Provided that any person who does not possess the required qualifications may be so appointed only 
for the purposes of clause ( a) and clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of section 21 : 
Provided further that no person who has any f inancial interest in the manufacture, import or sale of 
any insecticide shall be so appointed.  
(2) Every Insecticide Inspector shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of      
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) , and shall be officially subordinate to such authority as 
the Government appointing him may specify in this behalf.  
21. Powers of Insecticide Inspectors .—(1) An Insecticide Inspector shall have power — 
(a) to enter and search, at all reasonable times and with such assist ance, if any, as he considers 
necessary, any premises in which he has reason to believe that an offence under this Act or the rules 
made thereunder has been or is being or is about to be committed, or for the purpose of satisfying 
himself that the provisio ns of this Act or the rules made thereunder or the conditions of any certificate 
of registration or licence is
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 10]
Act or the rules made thereunder or the conditions of any certificate 
of registration or licence issued thereunder are being complied with;  
(b) to require the production of, and to inspect, examine and make copies of, or take extracts 
from, regi sters, records or other documents kept by a manufacturer, distributor, carrier, dealer or any 
other person in pursuance of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder and seize the 
same, if he has reason to believe that all or any of them, may furnish evidence of the commission of 
an offence punishable under this Act or the rules made thereunder;  
(c) to make such examination and inquiry as he thinks fit in order to ascertain whether the 
provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder are bei ng complied with and for that purpose stop 
any vehicle;  
(d) to stop the distribution, sale or use of an insecticide which he has reason to believe is being 
distributed, sold or used in contravention of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunde r, 
for a specified period not exceeding  1[thirty] days, or unless the alleged contravention is such that the 
defect may be removed by the possessor of the insecticide, seize the s tock of such insecticide;  
(e) to take samples of any insecticide and send such samples for analysis to the Insecticide 
Analyst for test in the prescribed manner; and  
(f) to exercise such other powers as may be necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act or 
the rules made thereunder . 
2[(2) The provisions of the Code of Cr iminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , shall, as far as may be, 
apply to any search or seizure under this Act as they apply to any search or seizure made under the 
authority of a warrant issued under section 94 of the said Code.]  
(3) An Insecticide Inspector may exercise the powers of a police officer under  3[section 42 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) ], for the purpose of ascertaining the true name and 
residence of t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 10]
al Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) ], for the purpose of ascertaining the true name and 
residence of the person from whom a sample is taken or an insecticide is seized . 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 23 of 2000, s. 2, for “twenty” (w.e.f. 5 -8-2000).  
2. Subs. by Act 24 of 1977, s. 6, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 2 -8-1977).  
3. Subs. by s. 6, ibid.,  for “section 57 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898)” (w.e.f. 2 -8-1977).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 11]
11 
 22. Procedure t o be followed b y Insecticide Inspectors .—(1) Where an Insecticide Inspector seizes 
any record, register or document under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 21, he shall, as soon as may 
be, inform a Magistrate and take his orders as to th e custody thereof.  
(2) Where an Insecticide Inspector takes any action under clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of          
section 21 — 
(a) he shall use all dispatch in ascertaining whether or not the insecticide or its sale, distribution 
or use contravenes any  of the provisions of section 18 and if it is ascertained that the insecticide or its 
sale, distribution or use does not so contravene, forthwith revoke the order passed under the said 
clause or, as the case may be, take such action as may be necessary for  the return of the stock seized;  
(b) if he seizes the s tock of the insecticide  he shall, as soon as may be, inform a Magistrate and 
take his orders as to the custody thereof;  
(c) without prejudice to the institution of any prosecution, if the alleged contravention be such 
that the defect may be remedied by the possessor of the insecticide, he shall, on being satisfied that 
the defect has been so remedied, forthwith revoke his order and in case where the Insecticide 
Inspector has seized the s tock of ins ecticide, he shall, as soon as may be, inform a Magistrate and 
obtain his orders as to the release thereof.  
1[(3) Where an Insecticide Inspector takes any sample of an insecticide, he shall issue a receipt 
therefor stating therein that the fair price of su ch sample shall be tendered if the sample, after test or 
analysis is not found to be misbranded and the Insecticide Analyst has reported to that effect and on such 
price having been tendered may require a written acknowledgement therefor.]  
(4) 2*** where the Insecticide Inspector seizes the s tock of any insecticide under clause ( d) of              
sub-section ( 1) of section 21, he shall tender a receipt therefo
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 11]
under clause ( d) of              
sub-section ( 1) of section 21, he shall tender a receipt therefor in the prescribed form.  
(5) Where an Insecticide Inspector takes a sample of an insecticide for  the purpose of test or analysis, 
he shall intimate such purpose in writing in the prescribed form to the person from whom he takes it and, 
in the prese nce of such person unless he wi lfully absents himself, shall divide the sample into three 
portions and e ffectively seal and suitably mark the same and permit such person to add his own seal and 
mark to all or any of the portions so sealed and mark ed: 
Provided that where the insecticide is made up in containers of small volume, instead of dividing a 
sample as  aforesaid, the Insecticide Inspector may, and if the insecticide be such that it is likely to 
deteriorate or be otherwise damaged by exposure shall, take three of the said containers after suitably 
marking the same and, where necessary, sealing them.  
(6) The Insecticide Inspector shall restore one portion of a sample so divided or one container, as the 
case may be, to the person from whom he takes it and shall retain the remainder and dispose of the same 
as follows: — 
(i) one portion or container, he shall forthwith send to the Insecticide Analyst for test or    
analysis; and  
(ii) the second, he shall produce to the court before which proceedings, if any, are instituted in 
respect of the insecticide.  
23. Persons bound to d isclose place w here insecticides are manufactured or k ept.—Every person 
for the time being in charge of any premises where any insecticide is being manufactured or is kept for 
sale or distribution shall, on being required by an Insecticide Inspector so to do, be legally bound to 
disclose to the Insecticide Inspector the place where the insecticide is being manufactured or is kept, as 
the case may be.  
24. Report o f Insecticide Analyst .—(1) The Insecticide Analyst to whom a sample of any 
insecticide has been submitt
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 11]
ecticide Analyst .—(1) The Insecticide Analyst to whom a sample of any 
insecticide has been submitted for test or analysis under  sub-section ( 6) of section 22, shall, within a 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 23 of 2000, s. 3, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 5 -8-2000).  
2. The words, brackets and figure “Where the price tendered under sub -section ( 3) is refused, or” omitted by s. 3,                     
ibid. (w.e.f. 5 -8-2000).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 12]
12 
 period of  1[thirty] days, deliver to the Insecticide Inspector submitting it a signed report in duplicate in the 
prescribed form.  
(2) The Insecticide Inspector on receipt thereof shall deliver one copy of the  report to the person from 
whom the sample was taken and shall retain the other copy for use in any prosecution in respect of the 
sample.  
(3) Any document purporting to be a report signed by an Insecticide Analyst shall be evidence of the 
facts stated therein, and such evidence shall be conclusive unless the person from whom the sample was 
taken has within twenty -eight days of the receipt of a  copy of the report notified in writing the Insecticide 
Inspector or the court before which any proceedings in respect of the sample are pending that he intends 
to adduce evidence in controversion of the report.  
(4) Unless the sample has already been teste d or analysed in the Central Insecticides Laboratory, 
where a person has under sub -section ( 3) notified his intention of adducing evidence in controversion of 
the Insecticide Analyst ‟s report, the court may, of its own motion or in its discretion at the re quest either 
of the complainant or of the accused, cause the sample of the insecticide produced before the magistrate 
under sub -section ( 6) of section 22 to be sent for test or analysis to the said laboratory,  2[which shall, 
within a period of thirty days,  make the test or analysis] and report in writing signed by, or under the 
authority of, the Director of the Central Insecticides Laboratory the result thereof, and such report shall be 
conclusive evidence of the facts stated therein.  
(5) The cost of a test  or analysis made by the Central Insecticides Laboratory under sub -section ( 4) 
shall be paid by the complainant or the accused, as the court shall direct.  
25. Confiscation .—(1) Where any person has been convicted under this Act for contravening any of 
the provisions of this Act or of the rules made thereunder, the s tock o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 12]
ct for contravening any of 
the provisions of this Act or of the rules made thereunder, the s tock of the insecticide in respect of which 
the contravention has been made shall be liable to confiscation.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), where the Court is satisfied on 
the application of an Insecticide Inspector or otherwise and after such inquiry as may be necessary, that 
the insecticide is a misbranded insecticide, such insecticide shall be liable to confiscation.  
26. Notification of poisoning .—The Stat e Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
require any person or class of persons specified therein to report all occurrences of poi soning (through the 
use or hand ling of any insecticide) coming within his or their cognizance to such office r as may be 
specified in the said notification.  
27. Prohibition of sale, etc., of insecticides for reasons o f public safety .—(1) If, on receipt of a 
report under section 26 or otherwise, the Central Government or the State Government is of opinion for 
reasons to be recorded in writing, that the use of any insecticide specified in  3*** clause ( e) of section 3 
or any specific batch thereof is likely to involve such risk to human beings or animals as to render it 
expedient or necessary to take immediate ac tion then that Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, prohibit the sale, distribution or use of the insecticide or batch , in such ar ea, to such extent and 
for such  period (not exceeding sixty days) as may be specified in the notification pending investigation 
into the matter:  
Provided that  where the investigation is not completed within the said period, the Central Government 
or the State Government, as the case may be, may extend it by such further period or periods not 
exceeding thirty d ays in the aggregate as it may specify in a like manner.  
(2) If, as a result of its own investigation or on receipt of the report from th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 12]
in a like manner.  
(2) If, as a result of its own investigation or on receipt of the report from the State Government, and 
after consultation with the Registration Committee, the Central Govern ment , is satisfied that the use of 
the said insecticide or batch is or is not likely to cause any such risk, it may pass such order (including an 
order refusing to register the insecticide or cancelling the certificate of registration, if any, granted in 
respect thereof) as it de ems fit, depending on the circumstances of the case.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 23 of 2000, s. 4, for “sixty” (w.e.f. 5 -8-2000).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid.,  for “which shall make the test or analysis” (w.e.f. 5 -8-2000).  
3. The w ords, brackets and figure “ sub-clause ( iii) of” omitted by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 5 -8-2000).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 13]
13 
 28. Notification of cancellation of registration, etc.—A refusal to register any insecticide or a 
cancellation of the certificate of registration of any insecticide shall be notified in the Official Gaze tte and 
in such other manner as may be prescribed.  
29. Offences and punishment .—(1) Whoever, — 
(a) imports, manufactures, sells, stocks or exhibits for sale or distributes any insecticide deemed 
to be misbranded under sub -clause ( i) or sub -clause (iii) or sub-clause ( viii) of clause ( k) of        
section 3; or  
(b) imports or manufactures any insecticide without a certificate of registration; or  
(c) manufactures, sells, stocks or exhibits for sale or distributes an insecticide without a      
licence; or  
(d) sells or distributes an insecticide, in contravention of section 27; or  
(e) causes an insecticides, the use of which has been prohibited under section 27, to be used by 
any worker; or  
(f) obstructs an Insecticide Inspector in the exercise of his powers or discharge of his duties under 
this Act or the rules made thereunder,  
1[shall be punishable — 
(i) for the first offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine 
which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees but which may e xtend to fifty thousand rupees, or 
with both;  
(ii) for the second and a subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three years, or with fine which shall not be less than fifteen thousand rupees but which may extend to 
seventy -five thousand rupees, or with both ]. 
(2) Whoever uses an insecticide in contravention of any provision of this Act or any rule made 
thereunder shall be punishable with fine  2[which shall not be less than five hundred rupees but which may 
extend to five thousand rupees, or imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with 
both] . 
(3) Whoever contravenes any of the other provisions of this Act or any rule made thereunder or any 
condition of a certificat
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 13]
ny of the other provisions of this Act or any rule made thereunder or any 
condition of a certificate of registration or licence granted thereunder, shall be punishable — 
(i) for the first offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to  3[one year, or with 
fine which shall not be less than five thousand rupees but which may extend to twenty -five thousand 
rupees, or with both] ; 
(ii) for the second and a subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to  
4[two years, or with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees but which may extend to 
fifty thousand rupees, or with both].  
(4) If any person convicted of an offence under this Act commits a like offence afterwards it shall be 
lawful for the court before which the second or subsequent conviction takes place to cause the offender ‟s 
name and place of residence, the offence and the penalty imposed to be publ ished in such newspapers or 
in such other manner as the court may direct.  
30. Defences which may or may not be allowed in prosecutions u nder this Act .—(1) Save as 
hereinafter provided in this section, it shall be no defence in a prosecution under this Act to prove merely 
that the accused was ignorant of the nature or quality of the insecticide in respect of which the offence 
was committed or of the risk involved in the manufacture, sale or use of such insecticide or of the 
circumstances of its manufacture o r import.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 23 of 2000, s. 6, for certain words (w.e.f. 5 -8-2000).  
2. Subs. by s. 6, ibid.,  for “which may extend to five hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 5 -8-2000).  
3. Subs. by s. 6, ibid.,  for “si x months, or with fine, or with both” (w.e.f. 5 -8-2000).  
4. Subs. by s. 6, ibid.,  for “one year, or with fine, or with both” (w.e.f. 5 -8-2000).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 14]
14 
 (2) For the purposes of section 17, an insecticide shall not be deemed to be misbranded only by 
reason of the fact that — 
(a) there has been added thereto some innocuous substance or ingredient because the same is 
required for the manufacture or the preparation of the insecticide as an article of commerce in a state 
fit for carriage or consumption, and not to increase the bulk, weight or measure of the insecticide or to 
conceal its inferior quality or other defect; or  
(b) in the process of manufac ture, preparation or conveyance some extraneous substance has 
unavoidably become intermixed with it.  
(3) A person not being an importer or a manufacturer of an insecticide or his agent for the distribution 
thereof, shall not be liable for a contravention o f any provision of this Act, if he proves — 
(a) that he acquired the insecticide from an importer or a duly licensed manufacturer, distributor 
or dealer thereof;  
(b) that he did not know and could not, with reasonable diligence, have ascertained that the 
insecticide in any way contravened any provision of this Act; and  
(c) that the insecticide, while in his possession, was properly stored and remained in the same 
state as when he acquired it.  
31. Cognizance and t rial of offence .—(1) No prosecution for an off ence under this Act shall be 
instituted except by, or with the written consent of, the State Government or a person authorised in this 
behalf by the State Government.  
(2) No court inferior to that of a  1[metropolitan magistrate or a judicial magistrate of the first class] 
shall try any offence under this Act.  
2[31A. Special Courts .—(1) If the State Government is satisfied that it is necessary for the purpose 
of providing for speedy trial of offences under this Act in any district or metropolitan area, it may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette and after consultation with the High Court, notify one or more Courts 
of Judicial Magistrates of the first class, or, as the case m
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 14]
High Court, notify one or more Courts 
of Judicial Magistrates of the first class, or, as the case may be, Metropolitan Magistrates, in such district 
or metropolitan area to be Spe cial Courts for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Unless otherwise directed by the High Court, a court notified under sub -section ( 1) shall exercise 
jurisdiction only in respect of cases under this Act.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), the ju risdiction and powers of the presiding officer of 
court notified under sub -section ( 1) in any district or metropolitan area shall extend throughout the district 
or the metropolitan area, as the case may be.  
(4) Subject to the foregoing provisions of this s ection, a court notified under sub -section ( 1) in any 
district or metropolitan area shall be deemed to be a court established under sub -section ( 1) of section 11, 
or, as the case may be, sub -section ( 1) of section 16 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 197 3 (2 of 1974) 
and the provisions of that Code shall apply accordingly in relation to such courts.  
Explanation. —In this section, “High Court ” has the same meaning as in clause ( e) of section 2 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) .] 
32. [Magistrate’s power to impose enhanced penalties .] Omitted by the Insecticides (Repealing and 
Amending) Act 1977  (24 of 1977) , s. 8 (w.e.f. 2-8-1977 ). 
33. Offences by c ompanies .—(1) Whenever an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, or was responsible 
to the company for the conduct of the business of , the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded a gainst and punished accordingly : 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 24 of 1977, s. 7, for “presidency magistrate or a magistrate of the first class” (w.e.f. 2-8-1977).  
2. Ins. by Act 23 of 2000, s.
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 14]
cy magistrate or a magistrate of the first class” (w.e.f. 2-8-1977).  
2. Ins. by Act 23 of 2000, s. 7 (w.e.f. 5 -8-2000).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 15]
15 
 Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment under this Act if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he 
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has be en committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of , any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of that  offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purpose of this section :— 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of    
individuals; and  
(b) “director ”, in relation  to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
34. Power of Central Government to give directions .—The Central Government may give such 
directions to any State Government as may appear to the Central Government to be necessary for carrying 
into execution in the State any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule or order made thereunder.  
35. Protection o f action taken in good faith.—No prosecution, suit or other proceeding shall lie 
against the Government or any officer of the Government or the Board, the Regi stration Committee or 
any Committee of the Board, for anything in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
36. Power of Central Government t o make r ules.—(1) The Central Government may, after 
consultation with the Board and subject to the con dition of previous publication, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, make rules for the purpose of giving effec t to the provisions of this Act : 
Provided that consultation with the Board may be dispensed with if the Central Government
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 15]
his Act : 
Provided that consultation with the Board may be dispensed with if the Central Government is of 
opinion that  circumstances have arisen which render it necessary to make rules without such consultation 
but in such a case the Board shall be consulted within six months of the making of the rules and the 
Central Government shall take into consideration any suggestio ns which the Board may make in relation 
to the amendment of the said rules.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
prescribe — 
(a) the method of packing and labelling;  
(b) the manner of registration of an insecticide;  
(c) the functions of the Board and of the Registration Committee and the travelling and other 
allowances payable to members of the Board, the Registration Committee and any Committee of the 
Board;  
(d) the places a t which insecticides may be imported and prohibit their import at any other place;  
(e) the form of application for registration of an insecticide and the particulars relating thereto;  
(f) 1* * * the fee payable in respect of registration;  
(g) the manner of  appeal to the Central Government under section 10 and the fee payable 
therefore;  
(h) the form of application for the grant of licence and the particulars relating thereto;  
(i) the form of licence, the conditions attached thereto and the fee payable theref ore; 
(j) the period for which a licence may be renewed and the fee for such renewal;  
(k) the circumstances in which a licence may be varied or amended under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 14;  
                                                           
1. The words “the conditions of registration and” omitted by Act 24 of 1977, s. 9 (w.e.f. 2 -8-1977).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 16]
16 
 (l) the functions of the Central Insecticides Laboratory;  
(m) the qualifications, powers and duties of an Insecticide Analyst and an Insecticide Inspector;  
(n) the manner of testing or analysing the samples of any insectici de and the fee payable therefor ; 
(o) the form in which intimation shall be given by an Insecticide Inspector under sub -section ( 5) 
of section 22 to a person from whom a sample of an insecticide is taken for test or analysis;  
(p) the form in which an Insecticide Analyst shall submit a report of his test or analysis to the 
Insecticide Inspector under sub -section ( 1) of section 24;  
(q) the protective clothing and equipment to be used by workers during the manufacture, 
formulation, transport, distribution and application of insecticides and other fa cilities to be provided 
to keep themselves and things supplied to them free from any contamination;  
(r) the use by the workers of any such protective clothing, equipment and other facilities;  
(s) the precautions to be taken against poisoning through the us e or handling of insecticides;  
(t) the measures for detecting and investigating cases in which poisoning has occurred;  
(u) the facilities to be provided for ensuring first -aid treatment;  
(v) the instruction and training to be provided regarding the use of things supplied to the workers 
for ensuring their safety;  
(w) the facilities for medical examination of workers engaged in the manufacture or handling of 
insecticides;  
1*                                   *                                 *                                   *                               * 
(y) the equipment for, and method of, application of, an insecticide and the disposal of surplus 
material, washings and containers, following application;  
(z) the maintenance and inspection of records an d returns;  
(za) the restrictions on storage of insecticides during transport or , otherwise along with articles of 
food;  
(zb) the maximum proportion 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 16]
ticides during transport or , otherwise along with articles of 
food;  
(zb) the maximum proportion of any insecticide which may be added to, or contained in, any 
preparation for domestic use and the restrictions thereon;  
(zc) the manner in which refusal to register an insecticide or cancellation of certificate of 
registration thereof may be notified;  
(zd) the officer or authority to whom the Central Government may delegate any of the powers and 
functi ons conferred on it by this Act;  
(ze) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in se ssion for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session  2[or in two or more successive sessions, and if , before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or successive sessions aforesaid] , both Houses agree in making  
any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be with out prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
37. Power of the State Government s to make r ules.—(1) The State Government may, after 
consultation with the board and subject to the condition of previous publication, by notification in the 
                                                           
1. Clause ( x) omitted by Act 24 of 1977, s. 9  (w.e.f. 2 -8-1977).  
2. Subs. by s. 9, ibid.,  for certain words (w.e.f. 2 -8-1977).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 17]
17 
 Official Gazette, make rules for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act and not 
inconsistent with the rules, if any, made by the Central Government.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the authority to which, the manner in which, and the fee on payment of which, an appeal may 
be filed under section 15 and the procedure to be followed by the appellate authority in disposing of 
the appeal;  
(b) the delegation of any of the powers and functions conferred by this Act on the Sta te 
Government to any officer or authority specified by that Government.  
1[(3) Every rule made by the State  Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before the State Legislature.]  
38. Exemption .—(1) Nothing in this Act shall apply to — 
(a) the use of any insecticide by any person for his own household purposes or for kitchen g arden 
or in respect of any land under his cultivation;  
(b) any  substance specified or included in the Schedule or any preparation containing any one or 
more such substances, if such substance or preparation is intended for purposes other than preventing, 
destroying, repelling or mitigating any insects , rodents , fungi , weeds and other forms of plant or 
animal life not useful to human beings.  
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, and subject to such 
conditions, if any, as it may specify therein, exempt from all or any of the provisions  of this Act or the 
rules made thereunder , any educational, scientific or research organisation engaged in carrying out 
experiments with insecticides.  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 4 of 2005, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 11 -1-2005).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 18]
18 
  
THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 3( e)] 
LIST OF INSECTICIDES  
Acrylonitrile  
Aldrin ( 1:2:3:4:10 :10—hexachloro -1:4:4a ; 5:8; 8a-hexahydro -1:4:5:8-dimethanonaphthalene)  
Allethrin (allyl homologue of Cinerein I)  
Aluminium Phosphide  
Amiton  
Antu (Alpha -naphthyl thiourea)  
Aramite [2 (p -tert-butylphenoxy) ispropyl 1 -2 chloroethyl sulphit e] 
Barium Carbonate  
Barium Fluoro Silicate  
BHC (Ben zene Hexachloride) ( 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 -hexachlorohexane)  
Bis-dimethylamino Fluoropho sphine Oxide  
Calcium Arsenate  
Calcium Cyanide  
Captan (N -trichloromethylmercapto -4-cyclohexane) , 1, 2-discarboximide  
Carbaryl (1-naphthyl -N-methyl carbamate)  
Carbon Disulphide  
Carbon Tetrachloride  
Chlorbenside (p -chloro benzyl -p-chlorophenyl sulphide)  
Cholorobis ethyl amino triazine  
Chlord ane (1,  2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 8-Octachlore -2, 3, 3a, 4, 7, 7a-hexahydro -4, 7-methanoindane)  
Chlorobenzilate  (Ethyl  4, 4‟-dichl orobenzilate)  
Chlorothion (o , o-dimethyl -o-3-chloro -4-nitrophenyl thiono phosphate)  
Chloro -I.P.C  
Chloropicrin  
Chlorofenson (p -chlorophenyl -p-chlorobenzene sulphonate)  
S-(p-chlorophenylthio) methy -o-o-diethyl  phosphorodithioa te (Trithion)  
CIPC [isoprop yl-N (3-chloropheny l) carbamate]  
CMU (Manuron)  
Copper Arsenate  
Copper Cyanide  
Copper naphthanate  
Copper Sulphate  
Coumachlor [3 -(a-acetony 1-4-chlorobenzy 1-4-hydroxy  coumarin)]  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 19]
19 
 Copper Oxychloride  
Cuprous Oxide  
Dalapon (Sodium 2,  2, dichloro propionate)  
D-D mixture  
DDD (Di chloro Diphenyl Dichloroethane)  
DDT [a mixture of 1, 1, 1-trichloro -2, 2 -bis (p -chloropheny l) ethane and 1, 1, 1 -trichloro -2-                          
(o-chlorop heny l)-2 (p-chloropheny l) ethane]  
DDV P (2, 2-dichlorovinyl dimethyl phosphate)  
Demeton -O (O, O -diethyl -S [(2-ethylthio )-ethyl ] phosphorothioate)  
Demeton -S (O, O -diethyl -S [(2-ethylthio)-ethyl ] phosphorothioate)  
Diazinon (O, O -diethyl -O [(2-isopropyl -6-methyl -4-pyrimidinyl] phosphorothioate)  
Dibrom (1, 2 -dibromo, 1, 2, 2-dichloroethyl dimethyl phosph ate) 
Dichlorophenoxy acetic acid (2 , 4-D) 
Dieldrin (1 : 2 : 3 : 4 : 10 : 10 -hexachloro -6 : 7 -epoxy -l : 4a : 5 : 6 : 7 : 8 :  8a-Octahydro -1 : 4 : 5 :           
8-dimethanonaphthalene)  
Dimethoate (O, O -dimethyl -S-(N-methylcarbam oyl methyl) phosphorodithioate)  
Dipterex (O, O -dimethyl -2, 2, 2 -trichloro hydroxy ethyl phosphonate)  
DNOC (Dinitro -ortho -compound) (3 : 5 -dinitro -o-cresol)  
EDCT mixture (Ethylene Dichlorid e Carbon Tetrachloride mixture)  
Ekatin  
Endri n (1, 2, 3, 4, 10 -10-hexachloro -6, 7-epoxy -1, 4, 4a, 5, 6, 7, 8, 8a -Octahydre -1, 4-endo -endo, 5-8 
dimethanonaphthalene)  
E.P.N. (O -ethyl -O-p-nitriphenyl benzene thiophosphonate)  
Ethyoxy ethy l mercury chloride  
Ethyl di -n-propylthio ‟carbamate (Eptam)  
Ethyl mercury phosphate  
Ethyl mercury chloride  
Ethylene dibromide  
Ethylene Dichloride  
Fenson (Parachlorophenyl benzene sulphonate)  
Fenthion (3 -methyl -4-methyl thiophenyl phosphorothionate)  
Ferbam (Ferric Dimethyl dithio Carbamate)  
Gusathion [O, O -dimethyl S (4 -oxo-1, 2, 3 -benzotriazinyl -3-methyl) phosphorothioate ] 
Heptachlor (1, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 8 -heptachloro -4-7-methano -3a, 4, 7, 7a-tetrahydroindene)  
HETP (Hexaethyl tetraphosphate)  
Hexachlorobenzene  
1[Hirsutella species]  
                                                           
1. Added by 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 19]
e  
1[Hirsutella species]  
                                                           
1. Added by G.S.R. 69(E), dated 5 -2-2001.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 20]
20 
 Hydrogen Cyanide  
Hydrogen Phosphide  
Lead arsenate  
Lime Sulphur (Calcium Polysulphide, water -free sulphur, calcium thiosulphate mixture)  
Lindane (gamma, B.H.C.)  
Malathion (S -(1, 2-Bis (ethoxycarbony 1) ethyl) O, O -dimet hyl-phosphoro -dithioate)  
Maleic h ydrazide (1, 2 -dihydropyropyridazine 3, 6 -dione)  
Maneb Manganese ethy lene bisdithiocarbamate  
MCPA -(4-chloro -2 Methyl phenoxy acetic acid)  
Mercuric Chloride  
Metaldehyde  
Metasystox  
Methoxychlor (1, 1, 1 -trichloro -2, 2-di-p-metho xyphenyl ethane)  
Methoxy ethyl mercury chloride  
Methyl bromide  
Methyl demeton (Dim eton-methyl and Dimeton -Methyl)  
Methyl Mercury Chloride  
Methyl Parathion (O, O -dimethy l-O-p-nitrophenylthiophosphate)  
Metox (Chlorsulphicide)  
Nabam (Disodium ethylene -1, 2-bisdithiocarbamate)  
Nicotine sulphate  
Octa methyl pyrophosphoramide  
Para-dichloro benzene  
Parathion (O, O -diethyl -O-p-nitrophenylthiophosphate)  
Paris Green (Copper Aceto arsenite)  
Pentachloronitrobenzen e (P.C.N.B.)  
Pentachlorophenol  
Phenyl mercury acetate  
Phenyl mercury chloride  
Phenyl mercury urea  
Phosdrine  
Phthalimidomethyl -O-O-dimethyl phosphorodithioate (Imidan)  
Pipero nyl butoxide (butyl carbity l) (6-propyl piperonyl) e ther O  
Pival (2 -Pivalyl -indane 1 -3 dione)  
Potassium Cyanide  
n-Propyl ethyl -n-butyl thiolcarbamate (Tillam)  
Pyrethrins (insectically active principles of Chrysanthemum cin erariaefolium ) 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 21]
21 
 Rotenone  
Ryania  
Sodium fluoroacetate  
Sodium cyanide  
Sodium Fluoro Silicate  
Sulphur (wettable or colloidal sulphur)  
Strychnine  
Sulphoxide [1, 2 -methylene -dioxy -4 (2-octylsulphinyl) propyl ben yene] 
TCA (trichlor acetic acid sodium and ammonium  salts)  
Tedion (tetrachlor diphenyl sulphone)  
TEPP (tetraethyl Pyrophosphate)  
Tetrachloro -p-benzoquinone  
Thanite  
Thiram [bis (dimethyl Thiocarbamyl) disulphide]  
Tolyl mercury acetate  
Trichlorphon  
Triorthocresyl Phosphate  
Thallium sulphate  
Thiometon  
Toxaphene (chl orinated camphene containing 67 —69% chlorine)  
Trichloro phenoxy acetic acid (2, 4, 5 -T) 
Warfarin (3 -a-acetonyl benzyl -4-hydroxy -coumarin)  
Zinc Phosphide  
Zimet  
Zineb (Zin c Ethylene bis -dithiocarbamate)  
Ziram (Zinc dimethyl -dithiocarbamate)  
Zulate  
 
1[Acrolein .   .   .    .   .    .   .   .  2-Propenal or Acrylaldehyde  
Actellic (Pirimiphosmethyl) .   . 2-diethylamino -6-methylp yrimidin -4-yl dimethyl phosphorothionate  
Afugon .   .     .     .     .     .     . Diethyl methyl ethoxy carbonyl pyrazolo -pyrimidine -yl-phosphoroth  
onate  
Alachlor .    .     .     .     .     .     .  2-Chloro -2; 6‟-dienthyl -n-(methoxymethyl) -acetanilide  
Aldicarb .   .     .     .     .     .      .  2-methyl -2-(methylthio) propionaldehyde -o-(methylcarbamo yl) oxime  
Amidithion .    .      .     .      .    .   S-(N-2 methoxyethyl -Carlomoyl -methyl) dimethyl  
phospho rothiolothionate  
                                                           
1. Ins. by G.S.R. 9(E), dated 9 -1-1974 . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 22]
22 
 Amitrole .   .     .     .      .    .     .  3-Amino -1, 2, 4 -triazole  
Ammonium Sulphamate .   .    .   Ammonium Sulphamate  
Asulam .   .     .      .      .      .     .  Methyl -N (4-aminobenzenesulphonyl) carbamate  
Atrazine .    .      .     .     .    .     .  2-Chloro -4-ethylamino -6-isopropylamino -1, 3, 5 -trizine  
Aureofungin .    .     .    .     .     .  Aureofungin  
Azinphos -ethyl .   .     .    .    .   .    S-(3, 4 -dihydro -4-oxobenzo -(d)-(1, 2, 3) -triazin -3-ylmethyl) diethyl 
phosphorothiolothionate  
Barban .    .     .      .     .      .     .  4-chloro -2-ynyl-3-chlophenyl carbamate  
Barium Polysulphide .   .     .    .     Barium Polysulphide  
Bassa .    .     .    .     .    .      .     . O-Secondary -butylpheny lmethyl carbamate  
BCPE (Chlorphenithel) .    .     .  1, 1-bis-(4-Chlorophenyl) -ethan ol 
Benomyl .    .     .    .     .     .     .      Methyl -N-benzimidazol -2-yl-N (butyl carbemoyal carbamate ) 
Bensulide .    .     .    .     .    .     .      S-(O, O-Di-isopropyl p hosphorodithionate) cester with                              
N-(2-mercaptoethyl) benzene Sulphenamide  
Binapacryl .    .     .    .     .    .   .  2-(1-methyl -n-propyl) -4, 6-dinitro pheni ly-2-methylcrotonate  
Bromacil .    .     .    .     .     .     .      5-bromo -6-methyl -3-(1-methylpropyl) uracil  
Brompyrazen .    .     .    .     .    .      5-amino -4-bromo -2-phenylpyridazin -3-one 
Bromoxynil .    .     .    .      .     .      3, 5-dibromo -4-hydroxybenzonitri le 
Brozone .    .     .    .     .     .      .      Methyl bromide & chloropic rin in petroleum solvent  
Buturon .    .     .    .     .     .      .      3-(4-chlorophenyl) -1-methyl -1 (1-methyl pro p-2-ynyl) urea  
Butylate .    .     .    .     .     .      .      S-ethyl -N, N -diisobutylthiocarbamate  
Bux.    .      .      .     .    .     .     .  Mixture of m-(1-methyl butyl) phenyl methyl carbamate and m-(1-ethyl 
propyl) phenyl methyl carbamate  
Cadmium  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 22]
(1-methyl butyl) phenyl methyl carbamate and m-(1-ethyl 
propyl) phenyl methyl carbamate  
Cadmium  based compounds .   . (Cadmium chloride, Cadmium sulphate, Cadmium succinate)  
Captafel .    .     .    .     .     .      .      N-O (1, 1, 2, 2 -tetrachloroethylthio) cyelohex -4-ene-1 2-dicarboxymide  
Carbefuran .    .      .    .      .     .     2, 3-dihydro-2, 2 : dimethyl -7-benzofuranyl methyl carbamate  
Carbophenothion .    .     .    .    .  S-[(p-Chlorophenylthio )-methyl] -o, o-diethyl phosphorodithio ate 
Carboxin (DCMO) .    .     .     .      5, 6-Dihydro -2-methyl -1, 4-oxathi in-3-carboxanilide  
Chinomethionate .    .     .    .    .  6-methyl -2-oxo-1, 3-dithio (4, 5 -b) quinoxaline  
Chloramben .    .     .    .     .    .      3-amine -2, 5-dichoro benzonic acid  
Chlorbufam (BIPC) .    .     .    .      1-methyl -2-propynyl -m-chloroca rbanilate  
Chlorfen yinphos .    .     .    .     .     2-chloro -1 (2, 4 -dichloropheny l)-Vinyl diethylphosphate  
Chloromequate  chloride .    .    .   (2-chloroethyl) trimethyl  ammonium chloride  
Chloroneb .    .     .     .      .     .      1, 4-dichloro -2, 5-dimethexybenzine  
Chlorpropane .    .     .    .     .    .      Chloropropane  
Chloroxur -n.    .     .    .     .    .      N-4-(4-Chlorophenoxy) phenyl -NN-dimethyl -ureat 
Citicide .    .     .    .     .    .     .      Chlorinated turpene  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 23]
23 
 Citowett .    .     .    .     .    .     .      Alkylarylpolyglykelether  
Clonitralid .    .     .     .     .     .      5, 2-dichloro -4‟nitro -salicylic -anilide -ethanolamine  
Copper Hydroxide .    .     .     .      Copper Hydroxide  
Coumafuryl .    .     .    .     .    .      3-(a-Acetonylfurfuryl) -4-hydrocyceumarine  
Coumaphos .    .     .    .     .    .      3-Chloro -4-methyl -7-coumarinyl  diethyl phosphorothionat  
Coumatetralyl .    .     .    .    .   .     4-hydrox y-3-(1, 2, 3, 4 -tetraphydro -1-naphthyl) coumarin  
Coyden .    .     .    .     .    .     .      3, 5-dichloro -2, 6-dimethyl -4-pyridinol  
CPAS .    .     .    .     .    .     .     .  4-Chlorophenyl, 2, 4, 5 -trichlorophyny lazosulphide  
Cyclomorph .    .     .    .     .     .      N-Cyclodedecyl -2, 6-dimethyl -morpholinacetate  
Cycluren (OMU) .    .     .    .     
.     N‟-Cycle -octyl -N-N-dimethyl urea  
Cytrolane .    .     .    .     .    .     .      2-(diethoxy phosphraylimino) -4-methyl -1, 3-dithiolane  
Decarbofuran .    .     .    .     .    .      2, 3-dihydro -2-methylobenzofuren -7-yl-methyl carbamate  
Decazolin .    .     .    .     .    .     .      1-(alpha, alpha -dimethyl -beta-acetoxypropionyl -3-isopropyl -2,              
4-dioxodeo a-hydro quinazoline  
DEET .    .     .    .     .    .     .     .  N, N -Diethyl -m-toluamide  
Dibromochloropropane .    .     .     1, 2-dibromo -3-chloropropane  
Dicamba .    .     .    .     .    .     .      3, 6-dichloro -2-methoxybenzoic acid  
Dichlobenil .    .     .    .     .     .      2, 6-dichlorobanzo nitr ile 
Dichlofen thion.    .     .     .      0-(2, 4-dichlorophenyl) O,  O-diethyl phosphorothioate  
Dichlone .    .     .    .     .    .     .      2, 3-dichloro -1, 4-naphthoquinone  
Dichloropropane .    .     .    .     .     1, 3-dichloropropane  
Dicloran .    .     .    .     .    .     .      2, 6-dichloro -4-nitroaniline  
Dicofol .    .     .    .     .     .     .      2, 2, 2 -trichl
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 23]
    2, 6-dichloro -4-nitroaniline  
Dicofol .    .     .    .     .     .     .      2, 2, 2 -trichloro -1, 1-di-(4-chlorophenyl) ethanol  
Dicrotoph os.    .     .    .     .    .      Dime thyl phosphate ester with (E) -3-Hydro xy-N, N -dimethyl -crs-
crotonamide dimethyl phosphate  
2, 4-D B.    .     .    .     .    .     .      4-(2, 4-Dichlorophenoxy) butyric acid  
Difenphos (Abate) .    .     .     .      O.O.O ‟, O‟-Tetramethyl O, O ‟-thiodi -p-phenylene phosphorothio ate 
Dikar .    .     .    .     .    .     .     .  A blend of Dithane M -45 and Tech . Karathane  
Dimas (Alar) .    .     .    .     .    .      N-dimethylamino suceinic acid  
Dinocap .    .     .    .     .    .     .      Mixture of 4 & 5 parts of 2, 4 -dinitro -6-octophyany1  crotonates to 2 
parts of the isomer  of 2, 6 d initro -4-octylphenyl crotonates  
Dinoseb .    .     .    .     .    .     .      2, 4-dinitro -6-S-butylphenol  
Dinoseb acetate .    .     .    .     .     2, 4-dinitro -6-S-butylphenol acetate  
Dioxathion .    .     .    .      .     .      S-S-1, 4 -dioxane -2, 3-ylide ne (bis ) o, o -diethyl phos                    
phosphorothiolothionate  
Diphacinene .    .     .    .     .    .      2-diphenylacetyl 1, 3-indanediene  
Diphenamid .    .     .    .     .    .      NN-dimethyl -2, 2-diphenylacetamide  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 24]
24 
 Disulfoton .    .     .    .      .     .      diethyl s-[2-(ethylthio) ethyl ] phosphorothiolothionate  
Diuron .    .     .    .     .    .     .      N‟-3- (4-dichlorophenyl) -NN-dimethylurea  
DMPA .    .     .    .     .     .     .      O-(2, 4-Dichlorophenyl) O ‟ methyl N -isopropyl -phosphoromidithicate  
Dodine .    .     .    .     .     .     .      Dodecylguanidine -monoacetate  
Dodomorph .    .     .    .     .    .      4-Cycl odode eyl-2, 6-dimethyl -morpholine  
Drat (Chlorophacinone) .   .   .  2-(a-P-Chlorophenyl -a-pheylacetyl) indane -1, 3-dione  
DSMA .    .     .    .     .    .     .      Disodium metha nearsonate  
Dursban .    .     .    .     .    .     .      O, O-diethyl O -(3, 5, 6 -trichloro -2-pyridyl) phosphoro phorothioate  
Dusting Sulphur .    .     .    .     .      
Ediphenphos .    .     .    .     .    .      O-ethyl -s, s-diphenyl -dithiophosphate  
Endosulfan .    .     .      .     .     .      6, 7, 8, 9, 10,  10-hexachloro -1, 5, 5a, 6, 9, 9a  hexahydro -6, 9-methano -
2, 4, 3 -benzo (e) -dioxathiepin -3-oxide  
Endothall .    .     .    .     .    .    .      7 oxabicylo (2, 2, 1) -heptane -2, 3-dicarboxylate  
E P T C.    .     .    .     .    .     .      S-ethyl -dipropylthiocarbamate  
Erbon .    .     .    .     .    .     .     .  2-(2, 4, 5-trichlorophenoxy)  methyl 2, 2 -dichloropropionate  
Ethion .    .     .     .     .     .     .      Tetraethyl SS ‟ methyl ene bis phospherothiolothionate  
Ethrel .    .     .    .     .    .     .     .  2-chloroethane phosphonic acid  
Fenac .    .     .    .     .    .     .     .  Sodium 2, 3 , 6-trichlorophenylacetate  
Fenazeflor .    .     .    .    .    .   .   Phenyl 5, 6 -dichlore -2-trifluoromethyl  benzimidazole -1-carboxylate  
Fenitrothion .    .     .    .     .    .      dimethyl 3 -methyl -4-nitrophenyl phosp horothionte  
Fensulfothion .    .     .    .     .    .      diethyl 4 -(methyl  sulphinyl) phenyl phosphorothionate  
Fentinacetate .    .     .
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 24]
    .    .      diethyl 4 -(methyl  sulphinyl) phenyl phosphorothionate  
Fentinacetate .    .     .    .     .    .      triphenyltin acetate  
Fentin chloride .    .     .     .     .     triphenyltin chloride  
Fentin -hydroxide .    .     .    .    .  triphenyltin hydroxide  
Folex .    .     .    .     .    .     .     .  SSS-Tributyl phosphorotrithioate  
Formethion .    .     .    .     .    .      S-(N-formyl -N-methylcarbamoyl methyl) OO -dimethy al 
phosphorodithioate  
Fonofos (Dyfonate) .    .     .    .      O-ethyl -s-phenyl  ethyl phosphorodithioate  
Fujithion .    .     .    .     .    .     .      O, O-Dimethyl -s-Parachlorophenyl phosphorothis  
Gibberellins .    .     .    .     .    .      Gibberellic acid  
Herban .    .     .    .    .    .    .   .      3-5-3-a, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 8 -a-hexahydro -4, 7-methanoindanyl) -1, 1-dimethyl 
urea 
Indole  Acetic & Butyric   
Acids .  .    .     .    .     .    .     .     Indole Acetic Acid, Indole Butyric a cid 
loxynil (Pantrol)  .    .     .    .    .  3, 5-di-iodo-4-hydroxy be nzenitrile  
Isobenzan .    .     .    .     .    .     .      1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 7 , 7-Octac hloro-1, 3, 3a, 4, 7, 7a -hexahydro -4, 7, 
methanois olbenzofuran  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 25]
25 
 Isononuron .    .     .    .     .     .      N‟ (hexahydro -4, 7, methanoindan -1-yl) NN -dimethyl urea  
Kitazin .    .     .    .     .    .      .      O-O-Di-isopropyl -s-Benzyle thiophosphate  
Lenacil .    .     .    .     .    .      .      3-cyclohexyl -5, 6-trimethyleneuracil  
Linuron .    .     .    .     .    .     .      N-(3, 4-dichlorophenyl) -N-methoxy -N-methylurea  
Lucel .    .     .    .     .    .     .     .  5, 6, 7, 8 -tetrachloroquin ecxaline  
Machete (Butachlor) .    .     .    . (2-chloro -2‟, 6‟-diethyl -N-(Butoxymethyl) -acetanilide)  
M. C. P. B.   .    .     .    .     .    .      4-(4-Chloro -2-methylphenox y) butyric acid 
Menazon .    .     .    .     .    .     .      S-(4-, 6-diamino -1, 3, 5 -triazin -2-yl methyl) dimethyl -
phosphorothiolothionate  
Methamidophos .    .     .    .     .     O-S-dimethyles ter amide of thiphosphoric acid  
Meta m Sodium .    .     .    .     .     N-methyldithiocarbamic acid  
Methomyl .   .     .    .     .    .    .  S-methyl N -((methylcarbamoyl) oxy) thioacetimidate  
Methylmetiram .    .     .    .     .     Ammonium complex with Zn -(N‟ N-1, 2 -propylene bis-
(dithiocarbamate) a nd N ‟, N‟-Poly-1, 2-propylene -bis (Thiocarbamoyl) -
di-sulphid  
Metiram .    .     .    .     .    .     .      Ammonium c omplex with Zn -(N, „N-1, 2 -Ethylene bis, 
(dithiocarbamate) and N ‟-N‟-Poly-1, 2-propylene -bi (Thiocarbamoyl) -
disulphid  
Metoxuron .    .     .    .     .     .      N‟ (3-chloro -4-methoxyphenyl) -N, N-dimethyl urea  
Mevinphos .    .     .    .     .    .      2-methoxy carbonyl -1-methyl vinyl dimethyl phosphate  
MIPCIN .    .     .    .     .    .     .      2-inpropylphenyl -N-methyl carbamate  
Menap .    .     .    .    .     .   .   .      O-Ethyl S, S-dipropyl phosphordithi oate 
Molinate .    .     .    .     .    .     .      S-Ethyl -N-hexaphydro -1 H-azepinut hiolcarbamte  
Monocrotophos .    .     .    .     .     3-Hydroxy -N-methyl -crotonamide di methyl phosphat
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 25]
amte  
Monocrotophos .    .     .    .     .     3-Hydroxy -N-methyl -crotonamide di methyl phosphate  
Monolinuron .    .     .    .     .    .      N-(4-chlorophenyl) -N-Methoxy -N-methyl urea  
MSMA .    .     .    .     .    .     .      Monosodium metha earsonate  
Neled .    .     .    .     .    .     .     .  1, 2-dibromo -2, 2-dichloroethyl dimethyl phosphate  
Naphythylacetic acid .    .     .     Naphthylacetic acid and its derivations  
Naburon .    .     .    .     .    .     .      1-Butyl -3-(3-4-dichlorophenyl) -1-methyl urea  
Nemafos (Thinonzim) .    .     .     O, O -diethyl C -2 pyrazinyl phosphorothioate  
Neopynamin .    .     .    .     .    .      3, 4, 5,  6-tetrahydro -phthalimidomethyl chrysauthanate  
Nickel Chloride .    .     .    .     .    Nicke1 C hloride  
Nitrofen .    .     .    .     .    .     .      2, 4-dichlorophenyl 4 -nitrophenyl ether  
Omethoat e.    .     .     .     .     .      dimethyl 8 (N -methyl -carbamoylmethyl) phosphorothioate  
Orthane .    .     .    .     .    .     .      O, S-Dimethyl N -acetyl phosphoramidothioate  
Oxapyrazon .    .     .    .     .    .      (5-bromo -1, 6 -dithydro -6-oxo-1-phenyl -4-pyridazinyl Oxamicacid - 
compound with 2  dimethyl aminoethanol  (1 & 1).] 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 26]
26 
 1[Methabenzthiazuron  1-3, Dimenthyl -3 (z-benzothiozolyl) urea].  
2[1. Streptomycin   
2. Tetracyclines   
3. Turbuteryne  (2-terbuty -lamino -4-ethylamino -6-methyl -thio S-hiazine).  
4. Glyphosate  (N-(Phosphonomethyl) glycine) present is isopropylamine salt.  
5. Bacillus thuringiensis ]   
3[1. Amitraz  2-methyl -1, 3-di (2-4-xylylimino) 2 -azapropane.  
2. Bendiocarb  2, 2-dimethylbenzo -I, 3-dioxol 4 -yl, methyl carbamate.  
3. Benzoylprop -ethyl  ethyl N -benzoyl -N-(3-4-dichlorophenyl) DL alaninate.  
4. Cyanazine  2-(4-chloro -6-ethylamino 1, 3, 5 -triazin 2 -ylamino) -2methyl 
propionitrile.  
5. Etrimfos  O-6-ethoxy -2-ethyl -4-pyrimidinyl) O, O -dimethyl phospho -rothioate.  
6. Glyodin  2-heptadecyl 3, 4 -dihydro -1 H-imidazolyl acetate.  
7. Oxadiazon  
 3-(2, 4 -dichloro -5-(1-methylethoxy) phenyl) 5 -(1, 1 -dime -thylethyl) -1, 
3, 4-Oxadiazol -2 (3H) one.  
8. Oxyfluorfen  2-choloro -1 (3-ethoxy -4-nitrophenoxy) 4 -trifluormethyl) benzene.  
9. Propetam phos  (E)-O-2-isopropoxy carbonyl -1-methyl vinyl -o-mythyl ethy -
phosphoramidothioate.  
10. Scilliroside  3 B, 6B -6-acetyloxy -3 (B-D-glucopyrano -syloxy) 8, 14 -dihydroxybufa -
1, 20, 22, trienolide.  
11.Thiocyclam 
(hydrogenoxalate)  N, N -dimethyl -1, 2, 3-trithian -5-amine hydrogenoxalate.  
12. Vinclozolin   
13. Benodanil  2-Iodo-N-phenylbenzamide.  
14. Diclofop -methyl  2-(4-(2,4-dichlorophenoxy)phenoxy)propanoic acid.  
15. Metalaxyl methyl  (2-methoxyacetyl) N -2, 6-xylyl)DL alaninate.  
16. Pendimethain  N-(I-ethyl propyl)3, 4 -dimethyl 2, 6 -dinitro -benzeneamin.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by G.S.R. 823 (E) ,  dated 28 -9-1976.   
2. Ins. by G.S.R. 200( E), dated 29 -3-1978. For certain entries -See G.S.R. 32 (E) dated 12 -2-1980.  
3. Ins. by G.S.R. 501 (E), dated 17 -7-1982.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 27]
27 
 17. Fosethyl Aluminium  Aluminium tris (ethyl -phosphonate).  
18. Thiabendazole  
 
20. TCMTB  4-n-butyl -4H-1, 24 - triazole.  
 
2-(thicyanomethylathio) benzothiazole.  
21. Bromadiolone  3-3-4' bromol, 1-biphenyl 4 -y-3 hydroxy -I-phenyl propyl 4 -hydroxy -2 
H-1-benzopyran -2 one.]  
1[1. Benthiocarb  S(4-chlorobenzyl)N, N -dicthylthiol carbamate.  
 
2. Cypermethrin  ac-cyano -3-phenoxybenzyl -2, 2- dimethyl -3(2, 2 -dichlorovinyl) cyclo -
propane carboxylate.  
3. Decam ethrin  (S) ac -cyano -m-phenoxybenzyl (IR, 3R) -3(2, 2 -dibromoviny) dimethyl 
cyclopropane carboxylate.  
4. Fenvalerate  ac-cyano -m-phenoxybenzyl oc isopropyl -p-chlorophenyl ace tate.  
5. Permethrin  3-phenoxy benzyl (+ -cis, trans 3 -(2, 2 -dischlorovinyl) -2,2- dimethyl -
cyclopropane carboxylate.  
6. Tetrachloroiophthalonitrile  1, 2, 4 -Trichloro -3, 5-dinitrobenzene.]  
2[Bromophos  O-(4-bromo -2, 5-dichlorophenyl)OO -di-methyl phosphoroithioate.  
Bromophes ethyl  O-(4-bromo -2, 5- dichlorophenyl) OO -di-ethyl phosphorothioate.  
Cartap  3-di (carbamoylthio) -2-dimethylaminopropane.  
Dichlorophen  5,5-dichloro 2, 2, dihydroxy diphenyl methane.  
(Antiphen)   
Dinobuton  Isopropyl -2(1-methyl -n-propyl) -4, 6- dinitrophenyl carbonate.  
Dithianon  2, 3-dicano -1, 4-dithia -an tharquin -one. 
Ethyl formate  Ethyl formate.  
Fenfuram  2-methyl furan -3 carboxanilide.  
Glyphosine  N,N-bis (phosphonomethyl)glycine.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by G.S.R. 500(E)/85 -Gaz. of India, 18 -6-1985, Pt.II -S. 3(i), Ext., p. 2(No. 249).  
2. Ins. by G.S.R. 32(E)/80.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 28]
28 
 Guazatine  1.17-diguanindion -9-azahepta decane.  
Isofanphos  O-ethyl -o-(2-isopropoxy -carbonyl)phenyl  isopropyl 
phosphoramidothioate.  
Isoproturon  N, N -dimethyl -N-4-isopropyl phenyl urea.  
 
Magnesium  
 phosphide Magnesium phosphide.  
Matribuzin  4-amino -6-tort, butyl -3-(methyl thio) -1,2,4 -triazin -5-(4H) -One.  
Triadimefon  1-(4-chlorophenoxy) -3, 3 -dimethyl -1-(1H-1, 2, 4-tridzol -1-yl(-2-
butanone.  
Triforine  1, 4-di-(2,2, 2 -trichlord -1-formamidoethyl) -piperazine.  
Vacor  N-3 pyridyl methyl -N-pnitrophenyl urea.]  
1[1. Amirtaz  2-methyl -1, 3-di-(2-4-xylylimino)2 -azapropane.  
2. Bendiocarb  2, 2-dimethylbenzo -1, 3-dioxol 4 -yl methly carbamate.  
3. Benzolyprop  -ethyl ethl N -benzoyl -N-(3, 4-dichlorophenyl) -DL alaminate.  
4. Cyanazine  
 2(4-Chloro -6-ethylamino -1, 3, 5 -triazin -2-ylamino) -2-methyl 
proplonitrile.  
5. Etrimfos  0-(6-ethoxy -2-ethyl -4-pyrimldinyl) O. O -dimethyl phosphorothioate.  
6. Glyodin  2-heptadecyl -3, 4-dihydor -1H-imidazoly acetate.  
 
7. Oxadiazon  
 3-(2, 4 -dichloro -5-(-methylethoxy) phenyl) -5-(I), 1 -methylethyl) -1,3,4 -
oxadazol -2(3H) -one. 
8. Oxyfluorfen  2-Choloro -1-(3-ethoxy -4-nitrophenoxy) 4-trifuluormethyl)  benzene.  
9. Propetamphos  (E) -o-2-isopropoxycarbonyl -1-methyl vinyl -O-methyl ethylpho 
phoramidothioate.  
10. Scilliroside  3B, 6B -6-accetyloxy -3-(B-D-glucopyranosyloxy) 8, 14 -dihy-
droxybufa -1, 20,22, trienolide.  
11. Thiocyclam  (hydrogen oxalate N, N -dimethyl -1, 2, 3 -trithian -5-amine 
hydrogenoxalate.  
12. Vinclozolin  3-(3, 5-dichlorophenyl) -5-ethenyl -5-methyl -2, 4-oxazolldenedione.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by G.S.R. 501(E)/82.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 29]
29 
 13. Benodanil  2-Iodo-N-phenylbenzamide.  
14. Diclofop  -methyl  2-(4-(2,4-dichlorophenoxy) phenoxy) -propanoic acid.  
15. Metalaxyl  methyl -(2-methoxyacetyl)N -2, 6-xylyl) -DL-alaninate.  
16. Pendimethalin  
17. Fosethl  N-(1-ethuyl propyl] -3, 4-dimethyl -2, 6-dinitrobenzeneamin.  
Aluminium tris (ethyl -phosphonate).  
18. Thiab endazole  2(4-Thiazoloyl) -benzimidazole.  
19. Butrizol  4-n-butyl -4H-1, 24 -triazole.  
20. TCMTB  2-(Thicyanomethyl -thio)zothiazole.  
21. Bromadiolone  3-3-4-bromol, 1 -biphenyl -4-Y-3 hydroxy -1-phenyl propyl -4-hydroxy -2, 
H-1-benzopyran -2-one.]  
1[Flucythrinate  
 -RS-(Cyano -3-3-Phenoxy benzyl(s) -2-4-difluomethoxy phenyl) -
methylbutyrate.  
Triazophos  O, O -diethyl O -1-phenyl -1, 2-4 triazol -3 ylphosphorothioate.  
Diflbenzuron  1-(4-chlorophenyl) -3(2), 6 -difluorobenzoyal) urea.  
 
Bitertanol  
 B-(1, 1 -biphenyl)4 -yloxy)L(1, 1-dimethylethyl( -IH-1, 2, 4 -triazole -
ethrool.  
Sethoxydim  
 2, 1 -(ethoxymine) butyl -5 (2 -ethylthiopropyl) -3-hydroxy -2 
cyclothexen -1-one. 
Brodifacoum  3-(3-(4'-bromobiphenyl -4-yl)-1, 2, 3, 4 -tetrahydor -1-naphthyl) -
4hydroxycoumarin.  
Methoprene  Isopropyl (@E,  $E)-II-methoxy -3, 7, 11 -trimethyl -2, 4 -
dodecadienoate.]  
2[Phenamiphons  ethyl 4 -methylthio -m-tolyl.  
 
(Fenamiphos)  isopropylphosphoramidate.  
Ametryne  N-ethyl -N1-(1-methylethyl) -6-(methylthio) -1,3,5 -triazine -2, 4-diamine.  
Prometryne  N, Ni -bis (1-methylethyl) -6-(methylthio) -1, 3, 5 -triazine -2, 4-diamine.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by G.S.R. 500(E)/85 -Gaz. of India, 18 -6-1985, Pt.II -S. 3(i), Ext., p. 2(No. 249).  
2. Ins.  by  G.S.R. 31 (E)/87 -Gaz. of Ind., 15 -1-87, Pt, II -S. 3(i), Ext., p.2 (No. 26).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 30]
30 
 Fluazifop  RS : 2 -[4-(5-trifluoromethyl -2-pyridyloxy) phenoxy] propionic acid.]  
1[BORICACID  Ortho : -boric acid.  
BROMOPROPYLATE  Isopropyl 4, 4 -dibromobenzilate.  
RESMETHRIN  
 
AZAMETHIPHOS  
 5-benzyl -3-furylmethyl (IRS, 3RS, ISR) -2, 2 -dimethyl -3-(2-
methylprop -i-enyl)cyclopropanecarboxylate.  
S-6 Chloro -2, 3-dihydro -2-oxo-oxazolo (4, 5 -b) pyridine -3- ylmethyl O, 
O-dimethyl ph -phorothiate.  
METOLACHLOR  2-chloro -6'-ethyl -N-(2-methoxyl -1-methylethy l) accetotoluidide.  
VALIDAMYCIN A  
 II-(1, 3, 4/2, 6) -2,3 dihydro xy -6 hydroxymethyl -4(IS, $R, %S, ^S) -4, 5, 
6-trihydroxy 3 -hydroxymethycyclohex -2-enylamino cyclothexyl -B-D-
glucopyranoside.  
HALOXYFOP METHYL  Methyl 2-(4-((3-chloro -5-(trifluoromethyl -2-pyridinyl)oxy) phenoxy) 
Propaonate.  
PIMARICIN  (8E, 14E, 16E, 18E, 20E) -(1S, 3R, 5S, 7S, 12R, 24R, 25S, 26R), -22- (3 
amino 3 -3- dideoxy -B-D-mannopyranosyloxy) -1, 3, 26 -trihydroxy -12-
methyl -10-oxo-6, 11, 28 -trioxatricyc lo (22.3.1.05.7) octacosa -8, 14, 16, 
18, 20 -pentaene -25-car-boxylic acid.  
CYHALOTHRIN  (RS) -a-cyano -3-phenoxybenzyl (Z) -(IRS, #RS) -2-choloro -3.3. 3 -
trifluoropropenyl) -2, 2-domethylcyclopropane -carboxylate.  
CHOLECALCIREROL  9, 10 -seocholesta -5, 7, 10 (10)-trein-3 betaol; activate 7 - 
dehydrocholeserol.  
TOLCLOFOS -METHYL  O-(2, 6-dichloro -4-methylphenyl) O, O -dimethyl phosphorothioate.  
PIPEROPHOS  S-2 methylpoperidincoarbonyl -methyl O, O -dipropyl -
phosphorodithioate.  
CHLORPYRIPHOSMETHYL  O, O -dimethyl O -3, 5, 6-trichloro -2-pyridylphospho -rothioate.]  
2[1. CYPERMETHRIN  (SIR -Cis-and (IUPAC) (S) -alpha -cyano 3 - phenoxybenzyl (IR, 3R) -3-
RIS-Cis-isomer) (2, 2 -dichloririnyl) -2 2 dimethyl cyclopropane 
Carboxy - 
(ALPHAMETHERIN)  
 late & (r) alpha -cyano -3-phenoxybenzy l (IS, 3S) -3-(2, 2 - 
dichlorovinyl)2, 2 -dimethyl cyclopropane carboxylate  
2. BENFURACARD  
 (IUPAC) Ethyl N -(2, 3 -dihydro -2, 2 -dimethyl benzofuron -7-yl 
oxyocarbonyl (methyl) aminothio - N
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 30]
IUPAC) Ethyl N -(2, 3 -dihydro -2, 2 -dimethyl benzofuron -7-yl 
oxyocarbonyl (methyl) aminothio - N-isopropyl B -alaninate  
3. CYPHENOTHRIN  (IUPAC) (RS) -O-cyano -3- phenoxybenzyl (IR) -Cis, trans -
chrysanthemate  
                                                           
1. Ins. by G.S. R. 511 (E)/87 -Gaz. of Ind., 22 -5-1987,  Pt. II -S.3(ii), Ext., p.2 (No. 249).  
2. Ins. by G.S.R. 858 (E)/88 -Gaz. of Ind., 12 -8-88, Pt. II -S.39i) Ext. p. 2 (No. 439).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 31]
31 
 4. CYFLUTHRIN  (IUPAC) Cyano -(4-fluro 3 -penoxyphenyl) methyl 3 -(2, 2 -
dichloroethenyl) -2, 2-dimethyl -cyclopropanx carboxylate  
5. DIMETHAZONE  (IUPAC) 2 -(2-CHLOROPHENYL 4 -4 dimethyl -3-isoxazolidi -none)  
6. DIENOCH LOR  (IUPAC) Perchloro -1-bicyclopenta -2, 4-dience  
7. EPHOFENPROX  2-(4-ethroxyphenyl) -2-methylpropyl -3-phenoxybenzyl ether  
8. FLOCOUMAFEN  4-hydroxy -3-(1, 2, 3, 4, -tetrahydro -3-(4-4 trifluromethyl benzyloxy) -
phenyl) -1-napthy) coumarin) mixture of Cis & transisomers  
9. FENARIMOL  (IUPAC) (+) -2,4-dichloro -a-(Pyrimidin -5yl) benzhydryl alcohol  
10. FLUROXYPYR  (IUPAC) 4 -amino -3, 5-dichloro -6-fluro -2-phyridyloxy acetic acid  
11. FLUFENOXURON  1-(4-2-chloro -4-2chloro -4-(trifluoromethly) phenoxy -2fluorophenyl) 3 -
(2-6-difluorobenzoyl) urea  
12. FOLPET  (IUPAC) N -(trichloromethylthio) phthalimide  
13. CLOPYRALID  (IUPAC) 3, 6 -dichloropyridine -2-carboxyclic acid  
14. MYGLOBUTANIL  (IUPAC) 2 -P-Chlorophenyl 2 -(1H-1, 2, 4 -triazol -1-yl-methyl) -0-
dimethyl ) hoxaneritriale  
15. METHEDATHION  S-2, 3 -dithydro -5-methoxy -2-oxo-1, 3, 4 -thiadizol -3-yl-methyl 0 -0 
dimethyl phosphorodithioate  
16. OXADIXYL  (IUPAC) 2 - methoxy -N-(2-oxo-1, 3- oxazolidin -3yl) acet -2, 6-xylidide  
17. PENCONAZOLE  (IUPAC) 1 -(2, 4-dichloro -B-propylphenethyl) -1 H-1, 2, 4, -triazole  
18. PRETILACHLOR  (IUPAC) 2 -chloro -2, 6-diethyl -N(2-propoxyethyl) acetanilide  
19. PRALLETHRIN  RS-2-methyl -3-(2-propynyl) 4 -oxocyclopen -2-enyl (IR) - Cis, trans -
chly-santhemal  
20. PYRIDATE  (IUPAC) 6 - chloro -3-phenyl pyridazin -4yl S-octv thiocarbonate  
21. PYROOUILON   
22. PYRIDAPHENTHION   
23. SULPROFOS   
24. SEBUPHOS   
25. THRIADIMENOL   
26. TRICYCLAZOLE   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 32]
32 
 27. TRIDIPHANE   
1[Ammonium Copper Sulphate  Ammonium Copper Sulphate.  
Benalaxyl  Methyl -N-phenyl acety -N-2, 6-xylyl DL-alaninate.  
 
Bensulfuronmethyl  
 
 Methyl -2-(((4, 6 -dimethoxy -pyrimidin -2 yl) amino) Carbonyl) amino) -
sulphonyl) -methyl)benzoate. Bifenthrin (z) -IR)-cis (3) -IS)-cis 2 -
methylbiphenyl -3-yhmethyl (z) -(IRS, 3(RS) -2-(2-chloro -3, 3, 
trifluoroprop -1-enyl) -2, 2 -dimethyl cycle propanecarboxylate 2 -tert-
butylimino -3-isoprophyl -5-phenyl -1, 3, 5 -thiadiazinon -4-one. 
Chlorfluazuron  N(4-(3-chloro -5triflup -remethyl -2-pyridyloxy) -3. 5- 
Dichloroph  only) -N-(2,6-difluorebenzoyl) area  
Chloromuron  ethyl  Ethyl 2 ((((4 -chloro -6methoxy pyrimidin -2yl) amino) -carbonyl 
amino) sulphonyl) benzoate.  
Chlorsulfuron  
 1-(2-chloropheynl sulphonyl) -3-(4-methoxy -6methyl -1,3, 5 -trinzin -2-
yl)-urea.  
Cinmothylin  exe-1-methy  1-4-(1-methylethyl) -2 ((2 - methyl phenyl) -methoxy) -
oxabicycle -2(2.2.1) heptane.  
Cinosulfuron  (-) 
Cycloxydim  (1)-2(1-(cthoxyminio) butyl -3-hydroxy -5-thain -3-ylocyclohexenone  
Cymoxanil  1-(2-cyano -2-methoxy -iminoacetyl) -3-ethyl urea  
Cyproconazole  2-(4-chlorophenyl) -3-cyclopropyl -1-(1-11-1.2, 4 -triazol -lyl) 
 
Cyromazine  
 2-cylorpropyl amino -4, 6-diamino -5- triazine, or N -cyclo -propyl -1-3, 5-
triazine -2, 4, 6, -triamine.  
Dazomet  3, 5 -dimethyl -1, 3, 5 -thiadiazinane -2-thione or Tetrahydro 3, 5 -
dimethyl -1, 3, 5 -thiazine -2-thione.  
Desmetryn  N2-1 sopropyl -N-4 methyl -6-methylthio -1, 3, 5 -triazine -2, 4-diamine or 
2-isopropylamino -4- 
methylamino -6-Methylthio -1, 
3, 5-triazine.   
Diafenthiurion  3-(2, 6-disopropyl -4 phenoxy phenyl) -1-tert, butyl thiouroa.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by G.S.R. 13 (E)/90.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 33]
33 
 Defenfenican  2, 4' difluro -2 µ, µ, µ -trifuluorom -tolyloxy) -nicatina -nilide  
Difenoconazole  3-chloro -4-(4-methyl -2(1H -1, 2, 4 -triazol -l-ylmethyl) -1, 3-dioxolan -2-
yl) phenyl -4-chlorophenyl ether.  
Dimethachlor  2- chlore -N-(2-methoxyethyl) acet 2' -6'-xylidide . 
Dimethomorph  (E, Z) (3 -chlorophenyl)3 -(3, 4 -dimethoxy phenyl) -1-oxo-2- propenyl) 
morpholine.  
Dipropetryn  6-ethylthio -N2, N1 -di isopropyl -1 : 3, 5 -triazine -2, 4- diamine, or 
ethythio -4, 6-bis (isoprophylamino) -1, 3, 5 -triazine.  
Diquat & its salts  9, 10-dilhydro -8a, 10a -diazonimphenan -threne. Or 9, 10 -dihydro -8a, 
10a-diazoniaphenanthrene ion.  
Ethalfluralin  N-ethylµ, µ, µtrifluro -N-(2-methyl allyl) -2, 6-dinitro -p-toluidine  
Esfenvalcrate  (S)µ-cyano -3-phenoxybenzyl (S) -2-(4-chlorophenyl) -3-methyl butyra te. 
Fenoxaprop  
 -p-ethyl (D) + - ethyl -2-(4-(6-chloro -2-benzoxazol yloxy) phenoxy) 
Propanoate.  
 Fenpiclonil  
Fenmetralin  N-(2-chloro -6-fluorobenzyl) -N-ethylµ, µ, µ -trifluore -2, 6 -dintiro -P-
toludine.  
Fluometuron  1, 1-dimethyl -3µ, µ, µtriafluoro -m-tolyl)urea.  
Flutriafol  (RS) -2, 4-difluoro -µ, IH -1, 2 triazol -l-yl-methyl) benzhydryl alchol.  
Furathicourb  Butyl 2, 3 -dihydro -2, 2-dimethyl benzofuran -7-yl-N, N' - dimethyl -N, 
N'-thiodicarbamate.  
Fusilazol  1-((Bis)4 -fluorophenyl) methyl sily) methysilyl) methyl. H -1, 2, 4, 
trizol  
Glufosinate and its salts  4-hydroxy (methyl) phosphinoyl) -DL-homoalanine or DL -homoalanin -
4-yl (methyl) phosphinic acid.  
 Haloxyfop -ethoxyethyl  
Hexaconazole  1-((Bis)4 -fluorophenyl) methyl sily) methysilyl) methyl. H -1, 2, 4, 
trizol  
Glufosinate and its salts  4-hydroxy (methyl) phosphinoyl) -DL-homoalanine or DL -homoalanin -
4-yl (methyl) phosphinic acid.  
 Haloxyfop -ethoxyethyl  
Hexaconazole  (RS) -2 (2-, 4- dichlorophenyl) -1- (1H-1, (2, 4 - triazol -l-yl) hexan -2-ol. 
Hexafumuron  N-(((3, 5 -dichloro -4-(1, 1, 2, 2 -tetrafluoroethxoy) phenyl) amino -
carbonyl) -2, 6-difl
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 33]
fumuron  N-(((3, 5 -dichloro -4-(1, 1, 2, 2 -tetrafluoroethxoy) phenyl) amino -
carbonyl) -2, 6-difluorobenzamide.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 34]
34 
 Hexazinone  3-cyclothexyl -6-dimethyl amino -1-methyl -1, 3, 5 -triazine -2, 4-(1H, 3H) 
dione.  
Imazapyr & its salts  (Arsenal) 2(4 -Isopropyl -4 methyl -5-Oxo-2-imidazolin 2 -yl) nicotinic 
acid.  
Imazethapyr & its salts  (RS) -5- ethyl -2-(4-isopropyl -4-methyl -5-oxo-2imidazolin -2yl nicotinic 
acid.  
Iprodicone  3-(3, 5 -dichlorophenyl) -N-Isopropyl -2, 4 -dioxomidazolidine -1-
carboxamide.  
Isazofos  0-5-chloro -1-Isoropyl -1, H-1, 2, 4-triazol -3-yl-0, O-diethyl phas phoro 
thioate.  
Metsulfovax  2, 4-dimethyl -N-phenyl -5-thiazolecarboxamide.  
Matsulfuron  2-3-(4-methoxy -6-methyl -1, 3, 5 -triazin -2yl) ureidosulphony benzoic 
acid.  
Neem Products  Neem leaves, Neem oil, Neem seed kernel, Ne em cake.  
Oxamyl  N, N -dimethyl -2-methyl carbamoyl oxyimine -2- methylthio) ace 
tamide.  
Profenofos  O-4-brome -2-chloro -phenyl -O-ethyl S - propyl phosphorothiacate.  
Propiconazole  (=)1-[2-(2, 4 - dichlorophenyl) -4-propyl -1, 3-dioxolan -2nd methyl] -1H-
1, 2, 4-triazole.  
Prothoate  O, O -diethyl S -isopropylcarbamodyl methyl phosphoro dithoate  
Pyraclofos  (RS) -[0-1-(4-chloro phenyl) -Pyrazol -4yl O -ethyl S -propyl Phosphoro 
thioate)]  
Pyrozosulfuran and   
Pyrozosulfuran ethyl  Ethyl 5 -(3-(4 dimethoxy permidin -2-yl-carbamoyl sulpho -Moyl) -1-
methyl -pyrazol -4-carboxylate.  
Quinclorac  3, 7-dichloro -8-chinolin -carbonic acid  
or  
3, 7 -dichloro -8-quinoline 
carboxylic acid.   
Quizalofop and its salts  (RS) -2-(6-chloroquinoxalin -2-yloxy) phenyoxy pro -Pionic acid  
Sulfometuron  2-[3-(4, 6-dimethyl pyrimidin -2-yl) ureidosulphonyl] Benzoic acid  
Tebuthiuron  1-(5-Tert-bury-1, 3, 4 -thiadiazol -2-yl)-1, 3-dimethyl urea.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 35]
35 
 Tuflubenzuron  1-(3, 5-dichlore -2, 4-difluorophenyl) -3-(2, 6-difluoro -Benzonyl) urea  
Terbuthylazine  N2-tert-buryl -6-chloro -N4-ethyl 1, 3, 5 -triazine -2, 4-diamine  
or  
2-tert, butylamino -4-chloro -6-
ethylamino -1, 3, 5 -triazine   
Tralkoxydim  2-(1-(ethoxyimino) propyl -3-hydroxy -5-(2, 4, 6 -trimetic Phenyl 
cyclohex -2-enone.  
Triasulfuron  3-(6-methoxy -4-methl -1, 3, 5 -triazin -2-yl)-1-[2-(2-chloro -Thoxy) -
phenyl sulphonyl -urea.  
Triclopyr  3, 5, 6 -trichloro -2-pyridyloxyacetic acid.  
Thiodicarb  
 3, 7, 9, 13 -tetramethyl -5, 11 -dioxa -2, 8, 14 -trithia -4, 7, 9 -12-terra-
azapentadeca -3, 12 -diene -6, 10 -dione.  
Tribenuron -methyl (proposed)     Methyl -2-((([N -(4-methoxy -6-mety -1, 3, 5 -triazin -2-yl)-N- Methyl -
amino] - carbonyl) amino -sulphonyl) benzoate.  
(--) Methyl 2 -(4-ethoxy -6-methylamino -1amino -1, 3, 5 -2yl)-carbamoyl 
sulphanoyl - benzoate.  
(--) Methyl 3-((((N -(4-methoxy -6-methyl -1, 3 -5-triazin -2-yl) amino) 
carbonyl) amino) sulphonyl) - 2-thiophene forboxylate.]  
1[1. Allethrin  Allethrin and itsStereo isomers.  
2. Bacillus thuringiensis  Bacillus species.  
3. Fluvalinate  Tau Fluvalinate.]  
1[1. Blasticidin 'S'  
 
 1-(4-amino -1, 2 -dihydo -2-oxopyrimidin -1-yl)-4-((S-3- amino -5-(1-
methylguanidiono) Valermido) -1, 2, 3, 4 - tetradeoxy -D-erthro -hex-2-
enopyranuronic acid.  
2. Defethialone  ((Bromo -4'-beneyl -1-1')-yl-4) 3 -tetrahydo -1, 2, 3, 4 -naph thyl -1) 3-
hydroxy -4, 2H -1 benzo -thiopyranone -2. 
3. Imazalil -MAGNATE  Allyl 1 -(2-4-dichlorophenyl) -2-imidazol -1-ylethyl ether.  
4. Naproanilide  (2-(2-naphthyloxy) propionanilide  
5. Phenothiol  
 S-ethyl (4 -chloro -o-tolyloxy) thicacetate.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by G.S.R. 575(E)/93.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 36]
36 
 6. Terbufos  
 S-(((1, 1 -dime thylethyl)thio) methyl) -O, 0-diethyl pho - sphorodithicate.  
or  
S-tert-butyl thiomethyl -0, 0 -
diethyl Phosphorodithioate.   
7. Butocarboxim  3-(methyl thio) -0-((methyl amino) carbonyl) oxime -2 butanone.  
8. Imidacloprid  1-(6-Chloro -3-pyridinyl) -methyl) -N-nitroimidazolidin - 2-ylideneamine.  
9. Piroxofop Propinyl  2-Propynyl(R) -2-(4-(5-chloro -3-fluoro -2-pyridinyloxy) - phenoxy) -
propionate.]  
1[AMIDOSULFURON  (3-4, 6 dim thoxypyrimidia 2-yl)-1-(N-methyl -N-methyl -suplhonyl -
aminos -sulphonyl) urea.  
BROMUCONAZOLE  1(4-bromo 2 -(2, 4 -dichlorophenyl) tetrohydro -2-furanyl) methyl) -1H-1, 
2, 4-triazole  
CLOFENTEZINE  3, 6-bis (2 -chlorophynyl) -1, 2, 4, 5 -tetrazine  
DIFENZOQUAT METHYL   
SULPHATE  1, 2-dimethyl 3, 5 -diphenyl -pyrazolium -methyl sulphate  
FIPRONIL  ‡ -5-amino -1-(2, 6 dichloro -a, a, a -triflup -tolyl) -4-trifluro -methyl 
sulfinyl pyra -orezole Carbonitrile tetra -zine.  
 LACTOFEN 1  
PROPOOMOCARB   
HYDROCHLORIDE  Propyl 3 -(dimethylamine) Propylcarbomate hydro - chloride.  
SILAFLUOFEN  (4-Ethoxyphenyl) (3 -(4-fluoro -3-phenoxy -phenyl) -propyl) -(dimethyl) - 
silance.]  
2[Pinoxaden  2, 2-dimethyl -propanoid acid 8 -(2, 6 -diethyl 4 -methyl phenyl) -9-oxo-1, 
2, 4, 5 -tetrahydro -9H-Pyrazole [1, 2 -d] [1, 4, 5 ] oxadiazepine -7-yl este  
Dinotefuran  (RS) -1-methyl -2-nitro -3-(tetrahydro -3-furylmethyl) guanidine  
Triptericium of wilferdii Hook  Glycosides having Triptolide, Tripdiolide and Tripterolide  
Glycosides having Triptolide, 
Tripdiolide and Tripterolide  
Lepimectin (E -237) 
 
 Mixture of (10E, 14E, 16E, 22Z) -(IR, 4S, 5'S, 6R, 6'R, 8R, 12R, 13S, 
20R, 21 R, 24S), -21, 24 -dihydroxy -5', 6' , 11, 13, 22 -pentamethyl -12-
[(2Z) -2methoxyimino -2-phenylacetoxy] -5', 6', 11, 13, 22 -pentamethyl -
3, 7, 19 -trioxatetracyclo [15.6.1.14'8.020,24] pe ntacosa -10, 14, 16, 22 -
tetraene -6-spiro -2-tetrahydro -pyran -2-one (E -241) and (10E, 14E, 16E, 
22Z) -(IR, 4S, 5'S, 6R, 6'R
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 36]
raene -6-spiro -2-tetrahydro -pyran -2-one (E -241) and (10E, 14E, 16E, 
22Z) -(IR, 4S, 5'S, 6R, 6'R, 8R, 12R, 13S, 20R, 21 R, 24S), -6'-ethyl -21, 
                                                           
1. Ins . by G.S.R. 730(E)/95.  
2. Ins. by G.S.R. 51(E), dated 06 -02-2006.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 37]
37 
 24-dihydroxy -12-[(2Z) -2 ' methoxyimino -2-phenylacetoxy] -5', 11, 13, 
22-tetramethyl -3, 7, 1 9-trioxatetracyclo [15.6.1. 14,8.020,24] 
pentacosa -10, 14, 16, 22 -tetraene -6-spiro -2'-tetrahydro -pyran -2-one (E -
909) in the ratio of £20 to ³80  
Ethiprole  (+)-5-amino -1-(2, 6 -dichloro -alpha, alpha, alpha, trifluoro -p-tolyl) -4-
ethyl -sulfmyl pyrazole -3-carbonitrile  
Mycothecirem Verrucaria   
Tetraconazole  
 (RS) -2-(2, 4 -dichlorophenyl) -3-(1H, 1, 2 -4-triazole -l-yl) propyl 1,1,2, 
2-tetrafluoroethyl ether  
Hydramethylnon  
 5, 5 -dimethyl -perhydro pyrimidin -2-one-4-trifluoromethyl = a-(4-
trifluoromethyl styryl) cinnamyliderehydrazone  
Bitterbarkomycin  
 (Plant extract of Apocynum venetum) 1a, 2a, diacetoxyl -8A, 15 
dissobutyl acyloxy! -9a-benzyloxy -4A; 6A dihydroxy -A-
dihydrolignaloefuran  
Benalaxyl -M Methyl -N(Phenylacetyl) -N-(2, 6-xylyl -D-alaninate  
Sulfuryl Fluoride  ________  
Thifensulfuron -methyl  3-(4-methoxy -6-methyl -1 , 3, 5 -triazin -2-yl carbamoyisuifamoyi) = 
thiophen -2-caiboxylic acid  
NicosulfuronN  2-(4, 6, -dimethoxy pyrimidin -2-yl carbamoyl sulfamoyl) -N, N -
dimethyl = nicotinamide -(4, 6, -dimethoxy pyrimidin -2-yl)-3-(3-
dimethylcarbamoyl -2-pyridyl = sulfonyl) urea  
Rotenone  (2R, 6as, 12as) -1,2 ,6 6a,, 12, 12a -hexahydro -2-isopropenyl -8, 9 -
dimethoxychromeno [3, 4 -b] furo [2, 3 -h] chromen -6-one 
Diflyufenican  2', 4'-difluor o-2-(a, a, a -trifluoro -m-tolyloxy) nicotinanilide  
Photorhabdus  ___________  
luminescences akhurustii  _____________  
 
Strain K -l _____________  
Serratia marcescens GPS 5 
(Bacteria)  ________________  
Squamocin  Seed extract of Plant 'Annona squamosa Linn' (Custard apple)  
 
1[Flonicamid  N-cyanomethyl -4- (trifluoromethyl) nicotinamide  
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Notification No. GSR 683(E), dat ed 31 -10-2006.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 38]
38 
 Fluazifop -p-butyl  Butyl(R) -2-{4-[5-(trifluoromethyl) - 2-pyridyloxy]phenoxy}propionate  
Flazasulfuron  1-(4,6-dimethoxypyrimidin -2-yl)- 3-(3-trifluoromethyl -2-
pyridylsulfonyl)urea  
Cyazofamid  
 4-chloro -2-cyano -N,N-dimethyl - 5-p-olylimidazole -sulfonamide  
Fluazinam  3-chloro -N-(3-chloro -5-trifluoromethyl - 2-pyridyl) -a,a,a-trifluoro -2,6-
dinitro -p-toluidine  
Boscalid  2-chloro -N-(4-chloro -biphe nyl-2-yl)nicotinamide  
1-MCP  1-Methylcyclopropene  
Propoxycarbazone - sodium  2-[(4-methyl -5 -oxo-3 -propoxy -4,5 -dihydro -[1,2,4,]triazole -carbonyl) -
sulfamoyl] - benzoicacid methylester, sodium salt  
Isoxaflutole  2-[(4-methyl -5 -oxo-3 -propoxy -4,5 -dihydro -[1,2,4,]triazole -carbonyl) -
sulfamoyl] - benzoicacid methylester, sodium salt  
Isoxaflutole  
 5-cyclopropyl -4-(methanesuphonyl - 4-trifluoro -methylbenzzoyl) -
isoxazole  
Fluopicolide  2,6-dichloro -N-[3-chloro -5- (trifluoromethyl) -2-
pyridylmethyl]benzamide  
Aclonifen  2-chloro -6-nitro -3-phenoxyaniline  
Azimsulfuron  1-(4, 6 -dimethoxyprimidin -2-yl)-3-[1-methyl -4- (2-methyl -2H-
tetrazole -5-yl)pyrazol -5-ylsulfonyl]urea  
Zoxamide  (RS) -3, 5 -dicloro -N-(3-chloro -1-ethyl - 1-methyl -2-oxopropyl) -p-
toluamide  
Tribenuron methyl  2-[4-methoxy -6-methyl -1,3,5 -triazin - 2-yl(methyl)carbamoyl -
sulfamoyl]benzoic acid.  
Thifensulfuron methyl  Methyl -3-(4-methoxy -6-methyl -1, 3,5 -triazin -2-ylcarbamoyl 
sulfamoyl)thiophene -2-carboxylate  
Prothiofos  O-2,4-dichlorophenyl -O-ethyl S -propyl phosphorodithioate  
Penoxsulam  2-(2, 2 -difluoroethoxy) -N-(5,8-dimethoxy[1,2,4]triazolo[ 1,5 -
c]pyrimidin -2-yl)-6-(trifluoromethyl)benzenesulfonamide  
Omethoate  O,O-dimethyl S -methylcarba - moylmethyl phosphorodithioate  
Piriformospora indica  a plant root colonizing basidiomycete fungus  
Mepiquat Pentaborate  N,N dimethylpiperidinium pentaborate  
Sulcotrione  2-[2-chloro -4-(methylsulfonyl) benzoyl] -1,3-cyclohexanedione  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 38]
ro -4-(methylsulfonyl) benzoyl] -1,3-cyclohexanedione  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 39]
39 
 Flumorph  4-[3-(3,4-dimelthoxyphenyl) -3- (4-fluorophenyl)acryloyl] morpholine 
1H-1,2,4 -triazole -1-ethanole  
SYP 1620  N-methyl 2 -[2-((((4-(2,6 dichloro -phenyl) -3- butenylidene -2-
yl)amino)oxy)methyl) - phenyl] -2-methoxyiminoacetamide  
Metominostrobin  (E)-2-methoxyimino -N-methyl -2- (2-phenoxyphenyl)acetamide  
Empenthrin  (E)-(RS) -ethynyl -2-methylpent -2-enyl(1R;3RS;1R, 3SR)2,2 -dimethyl -
3-(2methyl=prop - 1-enylcyclopropanecarboxylate)  
Pyridaben  
 2-tert-butyl -5-(4-tert-butylbenzylthio) - 4-chloropyridazin -3(2H) -one] 
1[Chromafenozide  2' tert -butyl -5'-methyl -2'-(3,5-xyloyl)chroman -6-carbohydrazide  
Orthosulfamuron  1-(4,6-dimethoxypyrimidin -2-yl)-3-[2-(dimethylcarbamoyl)phenyl 
sulfamoyl] urea  
6-Benzylaminopurine  N-phyenylmethyl -1 H-purin -6- amine (6 -benzylaminopurine)  
Hexamethyldisilazane  Hexamethyldisilazane, reaction product with silica (CAS)  
Kresoxim -Methyl  Methyl(E) -methoxyimino -[2-(O-tolyloxymethyl)phenyl] acetate  
 
Spirotetramat  Carbonic acid 3 -(2,5-dimethyl - phenyl) -8 -methoxy -2-oxo-1 -aza-
spiro[4.5]dec -3-en-4-yl ester ethyl ester  
Mandipropamid  2-(4-chloro -phenyl) -N-[2-(3-methoxy -4-pro-2-ynyloxy -phenylo - ethyl] -
2-prop-2-ynyloxy -acetamide  
Chlorantraniliprole  3-Bromo -N-[4-chloro -2-methyl -6- (methyJcarbamoyl) phenyl] -1-(3-
chloropyridin -2-yl)-1 H-pyrazole -5-carbo xamide  
Prodiamine  5-dipropylamino -a,a,a-trifluoro - 4,6 dinitro -O-toluidine; 2,6 -dinitro -
Nl,Nl -dipropyl -4 trifluoromethyl -m-Phenylenediamine  
Fomesafen  5-[2-chloro -4-(trufluoromethyl) Phenoxy] -N-(methylsulfonyl) -2-
nitrobenzene)  
Topramezone  3-(4,5-dihydro -isoxazol -3-yl)-4-methanesulfonyl -2-methylphenyl) -(5-
hydroxyl -1 -methyl -1H-pyrazol -4-yl)methanone  
Pyribenzoxim  Dipheny Imethanone 0 -[2,6-bis[(4,6 -dimethoxy -2-
pyrimidinyl)oxy]benzoyl]oxime(CAS)  
n-Heneicosane  CH3._CH2_CH2_C18H37  
Formetanate hydrochloride  3-dimethylaminomethylene aminophenyl methylcarbamate 
hydrochloride]  
2[Flundone  l
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 39]
 hydrochloride  3-dimethylaminomethylene aminophenyl methylcarbamate 
hydrochloride]  
2[Flundone  l-methyl -3-phenyl -5-(oc, oc, oc -tnfluoro m -tolyl) -4-pyridone  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Notification No. G .S.R.631(E), dated 28.09.2007.  
2. Ins. by Notification No. G .S.R.650(E) , dated 11.09.2008.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 40]
40 
 Tebuthiuron  1 -(5-tert-butyl -1,3,4 -thiadiazol -2-yl)-1, 3-dimethylurea  
Trinexapac - Ethyl 4-cyclopropyl (hydroxyl) methylene - 
Ethyl  3,5-dioxocyclohexane carboxylate  
Thidiazuron  l-phenyl -3-(l, 2,3 -thiadiazol -5-yl) urea  
Isoxathion  0,0-diethyl 0 -5-phenyl isoxazol -3-yl phosphororhioate  
Eucalyptus  Containing 1,8 cineole (eucalyptol)" leaf extract]  
1[Pethoxamid  2-chloro -N-(2-ethoxyethyl) -N-(2-methyl -1-phenylprop -1-enyl) 
acetamide  
Penthiopyrad  (RS) -N-[{2-1, 3 -Dimethylbutyl) -3-thienyl] -1-methyl -3-
(trifluoromethyl)  
Imazamethabenz -methyl  
 
 Mixture of (+/-)-6-(4-Isopropyle -4-Methyl -5-oxo-2-Imidazolin -2-yl)-m-
Toluate and Methyl (+/ -)-2-(4-Isopropyle -4-methyl -5-oxo-2-
Imidazoldin -2-yl)-p-Toluate  
Aminocyclopyrachlore  6-Amino -5-chloro -2-Cyclopropyl -Pyrimidine -4-Carboxylic acid, 
Methyl Ester  
Gamma Cyhalothr in (s) a -cyano -3-phenoxybenzyl (Z) -(IR, 3R) -3-(2-Choloro -3, 3, 3 -
trifuloroprop -1-enyl-=2, 2 -dimethylcyclopropanecarboxylate  
Cyflumetofen  2-methoxyethyl (RS) -2-(4 tert butyly phenyl) -2-Cyano -3-Oxo-3-(a, a, a 
trifluro -o-tolyl) propionate  
Cyantraniliprole  1H-pyrnzole -5-Carboxamid 3 -brome -1-(3-Chloro -2 pyridinyl) -n-[4-
cyano -2-methyl -6-(methyl amino carbonyl)] phenyl (9CL)  
Ametoctradin  5-ethyl -6-octyl [1, 2, 4] triazolo [1, 5 -a] pyrimidin -7-amine  
Picoxystrobin  Methyl (E) 3 -methoxy 2-{2-[6-(trifluoromethyl) -2-pyridloxymethyl] 
phenyl} acrylate  
Metralenone  3'-bromo -2, 3, 4, 6' -tetramethoxy -2', 6-dimethyl benzophenone]  
2[Pyroxulam  N- (5, 7 -dimethoxy [1, 2 ,4] triazolo [1, 5 -a] pyrimidin -2-yl) 2-
methoxy -4- (trifluoromethyl) Pyridine -3-Sulfonamide  
Propisochlor  2 chloro -6' -ethyl -N-isopropoxymethylaceto -toluidide  
Orysastrobin  (2 E) -2-(methoxyimino) -2 {2 -[3E, 5E, 6E) -5-(methoxymino) -4, 6 -
dimethyl -2, 8 -dioxa -3, 7 -diazanona -3, 6 -dien-l-yl]-phenyl} -N-methyl 
acetamide  
Sulfoxaflor  [1 -[6- (trifluoromethyl) pyridine - 3yl] ethyl] methyl(oxido) -?4-
S
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 40]
thyl 
acetamide  
Sulfoxaflor  [1 -[6- (trifluoromethyl) pyridine - 3yl] ethyl] methyl(oxido) -?4-
SuIfanylidene cyanamide  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Notification No. G .S.R. 5(E), dated 05 -01-2010.  
2. Ins. by Notification No. G .S.R. 316(E) , dated 13 -04-2010.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 41]
41 
 Siduron  
 1 (2-methylcylohexyl) - 3 -phenyl urea  
Spinetoram  
 Major component 3'ethoxy 5, 6 -dihydro spinosynJ -minor component 3' 
ethoxy spinosynL  
Diamuron  1-(1-methyl -1-phenyl ethyl) -3-p-tolyl urea  
Simetryn  N2, N4 -diethyl -6-methylthio -1, 3, 5 -triazine -2, 4-diamine.]  
1[Theta -Cybermethrin  1a(S*),3ß] -(ñ)-cyano(3 -phenoxyphenyl)methyl3 -(2,2-dichloroethenyl) -
2,2- dimethylcyclopropanecarboxylate  
Pyroxasulfone  
 3-[(5-difluromethoxy) -1-methyl -3(trifluromethyl)pyrazol -4-
ylmethylsulfonyl]  
-4,5-dihydro -5,5-dimethyl -1,2-oxazole.  
Pyrifluquinazon  1-acetyl -1,2,3,4 -tetahydro -3-[(3-pyridylmethyl)amino] -6-[1,2,2,2 -
tetrafluoro -1- (trifluoomethyl)ethyl]quinazolin -2-one. 
Cyenopyrafen  (E)-2-(4-tert-butylphenyl) -2-cyano -1-(1,3,4 -trimethylpyrazol -5-yl)vinyl 
2,2-dimethylpropionate.  
Prohexadione Calcium  Calcium 3 -oxido -5-oxo-4-propionylcyclohex -3-enecarboxylate.  
Saflufenacil  (N'-[2-chloro -4-fluoro -5-(3-methyl -2,6-dioxo -4-(trifluoromethyl)3,6 -
dihydro -1(2H) -pyrimidinyl)benzyl] -N-methylsulfamide).  
Fluxapyroxad  3-9difluoromethyl) -1-methyl -N-(3',4',5' -trifluorobiphenyl -2-yl) 
Pyrazole -4-carboxamide.  
Etoxazole  (RS) -5-tert-butyl -2{2-(2,6-difluorophenyl) -4,5-dihydro -1,3-oxazol -4- 
ylphenetole.  
Bistrifluron  1-[2-chloro -3,5-bis(trifluoromethyl)phenyl] -3-(2,6-
difluiorobenzoyl)urea.  
Flupyradifurone  
 4-[(6-chloro -3-pyridylmethyl)2,2 -difluoroethyl)amino]furan -2(5H) -one. 
Beflubutamid  (RS) -N-benzyl -2-(a,a,a,4 -tetrafluoro -m-tolyloxy)butyramide.  
Flutolanil  a,a,a, -trifluoro -3'-isopropoxy -o-tolunanilide.  
itenpyram  (E)-N-(6-chloro -3-pyridylmethyl) -N-ethyl -N'-methyl -2-nitrovinylidene 
diamine.  
Pyriftalid  (RS) -7-(4,6-dimethoxypyrimidin -2-ylthio) -3-methyl -2-benzofuran -
1(3H) -one] 
2[Metazosulfuron  1-3-chloro -1-methyl -4-[(5RS) -5,6-dihydro -5-methyl -1,4,2 -dioxazin -3-
yl] Pyrazol -5-ylsulfonyl} -3-(4,6-dimethoxypyrimidin -2-yl)urea  
                                         
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 41]
zol -5-ylsulfonyl} -3-(4,6-dimethoxypyrimidin -2-yl)urea  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Notification No. G .S.R.380(E) , dated 24 -05-2012.  
2. Ins. by Notification No. G .S.R.313(E) , dated 06 -05-2014.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 42]
42 
 Spearmint (Mentha spicata) 
Oil containing L -carvon, 
Limonin and Pines  Spearmint Extract  
Quinmerac  7-Chloro -3 Methyl Quinoninle -8-Carboxylic Acid  
Bispyribac Acid  2,6-[Bis(4,6 -Dimethoxy -2-pyriminyle) Oxy] Benzoic Acid  
Triflumezopyrine  
 
 3,4-Dihydro -2,4-Dioxo -1-(Pyrimidin -5-Ylmethyl) -3- 
(Alpha,Alpha,Alpha -Trifluoro -m-Tolyl) -2H-Pyrido(1,2 -a) Pyrimidin -1-
ium-3-ide 
Renofluthrin  2,3,5,6 -tetrafluoro -4-(ymethoxmethyl)benzyl -3-(2,2-dichlorovinyl) -2,2- 
dimethylcyclopropanecarboxylate  
Benzobicyclon  3-(2-chloro -4mesylbenzoyl) -2-phenylthiobicyclo  [3.2.1] oct -2-en-4-one 
Dimethyl disulphide (DMDS)  Dimethyl Disulphide  
N-acetylthiazolidine -4-
carboxylic acid (natca)  N-acetylthiazolidine -4-carboxylic acid (natca)]  
1[Ipfencarbazone  
 1-(2, 4 -Dichorophenyl) -N-(2, 4 -difluorophenyl) -1, 5 -dihydro -N-(1-
meth yethyl) -5-oxo-4H-1, 2, 4 -tiazole -4-carbxoamide  
Fluthiacetmethyl  Methyl [2 -chloro -4-fluoro -5-(5, 6, 7, 8 -tetrahydro -3-oxo-1H,3H [1, 3, 
4] thiadiazdeolo [3, 4 -a] pyrifazin -1-ylideneamino] phenythio ] acetate  
Afidopyropen  
 
 [(3S, 4R, 4aR, 6S, 6aS, 12R, 12aS, 12bS) -3-(cyclopropylcarbonyloxy) -
1, 2, 3, 4, 4a, 5, 6, 6a, 12a, 12b -decahydro -6, 12 -dihydroxy -4, 6a, 12b -
trimethyl -11-oxo-9-(3-pyridyl) -11H, 12H -benzo[f]pyrano[4, 3 -b] 
chromen -4-yl] methyl cyclopropanecarboxylate  
Isopyrazam  3-(difluoromethyl) -1 -methyl-N-[1, 2, 3, 4 -tetrahydro -9-(1 -
methylethyl) -1, 4 -methanonaphthalen -5-yl]-1H-pyrazole -4-
carboxamide  
Sedaxane  Mixture of 2 cis -isomers 2' -[(1RS, 2RS) -1, 1' -bicycloprop -2-yl]-3-
(difluoromethyl) -1-methylpyrazole2' -[(1RS, 2SR) -1, 1' -bicycloprop -2-
1]-3-(Difluoromethyl) -1-methylpyrazole -4-carboxanilide  
Solatenol  N-[(1RS, 4SR) -9-(Dichloromethylidene) -1, 2, 3, 4 -tetrahydro -1, 4 -
methanonaphthalen -5-yl]-3-(difluoromethyl) -1-methyl -1H-pyrazole -4-
carboxamide  
Fosthiazate  O-ethyl S-(1-methylpropyl)(2 -oxo-3-thiazolidinyl) Phosphonothioate  
Halauxifenmethyl  2
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 42]
sthiazate  O-ethyl S-(1-methylpropyl)(2 -oxo-3-thiazolidinyl) Phosphonothioate  
Halauxifenmethyl  2-pyridinecarboxylic acid, 4 -amino -3-chloro -2-fluoro -3- 
methoxyphenyl), methyl ester  
Matrine  (7aS, 13aR, 13bR, 13cS) -dodecahydro -1H,5H, 10 -H Dipyrido[2, 1 -
f:3'.2', 1' -j][1, 6]nap hthyridin -10-one 
                                                           
1. Inserted by Notification No. G .S. R790(E) , dated 11 -11-2014.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 43]
43 
 2-phenylphenol Poly -D-
glucosamine  Biphenyl -2-ol Poly -(1, 4) -2-amino -2-deoxy -B-D-Glucan  
Polyoxin (Polyoxin -B, 
Polyoxin -D, Polyoxin -AL) 5-(2-amino -5-O-carbamoyl -2-deoxy -L-xylonamido) -1,(5- dideoxy -1-(1, 
2, 3, 4 -tetrahydro -5-hydroxymethyl -2, 4-dioxopyrimidin -1-yl-B-D-
allofuranuronic acid)  
Polyoxorim  5-(2-amino -5-O-carbamoyl -2-deoxy -L-xylonamido) -1-(5- carboxy -1, 2, 
3, 4 -tetrahydro -2, 4 -dioxopyrimidin -1-yl)-1, 5 -dideoxy -B-D-
allofuranuronic acid.]  
1[Common Name  
 CAS/CAS RN No.  
 IUPAC/Chemical Abstract Name  
Dimethenamid -p 
 
 163515 -14-8 
 
 (S)-2-chloro -N-{2,4-dimethyl -3-
thienyl} -N-{2-methoxy -1 -
methylethyl}acetamide  
Tri-basic copper sulphate  1344 -73-6 
 Copper (II) hydroxide sulphate  
 
Cyclaniliprole  
 1031756 -98-5 
 
 2,3- dibromo -4-chloro -1-(3- chloro -2-
pyridyl) -6-[ {(1RS) -1 -
cyclopropylethyl}carbamoyl] pyrazole -5-
carboxanilide  
2[Florpy rauxifen -benzyl ] 
 
 943832 -81-3(RN)  
 
 4-amino -3-chloro -6-[4-chloro -2-fluro -3-
methoxyphenyl] -5-fluro -2-pyridine 
carboxylic acid  
4,5-dichloro -2-n-octyl -3-(2H) -
isothiazolone(DCOIT)  64359 -81-5 
 
 4,5-dichloro -2-n-octyl -3-(2H) -
isothiazolone  
 
Simeconazole  
 
 149508 -90-7 
 
 {RS} -2-[4-fluorophenyl] -1-[1H-1,2,4 -
triazol -1-yl]-3 -[trimethylsilyl]propan -2-
ol 
Pydiflumetofen  
 
 1228284 -64-7 
 
 3-[difluromethyl] -N-methoxy -methyl -
N[1-methyl -2-{2,4,6 - 
tricholorophenyl}ethyl] -1H-pyrazole -4-
carboxamide  
Phosphonic acid OR Potassium 
Phosphonate (mixture of Mono 
Potassium and Di Potassium 
Salts of Phosphonic Acid)  (13977 -65-6);(13492 -2-7) 
and (13598 -36-2) 
 
 i. Potassium hydrogen phosphonate  
ii. Dipotassium phosphonate IUPAC -
Potassium hydrogen phosphonate  
3-iodo-2-propynyl 
Butylcarbamate (IPBC)  
 55406 -53-6 
 3 -iodoprop -2-
ynylbutylcarbamate(IPBC)/3 -iodo-2-
propyn -1 -yl N-butylcarbamate  
Mefentrifluconazole  
 
 1417782 -03-6 
 
 (2RS) -2-[4-(4-chlorophenoxy) -a, a, a -
trifluoro -0-tolyl] 1 -(1H-
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 43]
conazole  
 
 1417782 -03-6 
 
 (2RS) -2-[4-(4-chlorophenoxy) -a, a, a -
trifluoro -0-tolyl] 1 -(1H-1,2,4 -triazol -1 -
yl)propan -2-ol/a-[4-(4-chlorophenoxy) -
2- (trifluromethyl)phenyl] -a-methyl - 1H-
1,2,4 -triazole -1 -ethanol  
Bis(1 -hydroxy -2(1H) -
pyridinethiona to-o,s)-(T-4)zinc 
(ZPT) also known as -Zinc 
pyrithione  13463 -41-7 
 
 13.1.3b.zinc bis (2 -thiolpyridine -N-
oxide).]  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Notification No. S .O.3304(E) , dated 06 -10-2017.  
2. Subs. by notification No. S. O. 954(E), dated 2 -3-2020, for “Florpyauxifen -benzyl”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 44]
44 
 1[Common Name   CAS/CAS RN No.   IUPAC/Chemical Abstract Name  
Bixafen   
 
 581809 -46-3  
 
 N-(3', 4'-dichloro -5-fluorobiphenyl -2-yl)-
3-(difluromethyl) -1-methyl -1 H - 
pyrazole -4-carboxamide.  
Fluazaindolizine  
 
 1254304 -22-7  
 
 8-chloro -N-[(2-chloro -5-methoxyphenyl) 
sulfonyl] -6-(trifluromethyl) imadazo [1, 
2-a] pyridine -2-carboxamide  
Fluindapyr (New Fungicide)   
 
 1383809 -87-7  
 
 3-(difluoromethyl) -N-[(3RS) -7-fluoro -2, 
3-dihydro -1, 1, 3 -trimethyl -1 H-inden -4-
yl]-1 methylpyrazole -4-carboxamide  
Tolpyralate   
 
 1101132 -67-5 
 
 (RS) -1-{1-ethyl -4-[4-mesyl -3-(2-
methoxyethoxy) - o - toluoyl]pyrazole -5-
yloxy} e thyl methyl carbonate  
 
Spiropidion   
 
 1229023 -00-0  
 
 3-(4-chloro -2, 6-dimethylphenyl) -8-
methoxy -1-methyl -2-oxo1, 8 -diazaspiro 
[4.5] dec -3-en-4-yl ethyl carbonate  
Fluxametamide   
 
 928783 -29-3  
 
 4-[(5RS) -5-(3, 5-dichlorophenyl) -4, 5-
dihydro -5-(trifluromethyl) -1, 2-oxazole -
3-yl]-N-[(EZ)(methoxyimino) methyl] -o-
toluamide  
Flupyrimin   
 
 1689566 -03-7  
 
 [N(E)] -N-[1-[(6-chloro -3-pyridinyl) 
methyl] -2(1H) -pyridinylidene] -2, 2, 2 -
trifluroacetamide  
 
 
Dimefluthri   
 
 271241 -14-6  
 
 2, 3, 5, 6-tetrafluoro -4-(methoxymethyl) 
benzyl (1RS, 3RS: 1RS, 3SR) -2, 2-
dimethyl -3-(2-methylprop -1-enyl) 
cyclopropane carboxylate  
 
 
Ethaboxam   
 
 162650 -77-3  
 (RS) -N-(a-cyano -2-thenyl) -4-ethyl -2-
(ethylamino) -1, 3-thiazole -5-
carboxamide.  
 
 
Pyrazoxyfen   
 
 CAS RN 71561 -11-0  
 
 2[4-(2, 4-dichlorobenzoyl) -1, 3 
dimethylpyrazole -5-yloxy] acetophenone  
 
 
Dichlormid   
 
 37764 -25-3  
 
 N, N -diallyl -2, 2-dichloroacetamide  
 
 
Lancotrione Sodium   
 
 1486617 -22-4  
 
 Sodium 2 -{ 2-chloro -3-[2-(1, 3-dioxolan -
2-yl) ethoxy] -4-mesylbenzoyl} -3-
oxycyclohex -1-en-1-olate  
 
 
Benzpyrimoxan   
 
 1449021 -97-9  
 
I -  5-(1, 3-dioxan -2-yl)-4-[4-
(trifluoromethyl) benzyloxyl] pyrimidine 
] 
                                                         
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 44]
rifluoromethyl) benzyloxyl] pyrimidine 
] 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Notif ication No. S.O.  45(E), dated 02 -01-2019.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 45]
45 
 1[Common Name  CAS/CAS RN No.  IUPAC/Chemical Abstract Name  
Flumetsulam  
 
 98967 -40-9 
 
 CAS: N-(2, 6-difluorophenyl) -5-
methyl[1, 2, 4]triazolo[1, 5 -a]pyrimidine -
2-sulfonamide  
IUPAC: 2', 6' -difluoro -5-methyl[1, 2, 
4]triazolo[1, 5 -a] pyrimidine -2-
sulfonanilide  
Cloransulam -methyl  
 
 147150 -35-4 
 
 methyl 3 -chloro -2-(5-ethoxy -7-fluoro[1, 
2, 4]triazolo[ 1, 5-c]pyrimidin -2-
ylsulfonamido) benzoate; methyl 3 -
chloro -N-(5-ethoxy -7-fluoro[1, 2, 
4]triazolo[1, 5 -c]pyrimidine -2-
ylsulfonyl)  
Pyrapropoyne  
 
 1803108 -03-3 
 
 1H-pyrazole -4-carboxamide, N -[(2Z) -2-
[3-chloro -5-(2-cyclopropyethynyl) -2-
pyridinyl] -2-[(1 methylethoxy) 
imino]ethy] -3-(difluoromethyl) -1-methyl  
Isocycloseram  
 
 2061933 -85-3 
 
 4-[(5RS) -5-(3, 5-dichloro -4-
fluorophenyl) -4, 5-dihydro -5-
(trifluoromethyl) isoxazol -3-yl]-N-
[(4RS) -2-ethyl -3-oxoisoxazolidin -4-yl]-
o-toluamide  
Dimethametryn  
 22936 -75-0 
 N-(1, 2-dimethylpropyl) -N-ethyl -6-
methylthio -1, 3, 5 -triazine -2, 4-diamine  
Allyl isothiocyanate  57-06-7 1-propene -3-isothiocyanate  
Fenpropimorph  67564 -91-4 
 
 (+)-cis-4-[3-(4-tert-butylphenyl) -2-
methylpropyl] -2, 6-dimethylmorpholine  
Thiencarbazone -methyl  
 
 317815 -83-1 
 
 methyl 4 -[(4, 5 -dihydro -3-methoxy -4-
methyl -5-oxo-1H-1, 2, 4 -triazol -1-yl) 
carbonyl -sulfamoyl] -5-methylthiophene -
3-carboxylate  
Fluazaindolizine  
 
 1254304 -22-7 
 
 8-chloro -N-[(2-chloro -5-methoxyphenyl) 
sulfonyl] -6-(trifluoromethyl) imidazo [1, 
2-a]pyridine -2-carboxamide  
Etobenzanid  79540 -50-4 
 
 2, 3-dichloro -4-
ethoxymethoxybenzanilide  
Tebufenpyrad  
 
 119168 -77-3 
 
 N-(4-tert-butylbenzyl) -4-chloro -3-ethyl -
1-methylpyrazole -5-carboxamide  
Chlorine dioxide  10049 -04-4 Chlorine dioxide  
Oxaziclomefone  
 
 153197 -14-9 
 
 3-[1-(3, 5-dichlorophenyl) -1-
methylethyl] -3, 4-dihydro -6-methyl -5-
phenyl -2H-1, 3-oxazin -4-one 
Bixlozone  
 81777 -95-9 
 
 2-(2, 4-Dichlorobenzyl) -4, 4-
dimethylisoxazolidin -
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 45]
 3-oxazin -4-one 
Bixlozone  
 81777 -95-9 
 
 2-(2, 4-Dichlorobenzyl) -4, 4-
dimethylisoxazolidin -3-one 
 
 
Z11-16OH (Common Name) 
(Z)-11-Hexadecen -1-ol 
(Chemical name)  56683 -54-6 
 
 (Z)-11-Hexadecen -1-ol 
 
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Notification No. S .O. 1767(E) , dated 16 -05-2019.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968.pdf - page 46]
46 
 Cydia (Common Name)  
 
(E, E) -8, 10 -Dodecadien -1-ol 
 
(Chemical name)  33956 -49-9 
 
 (E, E) -8, 10 -Dodecadien -1-ol 
 
 
Z9-14AC (Common Name) Z -
9-Tetradecenyl acetate 
(Chemical name)  16725 -53-4 
 
 Z-9-Tetradecenyl acetate  
 
 
Z7-12AC (Common Name) Z -
7 Dodecenyl acetate (Chemical 
name)  14959 -86-5 
 
 Z-7 Dodecenyl acetate  
 
 
Z-9-HDAL (Common Name) 
(Z)-11-Hexadecenal (Chemical 
name)  56219 -04-6 
 
 (Z)-11-Hexadecenal  
 
 
Z-11-HDAL (Common Name)  
(Z)-11-Hexadecenal (Chemical 
name)    
E-11-HDL (Common Name) 
(E)-11-Hexadecen -1-ol 
(Chemical name)  61301 -56-2 
 
 (E)-11-Hexadecen -1-ol 
 
 
E-11-HAD (Common Name) 
(E)-11-Hexadecenyl acetate 
(Chemical name)  56218 -72-5 
 
 (E)-11-Hexadecenyl acetate  
 
 
CLM (Common Name)  
(Z, Z, E) -7, 11, 13 -
exadecatrienal  
(Chemical Name)  888042 -38-4 
 (Z, Z, E) -7, 11, 13 -Hexadecatrienal  
 
 
TDTA (Common Name) (3E, 
8Z, 11Z) -3, 8, 11 -
tetradecatrien -1-yl acetate 
(Chemical Name)  163041 -94-9 
 
 3, 8, 11 -tetradecatrien -1-yl acetate  
 
 
florylpicoxamid  
 
 1961312 -55-9 
 
 1S-2, 2-bis (4 -fluorophenyl) -1-
methylethyl N -{[3-(acetyloxy) -4-
methoxy -2-pyridyl]carbonyl} -L-
alaninate]  
1[Fenpropimorph  
 
 67564 -91-4 
 
 (+ -) cis-4-[3-(4-tert-butylphenyl) -2-
methylpropyl] -2,6-dimethylmorpholine.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. Notification No. S .O. 296(E), dated 15 -01-2020.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE INTER -STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT 
AND  CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) ACT, 1979  
_____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application . 
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
REGISTRATION OF ESTABLISHMENT S EMPLOYING INTER -STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN  
3. Appointment of registering officers . 
4. Registration of certain establishments . 
5. Revocation of registration in certain cases . 
6. Prohibition against employment of inter -State migrant workmen without registration . 
CHAPTER III  
LICENSING OF CONTRACTORS  
7. Appointment of licensing officers.  
8. Licensing of contractors . 
9. Grant of licences . 
10. Revocation, suspension and amendment of licences.  
11. Appeal.  
CHAPTER IV  
DUTIES AND OBLIGATIONS OF CONTRACTORS  
12. Duties of contractors . 
CHAPTER V  
WAGES , WELFARE AND OTHER FACILITIES TO BE P ROVIDED TO INTER -STATE  
MIGRANT WORKMEN  
13. Wage rates and other conditions of service of inter -State migrant workmen . 
14. Displacement allowance . 
15. Journey allowance , etc. 
16. Other facilities . 
17. Responsibility for payment of wages . 
18. Liability of principal employer in certain cases . 
19. Past liabilities.  
CHAPTER VI  
INSPECTING STAFF  
20. Inspectors.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT.pdf - page 2]
2 
 CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
SECTIONS  
21. Inter -State migrant workmen to be deemed to be in employment from date of recruitment for the 
purposes of certain enactments . 
22. Provisions regarding industrial disputes in relation to inter -State migrant  workmen . 
23. Registers and other records to be maintained.  
24. Obstructions.  
25. Contravention of provisions regarding employment of inter -State migrant workmen.  
26. Other offences . 
27. Offences by companies.  
28. Cognizance of offences.  
29. Limitation of prosecutions.  
30. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with the Act.  
31. Power to exempt in special cases.  
32. Protection of action taken under the Act. 
33. Power to give directions.  
34. Power to remove difficulties.  
35. Power to make rules.  
36. Repeals and saving . 
THE SCHEDULE.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT.pdf - page 3]
3 
 THE INTER -STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF  EMPLOYMENT  
AND  CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) ACT, 1979  
ACT NO. 30 OF 1979  
[11th June , 1979 .]  
An Act to regulate  the employment of inter -State migrant workmen and to provide for their 
conditions of service and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application .—(1) This Act may be called the Inter -State 
Migrant Workmen (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1979.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification i n the 
Official Gazette, appoint:  
Provided that if the Central Government considers it necessary or expedient so to do in the public 
interest, it may postpone or relax, to such extent as may be specified in s uch notification, the operation of 
all or any of the provisions of this Act in any State or States for such period not extending beyond one 
year from the date on which this Act comes into force.  
(4) It applies — 
(a) to every establishment in which five or m ore inter -State migrant workmen (whether or not in 
addition to other workmen) are employed or who were employed on any day of the preceding twelve 
months;  
(b) to every contractor who employs or who employed five or more inter -State migrant workmen 
(whether  or not in addi tion to other workmen) on any d ay of the preceding twelve  months.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires ,— 
(a) “appropriate Government ” means, — 
(i) in relation to — 
(1) any establishment pertaining to any industry carried on by or under the authority of 
the Central Government or pertaining to any such controlled industry as may be specified 
in this behalf by the Central Government; or  
(2) any  establishment of any railway,  Cantonment Board, major port, mine
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT.pdf - page 3]
 Central Government; or  
(2) any  establishment of any railway,  Cantonment Board, major port, mine or oil -field; or  
(3) any establishment of  a banking or insurance company,  
the Central Government;  
(ii) in relation to any other establishment, the Government of the State in which that 
other  establishment is situated;  
(b) “contractor ”, in relation to an establishment, means a person who undertakes (whether as an 
independent  contractor, agent, employee or otherwise) to produce a given result for  the establishment, 
other than  mere supply of goods or articles of manufacture to such establishment, by the employment 
of workmen  or to supply workmen to the establishment, and includes a sub -contractor, Khatadar , 
Sarda r, agent or  any other person, by whatever name called, who recruits or employs workmen;  
(c) “controlled industry ” means any industry the control of which by the Union has been declared 
by any Central Act to be expedient in the public interest;  
                                                           
1. 2nd October, 1980, vide notification No. G.S.R. 513(E), dated 11th August, 1980, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( i). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT.pdf - page 4]
4 
 (d) “establishment ” means — 
(i) any office or department of the Government or a local authority; or  
(ii) any  place where any industry, trade, business, manufact ure or occupation is carried on ; 
(e) “inter-State migrant workman ” means any person who is recruited by or through a contractor 
in one  State under an agreement or other arrangement for employment in an establishment in another 
State, whether with or without the knowledge of the principal employer in relation to such 
establishment;  
(f) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(g) “principal  employer ” means, — 
(i) in relation to any offic e or department of the Government or a local authority, the head of 
that office, department or authority or such other officer as the Government or the local authority, 
as the case may be, may specify in this behalf;  
(ii) in relation to a factory, the owne r or occupier of the factory and where a person has been 
named  as the manager of the factory under the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948), the person so 
named;  
(iii) in relation to a  mine, the owner or agent of the mine and where a person has been named 
as the manager of the mine, the person so named;  
(iv) in relation to any other establishment, any person responsible for the supervision and 
control of  the establishment.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of sub -clause ( iii) of this clause, the expressions “mine ”, 
“owner ” and “agent ” shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in clause ( j), clause ( l) 
and clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the Mines Act,1952 (35 of 1952);  
(h) “recruitment ” includes entering into any agreement or other arrange ment for recruitment and 
all its  grammatical variations and cognate expressions shall be construed accordingly;  
(i) “wages ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( vi) of section 2 of the Payment of 
Wages Act,  1936 (4 of 1936);  
(j) “workman ” means  any person employed in or in
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT.pdf - page 4]
f the Payment of 
Wages Act,  1936 (4 of 1936);  
(j) “workman ” means  any person employed in or in connection with the work of any 
establishment to do  any skilled, semi -skilled or unskilled, manual, supervisory, technical or clerical 
work for hire or reward,  whether the terms of employment be express or implied, but do es no t include 
any such person — 
(i) who is employed mainly in a managerial or administration capacity; or  
(ii) who, being employed in a supervisory capacity, draws wages exceeding five hundred 
rupees per  mensem, or exercises, either by the nature of the duties attached to the office or by 
reason of the  powers vested in him, functions mainly of a managerial nature.  
(2) Any reference in this Act to any law which is not in force in any area shall, in relation to that area, 
be construed as a reference to the corresponding law, if any, in force in that area.  
CHAPTER II  
REGISTRATION OF ESTABLISHMENT S EMPLOYING INTER -STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN  
3. Appointment of registering officers .—The appropriate Government may, by order not ified in the 
Official Gazette, — 
(a) appoint such persons, being officers of Government, as it thinks fit to be registering officers 
for the purposes of this Chapter; and  
(b) define the limits, within which a registering officer shall exercise the powers conferred on him 
by or under this Act.  
4. Registration of certain establishments .—(1) Every principal employer of an establishment to 
which this Act applies shall, within such period as the appropriate Government may, by notification in the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT.pdf - page 5]
5 
 Official Gazette, fix in this behalf with respect to establishments generally or with respect to any class of 
them, make an application to the registering officer, in such form and manner and on payment of such 
fees as may be prescribed, for the registration of the establishment:  
Provided that the registerin g officer may entertain any such application for registration after the 
expiry of the period fixed in that behalf, if the registering officer is satisfied that the applicant was 
prevented by sufficient cause from making the application in time.  
(2) Within one month after the receipt of an application for registration under sub -section  (1), the 
registering officer shall, — 
(a) if the application is complete in all respects, register the establishment and issue to the 
principal employer of the establishment a certificate of registration in the prescribed form; and  
(b) if the application is not so complete, return the application to the principal employer of the 
establishment.  
(3) Where within a period of one month after the receipt of an application for registration of an 
establishment under sub -section  (1), the r egistering officer does not grant  under clause  (a) of                        
sub-section  (2) the certificate of registration applied for and does not return the application under         
clause  (b) of that sub -section, the registering officer shall, within fifteen days of the receipt of an 
application in this behalf, from the principal employer, register the establishment and issue to the 
principal employer a certificate of registration in the pre scribed form.  
5. Revocation of registration in certain cases .—If the registering officer is satisfied, either on a 
reference made to him in this behalf or otherwise, that the registration of any establishment has been 
obtained by misrepresentation or suppr ession of any material fact  or that for any other reason, the 
registration has become useless or ineffective and, th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT.pdf - page 5]
rial fact  or that for any other reason, the 
registration has become useless or ineffective and, therefore, requires to be revoked, the registering 
officer may , after giving an opportunity to the principal employer of the establishment to be heard and 
with the previous approval of the appropriate Government, revoke by order in writing the registration and 
communicate the order to the principal employer:  
Provided that where the registering officer considers it necessary so to do for any special reasons, he 
may, pending such revocation, by order suspend the operation of the certificate of registration for such 
period as may be specified in the order and serve, by re gistered post, such order along with a statement of 
the reasons on the principal employer and such order shall take effect on the date on which such service is 
effected.  
6. Prohibit ion against employment of inter -State migrant workmen without registration .—No 
principal employer of an establishment to which this Act applies shall employ inter -State migrant 
workmen in the establishment unless a certificate of registration in respect of such establishment issued 
under this Act is in force:  
Provided that nothin g in this section shall apply to any establishment in respect of which an 
application for registration made within the period fixed, whether originally or on extension under                
sub-section  (1) of section 4 is pending before a registering office r and for the purposes of this proviso, an 
application to which the provisions of sub -section  (3) of section 4 apply shall be deemed to be pending 
before the registering officer concerned till the certificate of registration is issued in accordance with th e 
provisions of that sub -section.  
CHAPTER III  
LICENSING OF CONTRACTORS  
7. Appointment of licensing officers .—The appropriate Government  may, by order not ified in the 
Official Gazette, — 
(a) appoint  such persons, being officers of Government, as it thinks fi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT.pdf - page 5]
n the 
Official Gazette, — 
(a) appoint  such persons, being officers of Government, as it thinks fit to be licensing officers for 
the purposes of this Chapter; and  
(b) define  the limits , within which a licensing officer shall exercise the jurisdiction and powers 
conferred on licensin g officers by or under this Act.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT.pdf - page 6]
6 
 8. Licensing of contractors .—(1) With effect from such date as the appropriate Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, no contractor t o whom this Act applies shall, — 
(a) recruit any person in a State for the purpose of employing him in any establishment situated in 
another State, except under and in accordance with a licence issue d in that behalf — 
(i) if such establishment is an establishment referred to in sub -clause ( i) of clause ( a) of                            
sub-section ( 1) of section 2, by the licensing officer appointed by the Central Government who 
has jurisdiction in relation to the area wherein the recruitment is made;  
(ii) if such establishment is an establishment referred to i n sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( a) of                     
sub-section ( 1) of section 2, by the licensing officer appointed by the State Government who has 
jurisdiction in relation to the area wherein the recruitment is made;  
(b) employ as workmen for the exec ution of any work in any establishment in any State, persons 
from another State (whether or not in addition to other workmen) except under and in accordance 
with a licence issued in that behalf, — 
(i) if such establishment is an establishment referred to in  sub-clause ( i) of clause ( a) of                          
sub-section ( 1) of section 2, by the licensing officer appointed by the Central Government who 
has jurisdiction in relation to the area wherein the establishment is situated;  
(ii) if such establishm ent is an establishment referred to in sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( a) of                        
sub-section ( 1) of section 2,  by the licensing  officer appointed by the Stat e Government who has 
jurisdiction in relation to the area wherein the establishment is situated.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, a licence under sub -section ( 1) may contain such conditions 
including, in particular, the terms and conditions of the agreement or other a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT.pdf - page 6]
tain such conditions 
including, in particular, the terms and conditions of the agreement or other arrangement under which the 
workmen will be recruited, the remuneration payable, hours of work, fixation of wages and other essential 
amenities in respect of the inter -State migrant workmen, as the appropriate Government may deem fit to 
impose in accordance with the rules, if any , made under section 35 and shall b e issued on payment of 
such fees as may be prescribed:  
Provided that if for any special reasons, the licensing officer is satisfied that it is necessary to require 
any person who has applied for, or who has been i ssued, a licence to furnish any  security fo r the due 
performance of the conditions of the licence, he may, after communicating such reasons to such person 
and giving him an opportunity to represent his case, determine in accordance with the rules made in this 
behalf the security which shall be furn ished by such person for obtaining or, as the case may be, for 
continuing to hold the licence.  
(3) The security which may be required to be furnished under the proviso to sub -section ( 2) shall be 
reasonable and the rules for the purposes of the said provis o shall, on the basis of the number of workmen 
employed, the wages payable to them, the facilities which shall be afforded to them and other relevant 
factors provide for the norms with reference to which such security may be determined.  
9. Grant of licence s.—(1) Every application for the grant of a licence under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 8 shall be made in the prescribed form and shall contain the particulars regarding the location of 
the establishment, the nature of process, operation or work for which inter-State migrant workmen are to 
be employed and such other particulars as may be prescribed.  
(2) The licensing officer may make such investigation in respect of the application received under 
sub-section ( 1) and in making any such investigation, the lic ensing office
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT.pdf - page 6]
ication received under 
sub-section ( 1) and in making any such investigation, the lic ensing officer shall follow such procedure as 
may be prescribed.  
(3) A licence granted under section 8, shall be valid for the period specified therein and may be 
renewed from time to time for such period and on payment of such fees and on such conditions as may be 
prescribed.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT.pdf - page 7]
7 
 10. Revocation, suspension and amendment of licences .—(1) If the licensing officer is satisfied, 
either on a reference made to him in this behalf or otherwise, that — 
(a) a licence  granted under section 8 has been obtained by misrepresentation or suppression of 
any material fact, or  
(b) the holder of a licence has, without reasonable cause, failed to comply with the conditions 
subject to which the licence has been granted or has con travened any of the provisions of this Act or 
the rules made hereunder,  
then, without prejudice to any other penalty to which the holder of the licence may be liable under this 
Act, the licensing officer may, after giving the holder of the licence an oppor tunity to be heard, by order 
in writing, revoke the licence or forfeit the security furnished by him under the proviso to sub -section ( 2) 
of section 8 or any part thereof and communicate the order to the holder of the licence:  
Provided that where the licen sing officer considers it necessary so to do for any special reasons, he 
may, pending such revocation or forfeiture, by order, suspend the operation of the licence for such period 
as may be specified in the order and serve, by registered post, such order a long with a statement of the 
reasons on the holder of the licence and such order shall take effect on the date on which such service is 
effected.  
(2) Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, the licensing officer may vary or amend a 
licence gr anted under section 8.  
11. Appeal .—(1) Any person aggrieved by an order made under section 4, section 5, section 8 or 
section 10 may, within thirty days from the date on which the order is communicated to him, prefer an 
appeal to an appellate officer who shall be a person nominated in this behal f by the appropriate 
Government : 
Provided that the appellate officer may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty 
days, if he  is satisfied that the appellant  was prevented 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT.pdf - page 7]
he expiry of the said period of thirty 
days, if he  is satisfied that the appellant  was prevented by sufficient cau se from filing the appeal in time.  
(2) On receipt of an appeal under sub -section ( 1), the appellate officer s hall, after giving the appellant  
an opportunity of being heard, dispose of the appeal as expeditiously as possible.  
CHAPTER IV  
DUTIES AND OBLIGATIONS OF CONTRACTORS  
12. Duties of contractors .—(1) It shall b e the duty of every contractor — 
(a) to furnish such particulars and in such form as may be prescribed, to the specified authority in 
the State from which an inter -State migrant workman is recruited and in the State in which such 
workman is employed, within fifteen days from the date of recruitment, or, as the case may be, the 
date of employment, and where any change occurs in any of the particulars so furnished, such change 
shall be notifie d to the specified authorities of both the States;  
(b) to issue to every inter -State migrant workma n, a pass book affixed with a passport size 
photograph of the workman and indicating in Hindi and English languages, and where the language 
of the workman is  not Hindi or English, also i n the language of the workman, — 
 (i) the name and place of the establishment wherein the workman is employed;  
(ii) the period of employment;  
(iii) the proposed rates and modes of payment of wages;  
(iv) the displacement allowanc e payable;  
(v) the return fare payable to the workman on the expiry of the period of his employment and 
in such contingencies as may be prescribed and in such other contingencies as may be specified in 
the contract of employment;  
(vi) deductions made; and  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT.pdf - page 8]
8 
 (vii) such other particulars as may be prescribed;  
(c) to furnish in respect of every inter -State migrant workman who ceases to be employed, a 
return in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed, to the specified authority in the State 
from which  he is recruited and in the State in which he is employed, which shall include a declaration 
that all the wages and other dues payable to the workman and the fare for the return journey back to 
his State have been paid.  
(2) The contractor shall maintain the pass book referred to in sub -section ( 1) up-to-date and cause it to 
be retained with the inter -State migrant workman concerned.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section and section 16 “specified authority ” means such 
authority as may be specified by the appropriate Government in this behalf.  
CHAPTER V  
WAGES , WELFARE AND OTHER FACILITIES TO BE P ROVIDED TO INTER -STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN  
13. Wage rates and other conditions of service of inter -State migrant workmen .—(1) The wage 
rates, holidays, hours of work and other conditions of service of an inte r-State migrant workman shall, — 
(a) in a case where such workman performs in any establishment, the same or similar kind of 
work as is being  performed by any ot her workman in that establishment, be the same as those 
applicable to such other  workman; and  
(b) in any other case, be such as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government:  
Provided that an inter -State migrant workman shall in no case be paid less tha n the wages fixed under 
the Minimum Wages Act, 1948  (11 of 1948).  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, wages payable to 
an inter -State migrant workm an under this section shall be paid in cash.  
14. Displacement allowance .—(1) There shall be paid by the contractor to every inter -State migrant 
workman at the time of recruitment, a displacement al lowance equal to fifty per cent.  of the monthly 
wages payable
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT.pdf - page 8]
me of recruitment, a displacement al lowance equal to fifty per cent.  of the monthly 
wages payable to him or seventy -five rupees, whichever is hi gher. 
(2) The amount paid to a workman as displacement allowance under sub -section ( 1) shall not be 
refundable and shall be in addition to the wages or other amount s payable to him.  
15. Journey allowance , etc.—A journey allowance of a sum not less than the  fare from the place of 
residence of the inter -State migrant workman in his State to t he place of work in the other St ate shall be 
payable by the contractor to the workman both for the outward and return journeys and such workman 
shall be entitled to payme nt of wages during the period of such journeys as if he were on duty.  
16. Other facilities .—It shall be the duty of every contractor employing inter -State migrant workmen 
in connection with the work of an establishme nt to which this Act applies, — 
(a) to ensure regular payment of wages to such workmen;  
(b) to ensure equal pay for equal work irrespective of sex;  
(c) to ensure suitable conditions of work to such workmen having regard to the fact that they are 
required   to work in a State different from their own State;  
(d) to provide and maintain suitable residential accommodation to such workmen during the 
period of th eir  employment;  
(e) to provide the prescribed medical facilities to the workmen, free of charge;  
(f) to provide such protective clothing to the workmen as may be prescribed; and  
(g) in case of fatal accident or serious bodily injury to any such workman, t o report to the 
specified authorities of both the States and also the next of kin of the workman.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT.pdf - page 9]
9 
 17. Responsibility for payment of wages .—(1) A contractor shall be responsible for payment of 
wages to each inter -State migrant workman employed by him and su ch wages shall be paid before the 
expiry of such period as may be prescribed.  
(2) Every principal employer shall nominate a representative duly authorised by him to be present at 
the time of disbursement of wages by the contractor and it shall be the duty of such representative to 
certify the amounts paid as wages in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) It shall be the duty of the contractor to ensure the disbursement of wages in the presence of the 
authorised representative of the principal employer.     
(4) In case the contractor fails to make payment of wages within the prescribed period or makes short 
payment, then the principal employer shall be liable to make payment of the wages in full or the unpaid 
balance due, as the case may be, to the inter -State  migrant workman employed by the contractor and 
recover the amount so paid from the contractor either by deduction from any amount payable to the 
contractor under any contract or as a debt payable by the contractor.  
18. Liability of principal employer in certain cases .—(1) If any allowance required to be paid 
under section 14 or section 15 to an inter -State migrant workman employed in an establishment to which 
this Act applies is not paid by the contractor or if any facility specified in section 16 is not provided for 
the benefit of such workman, such allowance shall be paid, or, as the case may be, the facility shall be 
provided, by the principal employer within such time as may be prescribed.  
(2) All the allowances paid by the principal employer or all th e expenses incurred by him in providing 
the facility referred to in sub -section ( 1) may be recovered by him from the contractor either by deduction 
from any amount payable to the contractor under any contract or as a debt payable by the contractor.  
19. Past liabilit
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT.pdf - page 9]
ble to the contractor under any contract or as a debt payable by the contractor.  
19. Past liabilities .—It shall be the duty of every contractor and every principal employer to ensure 
that any loan given by such contractor or prin cipal employer to any inter -State migrant workman does not 
remain outstanding after the completion of the period of  employment of such workman under the said 
contractor or, as the case may be, in the establishment of such principal employer and accordingly every 
obligation of an inter -State migrant workman to re -pay any debt obtained by him during the period of his 
employment from the contractor or the principal employer and remaining unsatisfied before the 
completion of such period shall, on such completion, be deemed to have been extinguished and no suit or 
other proceeding shall lie in any court or before any authori ty for the recovery of such debt or any part 
thereof.  
CHAPTER VI  
INSPECTING STAFF  
20. Inspectors .—(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
appoint such persons as it thinks fit to be inspectors for the purposes of this Act, and define the local 
limits within which they shall exercise their powers under this Act.   
(2) Subject to any rules made in this behalf, within the local limits for which he i s appointed, an 
inspector may — 
(a) if he has reason to believe that any inter-State migrant workmen are employed in any premises 
or place, enter, at all reasonable hours, with such assistants (if any), being persons in the service of 
the Government or any local or other public authority as he thinks fit, such premise s or place  for the 
purpose of — 
(i) satisfying himself whether the provisions of this Act in relation to the payment of wages, 
conditions of service, or facilities to be provided to such workmen are being complied with;   
(ii) examining any register or record or notic es required to be kept or exhibited by the 
provisions of this Act or the rules ma
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT.pdf - page 9]
r record or notic es required to be kept or exhibited by the 
provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, and requiring the production thereof for 
inspection;   
(b) examine any person found in any such premises or place for the purpose of determining 
whether such per son is an inter -State migrant workman;   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT.pdf - page 10]
10 
 (c) require any person giving out work to any workman, to give any information, which is in his 
power to give, with respect to the names and addresses of the persons to, for and from whom the work 
is given out or rec eived, and with respect to the payments to be made for the work;   
(d) seize or take copies of such register, record of wages, or notices or portions thereof as he may 
consider relevant in respect of an offence under this Act which he has reason to believe has been 
committed by a principal employer or contractor, and   
(e) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed.   
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), if a State Government considers it 
necessary for the purpose of satisfy ing itself that the provisions of this Act are being complied with in 
respect of any workmen belonging to that State and employed in an establishment situated in another 
State, it may, by order in writing, appoint such persons, being persons in the service  of that Government, 
for the exercise of such of the powers mentioned in sub -section ( 2), as may be specified in that order:  
Provided that no such order shall be issued without the concurrence of the Government of the State in 
which such workmen are employ ed or where the establishment is an establishment referred to in                  
sub-clause ( i) of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2, without the concurr ence of the Central 
Government.  
(4) Any person required to produce any document or thing, or to give any information required, by an 
inspector under sub -section ( 2), or by a person appointed under sub -section ( 3), shall be deemed to be 
legally bound to do so within the meaning of section 175 and section 176 of the Indian Penal Code                
(45 of 1860).  
(5) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), shall, so far as may be, apply 
to any search or seizure under this section as they apply to any search or seizur
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT.pdf - page 10]
 as may be, apply 
to any search or seizure under this section as they apply to any search or seizure made under the authority 
of a warrant issued under section 94 of the said Code.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
21. Inter -State migrant workmen to b e deemed to be in employment from date of recruitment 
for the purposes of certain enactments .—For the purposes of the enactments specified in the Schedule, 
an inter-State migrant workman shall, on and from the date of his recruitment, be deemed to be employed 
and actually worked in the establishment or, as the case may be, the first establishment in connection with 
the work of which he is employed.  
22. Provisions regarding industrial disputes in relation to inter -State  migrant                     
workmen .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act. 1947 (14 of 1947), 
any dispute or difference in connection with the employment or  non-employment or the terms of 
employment or the conditions of labour, of an inter -State migrant workman (hereafter in this section 
referred to a s the industrial dispute), may, — 
(a) if the industrial dispute is relatable to an establishment referred to in  sub-clause ( i) of               
clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2, be referred under the provisions of the said Act, by the 
Central Government to any of the authorities referred to in Chapter II of that Act (hereafter in this 
section referre d to as the said authorities), — 
(i) in the State wherein the establishment is situated;  
(ii) in the State wherein the recruitment of such workman was made if he makes an 
application in that behalf to that Government on the ground that he has returned to that S tate after 
the completion of his employment;  
 (b) if the industrial dispute is relatable to an establishment referred to in sub -clause ( ii) of 
clause  (a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2, — 
(i) be referred under the provisions of the said Act, by the Governme nt of the Stat
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT.pdf - page 10]
f section 2, — 
(i) be referred under the provisions of the said Act, by the Governme nt of the State wherein 
the establishment is situated, to any of the said authorities in that State; or  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT.pdf - page 11]
11 
 (ii) be referred under the pro visions of the said Act, by the Government of the State wherein 
the recruitment of such workman was made to any of the sai d authorities in that State, if he makes 
an application in that behalf to that Government on the ground that he has returned to that State 
after the completion of his employment:  
Provided tha t— 
(a) no application referred to in sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( a) or sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( b) shall 
be entertained after the expiry of a period of six months from the date of his return to the State 
wherein the recruitment was made after the completion of his employment, unless the Government 
concerned is satisfie d that the applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from making the 
application within that period;  
(b) no reference under the said sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( b) shall be made except after obtaining 
the concurrence of the Government of the State wherein  the establishment concerned is situated.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 33B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947                       
(14 of 1947), where during the pendency of any proceeding in respect of an industrial dispute under that 
Act before any of the said authorities in the State wherein the establishment is situated, an application is 
made to that authority by an inter -State migrant workman for the transfer of such proceeding to a 
corresponding authority in the State wherein  his recruitment was made on the ground that he has returned 
to that State after the completion of his employment, that authority shall forward the application to the 
Central Government, or, as the case may be, to the Government of the State wherein such r ecruitment was 
made and transfer such proceeding in the prescribed manner to such authority as may be specified in this 
behalf by that Government:  
Provided that in a case where no authority has been specified by the Government concerned within 
the prescrib ed peri
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT.pdf - page 11]
 case where no authority has been specified by the Government concerned within 
the prescrib ed period, the authority before which the proceeding is pending shall, on a request being made 
by the inter -State migrant workman and after obtaining the previous approval of the Government which 
referred the dispute to that authority, forward such proceed ing to the Government concerned for reference 
of such dispute to an authority in the State wherein such recruitment was made.  
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), if the Central Government is satisfied that 
it is expedient in the int erests of justice so to do, it may, by order in writing and for reasons to be stated 
therein, withdraw any proceeding in respect of any industrial dispute relating to an inter -State migrant 
workman pending before an authority in the Sta te in which the esta blishment concerned is situated and 
transfer the same to such authority in the State wherein the recruitment of such workman was made as 
may be specified in the order.  
(4) The authority to which any proceeding is transferred under this section may proceed either                 
de novo  or from the stage at which it was so transferred.  
23. Registers and other records to be maintained .—(1) Every principal employer and every 
contractor shall maintain such registers and records giving such particulars of the inter-State migrant 
workmen employed, the nature of work performed by such workmen, the rates of wages paid to the 
workmen and such other particulars in such form as may be prescribed.  
(2) Every principal employer and every contractor shall keep exhibited in such manner as may be 
prescribed within the premises of the establishment where the inter -State migrant workmen are employed, 
notices in the prescribed form containing particulars about the hours of work, nature of duty and such 
other information as may  be prescribed.  
24. Obstructions .—(1) Whoever obstructs an inspector or a perso
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT.pdf - page 11]
nformation as may  be prescribed.  
24. Obstructions .—(1) Whoever obstructs an inspector or a person appointed under sub -section ( 3) 
of section 20 (hereinafter referred to as unauthorised person) in the discharge of his duties u nder this Act 
or refuses or wil fully neglects to  afford the inspector or authorised person any reasonable facility for 
making any inspection, examination, inquiry or investigation authorised by or under this Act in relation to 
an establishment to which, or a contractor to whom, this Act applies, shall b e punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to two thousand 
rupees, or with both.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT.pdf - page 12]
12 
 (2) Whoever wil fully  refuses to produce on the demand of any inspector or authorised person any 
register or other document kept in pursuance of this Act or prevents or attempts to prevent or does 
anything which he has reason to believe is likely to prevent any person from app earing before or being 
examined by any inspector or authorised person acting in pursuance of his duties under this Act, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend 
to two thousand rupees, or  with both.  
25. Contravention of provisions regarding employment of inter -State migrant workmen .—
Whoever contravenes any provisions of this Act or of any rules made thereunder regulating the 
employment of inter -State migrant workmen, or contravenes any con dition of a licence granted under this 
Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which 
may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both, and in the case of a continuing contravention, with an 
additional  fine which may extend to one hundred rupees for every day during which such contravention 
continues after conviction for the first such contravention.  
26. Other offences .—If any person contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or of any rules made 
thereunder for which no other penalty is elsewhere provided, he shall be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or with 
both.  
27. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence  under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be gu ilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:   
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT.pdf - page 12]
roceeded against and punished 
accordingly:   
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his kn owledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding any thing contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that of fence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of           
individuals; and  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
28. Cognizance of offences .—No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act except on 
a complaint made by, or with the previous sanction in writing of, an inspector or authorised person and no 
court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall try any 
offence punishable under this Act.  
29. Limitation of prosecutions .—No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this 
Act unless th e complaint thereof is made within three months from the date on which the alleged 
commission of the offence came to the knowledge of the inspector or authorised person concerned:  
Provided that where the offence consists of disobeying a written order made by an inspector or 
authorised person, complaint thereof may be made within six months of the date on which the offence is 
alleged to have been committed.  
30. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with the Act
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT.pdf - page 12]
ce is 
alleged to have been committed.  
30. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with the Act .—(1) The provisions of this Act shall 
have  effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law or in the terms of 
any agreement or contract of service, or in any standing orders applicable to the establishment whether 
made before or after the commencement of this Act:  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT.pdf - page 13]
13 
 Provided that where under any such law, agreement, contract of service or standing orders, the             
inter-State migrant workmen employed in the establishment are entitled to benefits in respect of any 
matter which are more favourable to them than t hose to which they would be entitled under this Act, the 
inter-State migrant workmen shall continue to be entitled to the more favourable benefits in respect of that 
matter, notwithstanding that they receive benefits in respect of other matters under this Act. 
(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed as precluding any inter -State migrant workmen 
from entering into an agreement with the principal employer or the contractor, as the case may be, for 
granting them rights or privileges in respect of any matter which are more favourable to them than those 
to which they would be entitled under this Act.  
31. Power to exempt in special cases .—The appropriate Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette and subject to such conditions and restrictions, if any, and for such period or periods as 
may be specified in the notification, direct that all or any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made 
thereunder shall not apply to or in relation to any establishment or class of establishment s or any 
contractor or class of contractors or any inter -State migran t workmen in such establishment  or class of 
such workmen, if that Government is satisfied that it is just and proper so to do having regard to the 
methods of recruitment and the condition s of employment in such establishment or class of 
establishments and all other relevant circumstances.  
32. Protection of action taken under Act .—(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie against any registering officer, licensing office r or any other employee of the Government for anything 
which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rule or order made 
thereunder.  
(2) No s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT.pdf - page 13]
ne or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rule or order made 
thereunder.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Government for any damage caused or 
likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this 
Act or any rule or notification or order made or issued thereunder.  
33. Power to give directions .—The Central Government may give directions to the Government of 
any State as to the carrying into execution in the State of the provisions contained in this Act.  
34. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may , by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for removing 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of tw o years from the date on which this 
Act comes into force.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
35. Power to make rules .—(1) The appropriate Government may, subject to th e condition of 
previous publication, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the foll owing matters, namely: — 
(a) the f orm and mariner in which an application for the registration of an establishment may be 
made under section 4, the fees payable thereon and the form of a certificate of registration issued 
under that section;  
(b) the  form in which an application for the grant  or renewal of a licence may be made under 
section 9 and the particulars it may contain;  
(c) the manner in which an investigation is to be made in respect of an application for the grant of 
a licence and the matte rs to be taken into account 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT.pdf - page 13]
 in respect of an application for the grant of 
a licence and the matte rs to be taken into account in granting or refusing a licence;  
(d) the form of a licence which may be granted or renewed under this Act, the conditions subject 
to which the licence may be granted or renewed, the fees payable for the grant or renewal of a l icence 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT.pdf - page 14]
14 
 and the security, if any, required to be furnished for the due performance of the conditions of the 
licence;  
(e) the circumstances under which licen ces may be varied or amended under section 10;  
(f) the form and the manner in which appeals may be fi led under section 11 and the procedure to 
be followed by appellate officers in disposing of the appeals;  
(g) the wage rates, holidays, hours of work and other conditions of service which an inter -State 
migrant workman is entitled under section 13;  
(h) the period within which wages payable to inter -State migrant workmen should be paid by the 
contractor under sub -section ( 1) of section 17 and the manner of certification of such payment under 
sub-section ( 2) thereof;  
(i) the time within which allowances or fac ilities required by this Act to be provided and 
maintained may be so provided by the contractor and in case of default on the part of the contractor, 
by the pri ncipal employer under section 18 ; 
(j) the powers that may be exercised by inspectors under secti on 20;  
(k) the form of registers and records to be maintained, and the particulars and information to be 
contained in notices to be exhibited, by the principal employers and contractors under section 23;  
(l) the manner of submission of returns, and the for ms in which, and the authorities to which, such 
returns may be submitted;  
(m) legal aid to inter -State migrant workmen;  
(n) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed under this Act.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before the expiry of th e session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT.pdf - page 14]
essions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified fo rm or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule.  
36. Repeals and saving. —(1) The Orissa Dadan  Labour (Control and Regulat ion) Act, 1975           
(Orissa Act 42 of 1975)  and any law corresponding to this Act, in force in any State, shall stand repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the provisions of the Act or 
law so repeated shall , in so far as such thing or action is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, 
be deemed to have been done or taken under the provisions of this Act as if the said provisions were in 
force when such thing was done or such action was taken and sha ll continue to be in force accordingly 
until superseded by anything done or any action taken under this Act.  
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT.pdf - page 15]
15 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 21]  
1. The Wor kmen ’s Compensation Act, 1923 ( 8 of 1923).  
2. The Payment of Wages Act, 1936 (4 of 1936).  
3. The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947).  
4. The Employees ’ State Insurance Act, 1948 (34 of 1948).  
5. The Employees’  Provident Funds and Misce llaneous Provisions Act, 1952 ( 19 of 1952).  
6. The Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 (53 of 1961).  
 
 
 
 
   
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE KAZIS ACT, 1880.pdf - page 1]
1 THE KAZIS ACT, 1880  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
Local extent.  
2. Power to appoint Kazis for any local area.  
3. Naib Kazis . 
4. Nothing in Act to confer judicial or administrative powers; or to render the presence of Kazi 
necessary; or to prevent any one acting as Kazi . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE KAZIS ACT, 1880.pdf - page 2]
2 THE KAZIS ACT, 1880  
ACT NO.12 OF 18801 
[9th July , 1880 .] 
An Act for the appointment of persons to the Office of Kazi ’. 
WHEREAS  by the preamble to Act No.  11 of 18642 (An Act to repeal the law relating to t he offices of 
Hindu and Muhamma dan Law officers and to the offices of Kazi ’-ul-Kuzaat and of Kazi ’, and to abolish 
the former offices ) it was (among other things) declared that it was declared that it   was inexpedient that 
the appointment of the Kazi -ul-Kuzaat, or of City, Town or Pargana  Kazi ’s should be made by the 
Government, and by the same Act the enactments relating to the appointment by the Government of the 
said officers were repealed; and whereas by the usage of the Muhammad an community in some parts of  
3[India ] the presence of Kazi ’s appointed by the Government is required at the celebration of marriages 
and the performance of certain other rites and ceremonies, and it is therefore expedient that the 
Government should again be empowered to appoint persons to the office of Kazi; It is he reby enacted as 
follows:— 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Kazi ’s Act, 1880;  
4*   *   *   *   * 
Local extent .—It extends, in the first instance, only to the territories administered by the Governor of 
Fort Saint George in Council.  5[But the Government of any other State ] may, from time to time, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, extend it to the whole or any part of the territories under its 
administration .6 
 2. Power to appoint Kazi ’s for any local area .—Wherever it appears to the State Government that 
any considerable number of the Muhammadans resident in any local area desire that one or more Ka ’zi’s 
should be appointed for such local area, the State Government may, if it thinks fit, after consulting the  
principal Muhammadan residents of such local area, select one or more fit persons and appoint him or 
them to be Kazi ’s for such local area.  
If any question arises whether any person has been righ
<|CHUNK|>
[THE KAZIS ACT, 1880.pdf - page 2]
r 
them to be Kazi ’s for such local area.  
If any question arises whether any person has been rightly appointed Kazi ’ under this section, the 
decision thereof by the State Government shall be conclusive.  
The State Government may, if it thinks fit, suspend or remove any Kazi ’ appointed under this section 
who is guilty of any misconduct in the execution of his office, or w ho is for a continuous period of six 
months absent from the local area for which he is appointed, or leaves such local area for the purpose of 
residing elsewhere, or is declared an insolvent, or desires to be discharged from the office,  or who refuses 
or becomes in the opinion of the State Government unfit, or personally incapable, to discharge the duties 
of the office.  
                                                           
1. The Act has been extended to the Union territory of Lakshadweep by Reg. 2 of 1970, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 15 -10-1970) 
and to the Union territory of Pondicherry by Act 26 of 1968, s. 3 and the Schedule.  
2. Rep.by Act 8 of 1868.  
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “the Provinces”.  
4. The words “and it shall come into force at once” omitted by Act 10 of 1914, s. 3and II Schedule.  
5. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule, f or “But the Government of any other Part A State or the Government of a                 
Part C State”.  
6. The Act has been extended to certain places in the Bombay Presidency, West Bengal, the U.P., the Punjab, the C.P. and 
Assam.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE KAZIS ACT, 1880.pdf - page 3]
3 3. Naib Kazi ’s.—Any Kazi ’ appointed under this Act may appoint one or more persons as his Naib 
or Naibs to act in his place in all or any of the matters appertaining to his office throughout the whole or 
in any portion of the local area for which he is appointed, and may suspend o r remove any naib so 
appointed.  
When any Kazi ’ is suspended or removed under section 2, his naib or naibs (if any) shall be deemed 
to be suspended or removed, as the case may be.  
4. Nothing in Act to confer judicial or administrative powers; or to render the presence of 
Kazi’s necessary; or to prevent any one acting as Kazi ’s.—Nothing herein contained, and no 
appointment m ade hereunder, shall be deemed — 
(a) to confer any judicial or administrative powers on any Kazi ’ or Naib Kazi ’ appointed 
hereunder; or  
(b) to render the presence of a Kazi ’ or Naib Kazi ’ necessary at the celebration of any marriage or 
the perf ormance of any rite or ceremony ; or 
(c) to prev ent any person discharging any of the functions of a Kazi ’. 
 
__________  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE KING OF OUDH’S ESTATE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE KING OF OUDH’S ESTATE ACT, 1887  
_____________ 
 ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS.  
____________  
SECTIONS.  
1. Administration of the estate of the late king of Oudh by the Governor General in Council.  
2. Indemnity to Agent to the Governor General.  
3. Effect of Act.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE KING OF OUDH’S ESTATE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 2]
2 
 THE KING OF OUDH’S ESTATE ACT, 1887.  
____________ 
ACT NO. XIX OF 1887.  
____________  
PASSED BY THE  GOVERNOR  GENERAL  OF INDIA IN COUNCIL.  
(Received the assent of the Governor General on the 23rd
___________   September, 1887.)  
An Act to provide for the Administration of the Estate of His late Majesty the King of Oudh . 
WHEREAS  His late Majesty Wajid Ali Shah , Kind of Oudh, was during his lifetime exempt from the 
jurisdiction of the Civil Courts, and it is expedient to  make provision for the administration of his 
estate otherwise than under the authority of those Courts; It is hereby enacted as follows : — 
1. Administration of the estate of the late king of Oudh by the Governor General in 
Council .—(1) The Governor Genera l in Council shall have exclusive authority to act in the 
administration of the property of whatever nature left by H is late Majesty the King of Oudh in regard 
to the settlement and satisfaction of claims against the estate of His Late Majesty, and may mak e 
distribution of the remaining property or the proceeds thereof in such manner as he deems fit among 
the family and dependents of His late Majesty.  
(2) No act of the Governor General in Council in connection with the administration to or 
distribution of t he property left by His late Majesty shall be liable to be questioned in any Court.  
2.  Indemnity to Agent to the Governor General .—The Agent to the Governor General with His 
late Majesty, and all  persons acting under his order, a re hereby indemnified and discharged from 
liability in respect of all acts done by him or them since the tw entieth day or September, 1887, i n 
connection with the preservation and administration of the estate of His late Majesty, and no suit or 
other proceeding shall be instituted i n any Court against him or them, or against the Secretary of State 
for India in Council, in respect of those acts or any of them.  
3. Effect of Act.— This Act shall take effect notwithstanding any 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE KING OF OUDH’S ESTATE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 2]
t of those acts or any of them.  
3. Effect of Act.— This Act shall take effect notwithstanding any testamentary or other disposition 
which may have been made by  His late Majesty, and notwithstanding any proceedings which may 
have been or may be instituted before any Civil Court for administering his estate or collecting the 
debts due to it, and any person who under any pr obate  howsoever, has received or reali sed any portion 
of the estate of His late Majesty shall be bound  to account therefor to such officer as the Governor 
General in Council may appoint in this behalf.  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE KING OF OUDH’S ESTATE.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE KING OF OUDH’S ESTATE  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Transfers of property by and to the Agent to the Governor General in Council, and institution of 
legal proceedings by him . 
2. Consequences ensuring on death, resignation or removal Agent . 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE KING OF OUDH’S ESTATE.pdf - page 2]
2 
 ACT No. XIV OF 1888  
PASSED BY THE GOVERNOR  GENERAL OF INDIA IN  COUCIL.  
(Received the assent of the Governor General on the 26th October, 1888 .) 
An Act to make further provision for the Administration of the Estate of His late Majesty the K ing of Oudh.  
WHEREAS  Act XIX of 1887 ( an Act to provide for the Administration of the Estate of His late  Majesty the 
King of Oudh) enacts that the Governor General in Council shall have exclusive authority to  act in the 
administration of the property nature left by His late Majesty the King of Oudh in regard to the 
settlement and satisfaction of claims against the estate of His late Majesty, and may make distribution 
of the remaining property or the proceeds thereof in such manner as he deems fit among  the family and 
dependents of His late Majesty;  
And whereas it is expedient to provide for the m ode in which property may be transferred, and suits 
and other proceedings may be instituted, in the course of the administration of the estate of His late Majes ty;  
It is hereby enacted as follow:  — 
1. Transfers of property by and to the Agent to the Governor General in Council, and institution 
of legal proceedings by him .—Subject to the control of the Governor General in Council, the person for 
the time being holding the office of Agent to the Governor General in Council for the Affairs of the late 
King of Oudh and for the Purposes of Act XIX of 1887, may — 
(a) in his own name and by his name of office dispose of any moveable and immoveable property 
of His late Majesty the King of Oudh in as full and effectual a manner as His Majesty could have 
disposed of it in his lifetime;  
(b) by his name of office take a conveyance of any moveable or immoveable property in which His 
late Majesty had a beneficial interest; and  
(c) by his name of office institute any suit or other proceeding in any Civil, Criminal or R evenue 
Court in connection with the possession of any moveable or immoveable property belon
<|CHUNK|>
[THE KING OF OUDH’S ESTATE.pdf - page 2]
al or R evenue 
Court in connection with the possession of any moveable or immoveable property belonging to the 
estate of His late Majesty or the dispossession of any perso n of any such property, or the recovery of 
rents, debts or other moneys due to the estate, or otherwise in connection with the administration of the 
estate.  
2. Consequences ensuring on death, resignation or removal Agent .—On the departure from British 
India, or the death, resignation or removal, of an Agent to the Governor General for the Affairs and Purposes 
aforesaid, the following consequences shall ensue, namely: — 
(a) any moveable or immoveable property vested in him as such Agent shall become vested in  his 
successor in office, and  
(b) a suit or other proceeding instituted by his name of office may be continued by his successor in 
office in the same manner as if the departure or the death, resignation or removal ha d not occurred.  
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LABOUR LAWS (SIMPLIFICATION OF PROCEDURE FOR FURNISHING RETURNS.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE LABOUR LAWS (SIMPLIFICATION OF PROCEDURE FOR FU RNISHING RETURNS 
AND MAINTAINING REGISTERS BY CERTAIN ESTABLISHMENTS ) ACT, 1988 
_________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
________ 
SECTIONS  
1.  Short title, extent and commencement.  
2.  Definitions.  
3.  Amendment of certain labour laws.  
4.  Exemption from furnishing or maintaining of returns  and registers required under certain labour 
laws.  
5.  Savings.  
6.  Penalty.  
7.  Power to amend Form.  
8.  Power to remove difficulties.  
FIRST SCHEDULE. 
SECOND SCHEDULE. 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LABOUR LAWS (SIMPLIFICATION OF PROCEDURE FOR FURNISHING RETURNS.pdf - page 2]
2 
 THE LABOUR LAWS (SIMPLIFICATION OF PROCEDURE FOR FU RNISHING RETURNS 
AND MAINTAINING REGISTERS BY CERTAIN ESTABLISHMENTS ) ACT, 1988 
ACT  NO. 51 OF 1988 
[24th September , 1988.] 
1[An Act to provide for the simplification of proced ure for furnishing returnsand maintaining 
registers in relation to establishments employing a  small numberof persons under certain 
labour laws.] 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement.— (1) This Act may be called the Labour Laws 
(2[Simplification of Procedure for] Furnishing Return s and Maintaining Registers by certain 
Establishments) Act, 1988. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India: 
Provided that nothing contained in this Act, in rel ation to the Plantations Labour Act, 1951 (69 of 
1951) shall extend to the State of Jammu and Kashmi r*. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date 3 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different States, and any referenc e in 
any provision of this Act to the commencement of th is Act shall be construed as a reference to the com ing 
into force of that provision in that State. 
2. Definitions.— In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “employer”, in relation to a Scheduled Act, which  defines such expression, has the same 
meaning assigned to it in that Act, and in relation  to any other Scheduled Act, means the person who i s 
required to furnish returns or maintain registers u nder that Act; 
(b) “establishment” has the meaning assigned to it in  a Scheduled Act, and includes — 
(i) an ‘industrial or other establishment’ as defined  in section 2 of the Payment of Wages Act, 
1936 (4 of 1936); 
(ii ) a‘factory’ as defined in section 2 of the Factori es Act, 1948 (63 of 1948); 
(iii ) a factory, workshop or place where employees are employed or work is given out to 
workers, in any scheduled emplo
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LABOUR LAWS (SIMPLIFICATION OF PROCEDURE FOR FURNISHING RETURNS.pdf - page 2]
kshop or place where employees are employed or work is given out to 
workers, in any scheduled employment to which the M inimum Wages Act, 1948 (11 of 1948), 
applies; 
(iv ) a‘plantation” as defined in section 2 of the Plan tations Labour Act, 1951 (69 of 1951), and 
(v) a ‘newspaper establishment’ as defined in section  2 of the Working Journalistsand other 
Newspaper Employees (Conditions of Service) and Mis cellaneousProvisions Act, 1955 (45 of 
1955); 
(c) “Form” means a Form specified in the Second Sched ule; 
(d) “Scheduled Act” means an Act specified in the Fir st Schedule and is in force on the 
commencement of this Act in the territories to whic h such Act extends generally, and includes the 
rules made thereunder; 
(e) “small establishment” means an establishment in w hich not less than ten and not more than 
4[forty] persons are employed or were employed on an y day of the preceding twelve months; 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 33 of 2014, s. 2, for the long titl e (w.e.f. 1-1-2015). 
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid ., for “Exemption from” (w.e.f. 1-1-2015). 
3. 1st May, 1989, vide notification  No. G.S.R.436(E), dated 10th April, 1 989, see  Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,  
sec. 3( i). 
4. Subs. by Act 33 of 2014, s. 4, for “nineteen” (w .e.f. 1-1-2015). 
*. Vide  notification No. S.O. 3912(E), dated 30th October,  2019, this Act is made applicable to the Union ter ritory of Jammu and 
Kashmir and the Union territory of Ladakh.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LABOUR LAWS (SIMPLIFICATION OF PROCEDURE FOR FURNISHING RETURNS.pdf - page 3]
3 
 (f) “very small establishment” means an establishment  in which not more than nine persons are 
employed or were employed on any day of the precedi ng twelve months. 
3. Amendment of certain labour laws.— On and from the commencement of this Act, the Sched uled 
Acts shall have effect subject to the provisions of  this Act. 
1[4. Exemption from furnishing or maintaining of ret urns and registers requires under certain 
labour laws.— (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in a Scheduled  Act, on andfrom the 
commencement of the Labour Laws (Exemption from Fur nishing Returnsand Maintaining Registers by 
certain Establishments) Amendment Act, 2014, itshal l not be necessary for an employer in relation to a ny 
small establishment orvery small establishment to w hich a Scheduled Act applies, to furnish the return sor 
to maintain the registers required to be furnished or maintained under thatScheduled Act: 
Provided that such employer— 
(a) furnishes, in lieu of such returns, annual return  in Form I; and 
(b) maintains, in lieu of such registers,— 
(i) registers in Form II and Form III, in the case of  smallestablishments, and 
(ii ) a register in Form III, in the case of very small establishments, 
at the work spot: 
Provided further that every such employer shall con tinue to— 
(a) issue wage slips in the Form prescribed in the Mi nimum Wages(Central) Rules, 1950 made 
under sections 18 and 30 of the Minimum WagesAct, 1 948 (11 of 1948) and slips relating to 
measurement of the amount of work done bypiece-rate d workers required to be issued under the 
Payment of Wages(Mines) Rules, 1956 made under sect ions 13A and 26 of the Payment ofWages Act, 
1936 (4 of 1936); and 
(b) file returns relating to accidents under sections  88 and 88A of theFactories Act, 1948 
(63 of 1948) and sections 32A and 32B of the Planta tions Labour Act, 1951 (69 of 1951). 
(2) The annual return in Form I and the registers in Forms II and III and wageslips, wage books and 
other records
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LABOUR LAWS (SIMPLIFICATION OF PROCEDURE FOR FURNISHING RETURNS.pdf - page 3]
 return in Form I and the registers in Forms II and III and wageslips, wage books and 
other records, as provided in sub-section ( 1), may bemaintained by an employer either in physic al form or 
on a computer, computerfloppy, diskette or other el ectronic media: 
Provided that in case of computer, computer floppy,  diskette or otherelectronic form, a printout of su ch 
returns, registers, books and records or aportion t hereof is made available to the Inspector on demand . 
(3) The employer or the person responsible to furnish  the annual return inForm I may furnish it to the 
Inspector or any other authority prescribed under t heScheduled Acts either in physical form or through  
electronic mail if the Inspectoror the authority ha s the facility to receive such electronic mail. 
(4) Save as provided in sub-section ( 1), all other provisions of a ScheduledAct, includin g, in particular, 
the inspection of the registers by, and furnishing of their copies to, the authorities under that Act,  shall 
apply to the returns and registersrequired to be fu rnished or maintained under this Act as they apply to the 
returns andregisters under that Scheduled Act. 
(5) Where an employer in respect of an establishment referred to in sub-section ( 1),to whom a 
Scheduled Act applies, furnishes returns or maintai ns the registers asprovided in the proviso to sub-s ection 
(1), nothing contained in that Scheduled Actshall ren der him liable to any penalty for his failure to fu rnish 
any return or to maintainany register under that Sc heduled Act.] 
5. Savings.— The commencement of this Act shall not affect — 
(a) the previous operation of any provision of any Sc heduled Act or the validity, invalidity, effect 
or consequence of anything done or suffered under t hat provision, before the relevant period; 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 33 of 2014, s. 5, for section 4 (w. e.f. 1-1-2015). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LABOUR LAWS (SIMPLIFICATION OF PROCEDURE FOR FURNISHING RETURNS.pdf - page 3]
of 2014, s. 5, for section 4 (w. e.f. 1-1-2015). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LABOUR LAWS (SIMPLIFICATION OF PROCEDURE FOR FURNISHING RETURNS.pdf - page 4]
4 
 (b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability alr eady acquired, accrued or incurred under any 
Scheduled Act, before the relevant period; 
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred or  inflicted in respect of any offence committed 
under any Scheduled Act, before the relevant period ; 
(d) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, 
obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punis hment aforesaid,  
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or rem edy in respect of any such right, privilege, obliga tion, 
liability, penalty, forfeitureor punishment shall b e instituted, continued or disposed of, as the case  may be, 
in accordance with that Scheduled Act. 
Explanation .—For the purpose of this section, the expression “re levant period” means the period 
during which an establishment is or was a small est ablishment or a very small establishment under this  
Act. 
6. Penalty.— Any employer who fails to comply with the provision s of this Act shall, on conviction, 
be punishable — 
(a) in the case of the first conviction, with fine wh ich may extend to rupees five thousand; and 
(b) in the case of any second or subsequent convictio n, with imprisonment for a period which shall 
not be less than one month but which may extend to six months or with fine which shall not be less 
than rupees ten thousand but may extend to rupees t wenty-five thousand, or with both. 
7. Power to amend Form.— (1) The Central Government may, if it is of opinion t hat it is expedient so 
to do, by notification in the Official Gazette, ame nd any Form and thereupon such Form shall, subject to 
the provisions of sub-section( 2), be deemed to have been amended accordingly. 
(2) Any notification issued under sub-section ( 1) shall be laid before each House of Parliament, if  it is 
sitting as soon as may be after the issue of the no tification, and if it is not sitting, within seven days of its 
re-assembly and the Central Govern
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LABOUR LAWS (SIMPLIFICATION OF PROCEDURE FOR FURNISHING RETURNS.pdf - page 4]
o tification, and if it is not sitting, within seven days of its 
re-assembly and the Central Government shall seek t he approval of Parliament to the notification by a 
resolution moved within a period of fifteen days be ginning with the day on which the notification is s o laid 
before the House of the People, and if Parliament m akes any modification in the notification or direct s that 
the notification should cease to have effect, the n otification shall thereafter have effect only in su ch 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may b e, but without prejudice to the validity of anythin g 
previously done thereunder. 
8. Power to remove difficulties.— If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the pr ovisions of this Act, 
the Central Government may, by order, not inconsist ent with the provisions of this Act, remove the 
difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the  expiry of a period of two years from the date on 
which this Act receives the assent of the President . 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LABOUR LAWS (SIMPLIFICATION OF PROCEDURE FOR FURNISHING RETURNS.pdf - page 5]
5 
  
1[THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See section 2( d)] 
1. The Payment of Wages Act, 1936 (4 of 1936). 
2. The Weekly Holidays Act, 1942 (18 of 1942). 
3. The Minimum Wages Act, 1948 (11 of 1948). 
4. The Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948). 
5. The Plantations Labour Act, 1951 (69 of 1951). 
6. The Working Journalists and other Newspaper Empl oyees (Conditions of Service) and 
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955 (45 of 1955). 
7.   The Motor Transport Workers Act, 1961 (27 of 1 961). 
8.  The Payment of Bonus Act, 1965 (21 of 1965). 
9. The Beedi and Cigar Workers (Conditions of Emplo yment) Act, 1966 (32 of 1966). 
10. The Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970 (37 of 1970). 
11. The Sales Promotion Employees (Conditions of Se rvice) Act, 1976 (11 of 1976). 
12. The Equal Remuneration Act, 1976 (25 of 1976). 
13. The Inter-State Migrant Workmen (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 
1979  
(30 of 1979). 
14. The Dock Workers (Safety, Health and Welfare) A ct, 1986 (54 of 1986). 
15. The Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) A ct, 1986 (61 of 1986). 
16. The Building and Other Construction Workers (Re gulation of Employment and Conditions of 
Service) Act, 1996 (27 of 1996).  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 33 of 2014, s. 6, for the First Sch edule and Second Schedule (w.e.f. 1-1-2015). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LABOUR LAWS (SIMPLIFICATION OF PROCEDURE FOR FURNISHING RETURNS.pdf - page 6]
6 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
[See section 2( c)] 
FORM I 
[See section 4 ( 1)] 
ANNUAL RETURN 
(To be furnished to the Inspector or the authority specified for this purpose underthe respective Sche duled Act before 
the 30th April of the following year) 
(ending 31st March__________________) 
 
1. Name of the establishment, its postal address, t elephone number, FAX number,e-mail address and loca tion______ 
___________________________________________________ ___________________________________________ 
 
2. Name and postal address of the employer_________ __________________________________________________ 
___________________________________________________ ___________________________________________ 
 
3. Name and address of principal employer, if the e mployer is a contractor____________________________ ______ 
___________________________________________________ ___________________________________________ 
 
4. Name of the Manager responsible for supervision and control________________________________________ ___ 
 
(i) Name of business, industry, trade or occupation c arried on by the employer________________________ 
___________________________________________________ _____________________________________ 
 
(ii ) Date of commencement of the business, industry, t rade or occupation________________________________ 
___________________________________________________ ___________________________________________ 
 
5. Employer’s number under ESI/EPF/Welfare Fund/PAN  No., if any______________________________________ 
 
6. Maximum number of workers employed on any day du ring the year to which this returnrelates to: 
 
Category   Highly Skilled   Skilled   Semi-skilled   Un-skilled 
Male 
Female 
Children (those 
who have not 
completed 18 years 
of age) 
Total 
 
7. Average number of workers employed during the ye ar: 
8. Total number of mandays worked during the year: 
9. Number of workers during the year: 
(a) Retrenched  : 
(b) Resigned   : 
(c) Terminated  : 
10. R
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LABOUR LAWS (SIMPLIFICATION OF PROCEDURE FOR FURNISHING RETURNS.pdf - page 6]
9. Number of workers during the year: 
(a) Retrenched  : 
(b) Resigned   : 
(c) Terminated  : 
10. Retrenchment compensation and terminal benefits  paid (provide information completelyin respect of each 
worker)____________________________________________ ____________________________________________ 
___________________________________________________ ______________________________________ 
 
11. Mandays lost during the year on account of— 
(a) Strike    : 
(b) Lockout   : 
(c) Fatal accident   : 
(d) Non-fatal accidents  : 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LABOUR LAWS (SIMPLIFICATION OF PROCEDURE FOR FURNISHING RETURNS.pdf - page 7]
7 
 12. Reasons for strike or lockout  : 
13. Total wages paid (wages and overtime to be show n separately): 
14. Total amount of deductions from wages made  : 
15. Number of accidents during the years  : 
Reported to Inspector of  
Factories/Dock Safety Reported to  
Employees’ State 
Insurance  
Corporation  Reported to Workmen’s 
Compensation Commissioner Others 
Fetal 
Non-Fatal 
16. Compensation paid under the Workmen’s Compensat ion Act, 1923 (8 of 1923) duringthe year___________ __ 
(i) Fatal accidents  : 
(ii ) Non-fatal accidents  : 
17. Bonus* 
(a) Number of employees eligible for bonus  : 
(b) Percentage of bonus declared and number of employ ees who were paid bonus: 
(c) Amount payable as bonus   : 
(d) Total amount of bonus actually paid and date of p ayment  : 
Signature of the Manager/Employer 
with full name in capital letters. 
 
Place:  
Date: 
ANNEXURE I * 
Name and 
address of the 
Contractor Period of 
contract From to Nature of work Maximum 
number of 
workers 
employed by 
each contractor Number of days 
worked Number of 
mandays worked 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
 
ANNEXURE II 
(See Item No. 6) 
 
Serial Number Name of the 
employee/worker Date of employment Permanent address 
1 2 3 4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Delete, if not applicable.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LABOUR LAWS (SIMPLIFICATION OF PROCEDURE FOR FURNISHING RETURNS.pdf - page 8]
8 
 FORM II 
[See section 4( 1)] 
REGISTER OF PERSONS EMPLOYED -CUM -EMPLOYMENT CARD 
Name of the establishment, address, telephone numbe r, FAX number and e-mail address_____________ 
Location of work___________________________________ ___________________________________ 
Name and address of principal employer if the emplo yer is a contractor_____________________________ 
___________________________________________________ ________________________________ 
1. Name of workman/employee________________________ ___________________________________ 
2. Father’s/Husband’s name_________________________ ____________________________________ 
3. Address: 
(i) Present__________________________________________ _______________________________ 
(ii ) Permanent________________________________________ ______________________________ 
4. Name and address of the nominee/next of kin_____ ___________________________________________ 
5. Designation/Category____________________________ ______________________________________ 
6. Date of Birth/Age_______________________________ ______________________________________ 
7. Educational qualifications______________________ _________________________________________ 
8. Date of entry___________________________________ _____________________________________ 
9. Worker’s ID No./ESI/EPF/L.W.F. No.______________ ______________________________________ 
10. If the employed person is below 14 years, wheth er a certificate of age is maintained______________ ______ 
11. Sex: Male or Female____________________________ _____________________________________ 
12. Nationality____________________________________ _____________________________________ 
13. Date of termination of employment with reason__ ___________________________________________ 
___________________________________________________ _________________________________ 
14. Signature/thumb impression of worker/employee__ __________________________________________ 
15. Signature of the employer/Authoris
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LABOUR LAWS (SIMPLIFICATION OF PROCEDURE FOR FURNISHING RETURNS.pdf - page 8]
worker/employee__ __________________________________________ 
15. Signature of the employer/Authorised officer wi th designation__________________________________ 
___________________________________________________ _________________________________ 
 
 
 
Signature of the contractor/ 
authorised representative 
of the principal employer.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LABOUR LAWS (SIMPLIFICATION OF PROCEDURE FOR FURNISHING RETURNS.pdf - page 9]
9 
 FORM III 
[See section 4( 1)] 
MUSTER  ROLL-CUM -WAGE  REGISTER 
Name of the establishment and address______________ __________________________________  
Location of work___________________________________ _____________________________  
Name and address of employer_______________________ ________________________________ 
 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
Serial 
number Name of the 
worker (ID No. if 
any) and 
father’s/husband’s 
name Designation 
/category/ 
nature of work 
performed Attendance 
(Dates of 
the month 
1,2, .. to 
31) Leave due 
(Earned leave 
and other kind 
of admissible 
leave) Leave 
availed 
(specify)  Wage rate/pay 
or piece 
rate/wages per 
unit Other 
allowances, 
e.g.  
(a) Dearness 
Allowance 
(b) House 
Rent 
Allowance 
(c)Night 
Allowances 
(d) 
Displacement 
Allowance 
(e) Outward 
Journey 
Allowance 
       (a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 
Overtime 
worked 
number 
of hours 
in the 
month Amount of 
overtime wages Amount of 
advance and 
purpose of 
advance Total/gross 
earnings Deduction e.g. 
(a) Provident 
Fund 
(b) Advance 
(c) Employees’ 
State Insurance 
(d) Other 
amount Net 
amount 
payable 
(12-13) Signature 
/receipt of 
wages/allowanc 
es for column 
number 14 Remarks 
    (a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d)    
 
Certificate by the principal employer if the employe r is contractor. 
This is to certify that the contractor has paid wag es to workmen employed by him as shown in this regi ster. 
 
 
Signature of principal employer/ 
authorised representative of principal employer.]  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LAND IMPROVEMENT LOANS ACT, 1883.pdf - page 1]
THE LAND IMPROVEMENT LOANS ACT, 1883  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
 Local extent . Commencement.  
2. Acts 26 of 1871 and 21 of 1876 repealed . 
3. “Collector ” defined.  
4. Purposes for which loans may be granted under this Act.  
5. Mode of dealing with applications for loans.  
6. Period for repayment of loans.  
7. Recovery of loans.  
8. Order granting loan conclusive on certain points.  
9. Liability of joint borrowers as among themselves.  
10. Power to make rules.  
11. Exemption of improvements from assessmen t to land revenue.  
12. Certain powers of State Government to be exercisable by Board of Revenue or Financial 
Commissioner.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LAND IMPROVEMENT LOANS ACT, 1883.pdf - page 2]
 
THE LAND IMPROVEMENT LOANS ACT, 1883  
ACT NO. 19  OF 18831 
[12th October , 1883 .] 
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to loans of money by the Government 
for agricultural improvements.  
WHEREAS  it is expedient to consolidate and amend the law relating to loans of money by the 
Government for agricultural improvements; It  is hereby enacted as follows: — 
1. Short title. —(1) This Act may be called the Land Improvement Loans Act, 
1883.  
(2) Local extent. Commencement .—It extends to the whole of India except 2[the 
territories which, immediately before the 1st November, 1956, were comprised in Part B 
States], but shall not come into force in any  part of 3[the territories to which this Act 
extends] until such date as the State Government 4*** may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint in this behalf.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Extension of Acts no. XIX o f 1883 and No. XII of 1884 to Hyderabad and 
Saurashtra area of the State of Bombay. —The Land Improvement Loan Act, 1883 and 
the Agriculturists’ Loans Act, 1884, (XIX of 1883), are hereby extended to and shall be, 
in virtue of such extension, in force in th e Hyderabad and Saurashtra area of the State of 
Bombay.  
[Vide Bombay Act XXVII of 1958, s. 2]  
Maharashtra  
Consequential and other amendments to Act XIX of 1883. —In section 1, to           
sub-section (2) the following proviso shall be added, namely: -- 
“Provided that on the commencement of the Land Improvement Loans and 
Agriculturists’ Loans (Extension and Amendment) Act, 1957, this Act shall also 
extend to and be in force in, the Hyderabad and Saurashtra areas of the state of 
Bombay.”  
[Vide  Bombay act X XVII of 1958, s. 3]  
                                                      
1. The Act has been amended in its application to the St ate of Madhya Pradesh by the C. P. and Berar 
Land Improvement Loans (Amendment) Act, 1949 (C. P. & B. 55 of 1949).  
Bombay by Bomba y Act 27 of 1958, U.P. by U.P. Act
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LAND IMPROVEMENT LOANS ACT, 1883.pdf - page 2]
 (Amendment) Act, 1949 (C. P. & B. 55 of 1949).  
Bombay by Bomba y Act 27 of 1958, U.P. by U.P. Act 42 of 1958 and Haryana by Haryana Act 26 of 
1971. The Act has been extended to the Hyderabad and Saurasthra area of the State of Bombay by 
Bombay Act 27 of 1958.  
The Act as at present in force in the State of Gujarat, ext ended to the Union territory of Dadra and Nagar 
Haveli by G.S.R. 1639, dated 3 -12-1962. Madhya Pradesh by Madhya Pradesh Act 23 of 1958 (when 
notified), to Goa, Daman and Diu with modifications, by Reg. 12 of 1962, s. 3 and Sch. and to the whole of 
the Uni on territory of Lakshadweep by Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1967).  
The Act has been repealed in its application to Bellary District by Mysore Act 14 of 1955 and to Malabar District of 
Kerala by Kerala Act 27 of 1961.  
Instruments executed by persons taking loans, or by their sureties, as security for the repayment of such 
loans, are exempted from stamp -duty —see the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 (2 of 1899), Sch. I. Art. 40, 
exemption ( 1) and notification under s. 9.  
2. Subs. by the Ad aptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956, for  “Part B States ”. 
3. Subs., ibid., for “a Part A State or a Part C State ”. 
4. The words “with the previous sanction of the G. G. in C ,” rep. by Act 8 of 1906, s. 2.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LAND IMPROVEMENT LOANS ACT, 1883.pdf - page 3]
2. Acts 26 of 1871 and 21 of 1876 repealed. —(1) The Land Improvement Act,  1871, 
and Act XXI of 1876 (An Act to amend the Land Improvement Act, 1871 ), shall, except as 
regards  the recovery of advances made before this Act comes into force and costs 
incurred by the Government in respect of such advances, be repealed.  
(2) When in any Act, Regulation or Not ification passed or issued befor e this Act 
comes into force, reference is m ade to either of those Acts, the reference shall, so far 
as may be practicable, be read as applying to this Act or the corresponding part of 
this Act.  
3. “Collector ” defined.—In this Act, “Collector ” 1means the Collector of land -revenue 
of a district, or the Deputy Commissioner, or any officer empowered by the State 
Government by name or by virtue of his office to discharge the functions of a Collector 
under this Act.  
4. Purposes for which loans may be granted under this Act. —(1) Subject to such 
rules as may be made under section 10, loans may be granted under this Act, by such 
officer as may, from time to time, be empowered in this behalf by the State Government, 
for the purpose of making any improvemen t, to any person having a right to make that 
improvement, or, with the consent of that person, to any other person.  
(2) “Improvement ” means any work which adds to the letting value of land, and includes the 
following, namely: -  
(a) the construction of wells, tanks and other works for the storage, supply or 
distribution of water for the purposes of agriculture, or for the use of men and cattle 
employed in agriculture;  
(b) the preparation of land for irrigation;  
(c) the drainage, reclamation from rivers o r other waters, or protection from floods or 
from erosion or other damage by water, of land used for agricultural purposes or wasteland 
which is culturable;  
(d) the reclamation, clearance, enclosure or permanent improvement of land for 
agricultural purposes;  
(e) the renewal or reconstruction of an
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LAND IMPROVEMENT LOANS ACT, 1883.pdf - page 3]
 permanent improvement of land for 
agricultural purposes;  
(e) the renewal or reconstruction of any of the foregoing works, or alterations therein or 
additions thereto; and  
(f) such other  works as the State Government 2*** may, from time to time, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be imp rovements for the purposes of this 
Act. 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
In section 4, in sub -section (2), for the words “any work which adds to the letting value of 
land” the words “in relation, to any land, any work which adds to the value of the land and 
which is suitable thereto as also consistent with the purpose for which it is held” shall be 
substituted.  
[Vide  Bombay Act XXVII of 1958, s. 3]  
5. Mode of dealing with applications for loans. —(1) When an application for a loan is 
made under this Act, the officer to whom the application is made may, if it is, in his 
opinion, expedient that public notice be given of the application, publish a notice, in such 
manner as the State Government may, from  time to time, direct, calling upon all persons 
                                                      
1. Cf. the definition in s. 3 (10) of the General Clauses Act,  1897 (10 of 1897).  
2. The words “with the previous sanction of the G. G. in C.” omitted  by Act 8 of 1906, s. 2.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LAND IMPROVEMENT LOANS ACT, 1883.pdf - page 4]
objecting to the loan to appear before him at a time and place fixed therein and submit their 
objections.  
(2) The officer shall consider every objection submitted under sub -section (1), and make an 
order in writing either admitting or overruling it:  
Provided that, when the question raised by an objection is, in the opinion of the officer, 
one of such a nature that it cannot be satisfactorily decided except by a Civil Court, he 
shall postpone his proceedings o n the application until the question has been so decided.  
6. Period for repayment of loans. —(1) Every loan granted under this Act shall be 
repayable by instalments (in the form of an annuity or otherwise), within such period from the 
date of the actual adv ance of the loan, or, when the loan is advanced in instalments, 1[from the 
date of the advance of the last instalment actually paid] as may,  from time to time, be fixed by 
the rules made under this Act.  
(2) The period fixed as aforesaid shall not ordinarily exceed thirty -five years.  
(3) The State Government 2***, in making 3*** the rules fixing the period, shall, in 
considering whether the period should extend to thirty -five years, or whether it should extend 
beyond thirty -five years, have regard t o the durability of the work for the purpose of which the 
loan is granted, and to the expediency of the cost of the work being paid by the generation of 
persons who will immediately benefit by the work.  
7. Recovery of loans.—(1) Subject to such rules as ma y be made under section 10, all loans 
granted under this Act, all interest (if any) chargeable thereon, and costs (if any) incurred in 
making the same, shall, when they become due, be recoverable by the Collector in all or any of the 
following modes, namel y:—  
(a) from the borrower —as if they were arrears of land -revenue due by him;  
(b) from his surety (if any) —as if they were arrears of land -revenue due by him;  
(c) out of the land for the benefit of which the loan has b
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LAND IMPROVEMENT LOANS ACT, 1883.pdf - page 4]
e arrears of land -revenue due by him;  
(c) out of the land for the benefit of which the loan has been granted —as if they were 
arrears of land -revenue due in respect of that land;  
(d)  out of the property comprised in the collateral security (if any) —according to the 
procedure for the realization of land -revenue by the sale of immovable property other than the 
land on which that revenue is due:  
Provided that no proceeding in respect of any land under clause (c) shall affect any 
interest in that land which existed before the date of the order granting the loan, other than 
the interest of the borrower, and of mortgagees of, or persons havin g charges on, that 
interest, and, where the loan is granted under section 4 with the consent of another person, 
the interest of that person, and of mortgagees of, or persons having charges on, that 
interest.  
(2) When any sum due on account of any such loan , interest or costs is paid to the 
Collector by a surety or an owner of property comprised in any collateral security, or is 
recovered under sub -section ( 1) by the Collector from a surety or out of any such property, 
the Col lector shall, on the applicatio n of the surety or the owner of that property (as the case 
may be), recover that sum on his behalf from the borrower, or out of the land for the benefit 
of which the loan has been granted, in manner provided by sub -section ( 1). 
(3) It shall be in the discre tion of a Collector acting under this section to determine the order 
in which he will resort to the various modes of recovery  permitted by it.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 1899, s. 2, for “from the date of the actual advance of the last instalment”.  
2. The words “and G. G. in C.”  omitted by Act 8 of 1906, s. 3.   
3. The words “and sanctioning”  omitted  by s. 3. ibid.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LAND IMPROVEMENT LOANS ACT, 1883.pdf - page 5]
8. Order granting loan  conclusive on certain points. —A written order under the hand 
of an officer empowered to ma ke loans under this Act granting a loan to, or with the consent 
of, a person mentioned therein, for the purpose of carrying out a work described therein, for 
the benefit of land specified therein, shall, for the purposes of this Act, be conclusive 
evidence —  
(a) that the work described is an improvement within the meaning of this Act;  
(b) that the person mentioned had at the date of the order a right to make such an 
improvement; and  
(c) that the improvement is one benefiting the land specified.  
9. Liability  of joint borrowers as among themselves. —When a loan is made under this 
Act to the members of a village -community or to any other persons on such terms that all of 
them are jointly and severally bound to the Government for the payment of the whole amount 
payable in  respect thereof, and a statement showing the portion of that amount which as 
among themselves each is bound to contribute is entered upon the order granting the loan and 
is signed by each of them and by the officer making the order, that stateme nt shall be 
conclusive evidence of the portion of that amount which as among themse lves each of those 
persons is bo und to contribute.  
10. Power to make rules. —The State Government 1*** may, from time to time, by  
notification in the Official Gazette, make r ules consistent with this Act to provide for the 
following matters, namely: —  
(a) the manner of making applications for loans;  
(b) the officers by whom loans may be granted;  
(c) the manner of conducting inquiries relative to applications for loans, and the  powers 
to be exercised by officers conducting those inquiries;  
(d) the nature of the security to be taken for the due application  and repayment of the 
money, the rate of interest at which, and the conditions under which, loans may be granted, 
and the mann er and time of granting loans;  
(e) the insp
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LAND IMPROVEMENT LOANS ACT, 1883.pdf - page 5]
tions under which, loans may be granted, 
and the mann er and time of granting loans;  
(e) the inspection of works for which loans have been granted;  
(f) the instalments by which, and the mode in which, loans, the interest to be charged on 
them and the costs incurred in the making thereof, shall be paid;  
(g) the manner  of keeping and auditing the accounts of the expenditure of loans and of the 
payments made in respect of the same; and  
(h) all other matters pertaining to the working of the Act.  
11. Exemption of impro vements from assessment to land revenue .—When land is 
improved with the aid of a loan granted under this Act, the increase in value derived from 
the improvement shall not be taken into account in revising the assessment of land -revenue 
on the land:  
Provided as follows —  
(1) where the improvement consists of the reclamation of wasteland, or of the 
irrigation of land assessed at unirrigated rates, the increase may be so taken into account 
after the expiration of such period as may be fixed by rules to be framed by the State 
Government 2*** ; 
                                                      
1. The words “subject to the control of the G.G. in C,” omitted by Act 4 of 1914, s. 2 and the 
Schedule,  Part I.  
2. The words “with the approval of the G.G. in C.” omitted  by Act 8 of 1906. s. 5.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LAND IMPROVEMENT LOANS ACT, 1883.pdf - page 6]
(2) nothing in this section shall entitle any person to call in question any assessment of 
land-revenue otherwise than as it might have been called in question if this Act had not been 
passed.  
1[12. Certain powers of State Government to be e xercisable by Board of Revenue 
or Financial  Commissioner. —The powers conferred on a State Government by sections 
4 (1), 5 ( 1) and 10 may, in a State for which there is a Board of Revenue or a Financial 
Commissioner, be exercised in the like manner and subject to the like conditions by such 
Board or Financial Commissioner, as the case may be: Provided that rules made by a 
Board of Revenue or Financial Commissioner shall be subject to the Control of the State 
Government.]  
 
 
 
 
_______ _____  
                                                      
1. S. 12 ins. by Act 4 of 1914, s. 2 and Sch., Pt. I. The original s. 12 had been rep. by Act 16 of 1908. The application of 
this section has been barred in U.P. by the U.P. Board of Revenue Act, 1922 (U.P. 12 of 1922).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LAWS LOCAL EXTENT ACT, 1874.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE LAWS LOCAL EXTENT ACT,  1874  
_____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
Preamble  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Interpretation clause . 
3. Local extent of Acts in first schedule . 
4. Local extent of enactments in second schedule . 
5. Local extent of enactment s in third schedule . 
6. Local extent of enactments in fourth schedule . 
7. Local extent of enactments in fifth schedule . 
8. Savings . 
9. [Repealed .]. 
FIRST SCHEDULE . 
SECOND SCHEDULE . 
THIRD SCHEDULE . 
FOURTH SCHEDULE . 
FIFTH SCHEDULE . 
SIXTH SCHEDULE . 
SEVENTH SCHEDULE . 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LAWS LOCAL EXTENT ACT, 1874.pdf - page 2]
2 
 THE LAWS LOCAL EXTENT ACT,  1874  
ACT NO. 15 OF 18741 
[8th December, 1874 .] 
An Act for declaring the local extent of certain Enactments, and for other purposes . 
Preamble .—WHEREAS  it is expedient to declare the local extent of certain Acts passed by the Governor 
General of India in Council, the Legislative Council of India, and the Council of the Governor General of 
India assembled for the purpose of making Laws and Regulations;  
AND WHEREAS  it is also expedient to consolidate the laws relating to the local extent of certain Acts 
and Regulations in the Presidencies of Fort St. George and Bombay, and in the Lower and the North -
Western Provinces of the  Presidency of Fort William in Bengal;  
It is hereby declared and enacted as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Laws Local Extent Act, 1874.  
2. Interpretation clause .—In this Act the expression “Scheduled Districts” means the territories 
mentioned in the sixth schedule hereto annexed.  
3. Local extent of Acts in first schedule .—The Acts mentioned in the first schedule hereto annexed 
are now in force  2[in the whole of India except  3[the territories which, immediately before the                          
1st November, 1956, were comprised in Part B States] and] the Scheduled Districts.  
4. Local extent of enactments in second schedule .—The enactments mentioned in the second 
schedule hereto annexed are now in force throughout the whole of the territories now subject to the 
government of the Governor of Fort St. George in Council, except the Scheduled Districts subject to such 
government.  
5. Local extent of enactment s in third schedule .—The enactments mentioned in the third schedule 
hereto annexed are now in force throughout the whole of the territories now subject to the government of 
the Governor of Bom bay in Council, except the Scheduled Districts subject to such government.  
6. Local extent of enactments in fourth schedule .—The enactments mentioned in the fo
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LAWS LOCAL EXTENT ACT, 1874.pdf - page 2]
 government.  
6. Local extent of enactments in fourth schedule .—The enactments mentioned in the fourth schedule 
hereto  annexed are now in force throughout the whole of the territories now subject to the government of 
the Lieutenant -Governor of Bengal, except the Scheduled Districts subject to such government.  
7. Local extent of enactments in fifth schedule .—The enactments mentioned in the fifth schedule 
hereto annexed are now in force throughout the whole of the territories now subject to the government of 
the Lieutenant -Governor of the North -West ern Provinces of the Presidency of Fort William, except the 
Scheduled Districts subject to such government.  
8. Savings .—Nothing herein contained shall — 
(a) bar the power of the Ce ntral Government or the State Government under any law for the time being  
in force, to extend to any place any Act mentioned in the said first schedule;  
                                                           
1. This Act has been  rep., so far as it relates to any enactment replaced by the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 (8 of 1890), as on 
1-7-1890, in certain partially excluded areas in the Madras Province : See Madras Regulation 6 of 1940.  
2. Subs . by the A.O. 1950 for “throughout all the Provinces of India, except”.  
3. Subs. by  the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956 , for “Part B States” (w.e.f. 1 -11-1956).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LAWS LOCAL EXTENT ACT, 1874.pdf - page 3]
3 
 (b) extend any Act empowering the State Government to extend the same or any part thereof, or affect 
in any manner the exercise of such power;  
(c) affect the operation of any Act or Regulation heretofore extended to or declared to be in force in 
any of the Scheduled Districts;  
(d) revive any enactment which has been repealed either generally or with reference to some special 
subject;  
1*    *   *  *   * 
(j) extend to any of the towns of Calcutta, Madras and Bombay any , law not now in force therein;  
2[(jj) extend to Pargana Bhadohi or Pargana Kera Mangror in the Mirzapur district, or to Pargana Kaswa 
Raja in the Benares district, any law not now in force therein];  
(k) affect the operation of any enactment not mentioned in any of the schedules hereto annexed.  
9. Enactments repeal ed.—[Repealed by the Repealing Act, 1876  (12 of 1876 )]. 
  
                                                           
1. Clause s (e) and ( h) were  rep. by Act 8 of  1887, clause ( f) by Act 12 of 1891, clause ( g) by Act 8 of 1890 and clause ( i) by Act 4 
of 1894.   
2. Ins. by Act 14 of 1881, s.15.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LAWS LOCAL EXTENT ACT, 1874.pdf - page 4]
4 
 FIRST SCHEDULE1 
(See section 3)  
ACTS OF THE SUPREME COUNCIL  
Year and Number   
Subject  
21837,  IV . . . . Power to acquire  land.  
                                                           
1. Act 15 of 1874 having been  rep. so far as it relates to the following enactments, by the Acts noted against each, the references to those enactments have 
been  omitted  from this schedule: — 
Enactments omitted   
Repealing Acts  
Act 26 of 1836  . . . . . . . Act 12 of 1927.  
Act 6 of 1840  . . . . . . . Act 26 of 1881.  
Act 11 of 1841  . . . . . . . Act 8 of 1887.  
Act 18 of 1841  . . . . . . . Act 11 of 1878.  
Act 19 of 1841  . . . . . . . Act 12 of 1927.  
Act 9 of 1842  . . . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
Act 12 of 1842  . . . . . . . Act 8 of 1887.  
Act 20 of 1847  . . . . . . . Act 12 of 1927.  
Act 34 of 1850  . . . . . . . The A.O. 1937.  
Act 30 of 1852  . . . . . . . Act 12 of 1927.  
Act 33 of 1852  . . . . . . . Act 8 of 1887.  
Act 18 of 1854  . . . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
Act 18 of 1854  . . . . . . . The A.O. 1937.  
Act 1 of 1859  . . . . . . . Act 21 of 1923.  
Act 3 of 1859  . . . . . . . Act 8 of 1887.  
Act 8 of 1859  . . . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
Act 14 of 1859, s. 15 . . . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
Act 15 of 1859  . . . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
Act 27 of 1860  . . . . . . . Act 7 of 1889.  
Act 9 of 1861  . . . . . . . Act 8 of 1890.  
Act 23 of 1861  . . . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
Act 6 of 1863  . . . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
Act 6 of 1864  . . . . . . . Act 12 of 1927.  
Act 11 of 1865  . . . . . . . Act 9 of 1887.  
Act 21 of 1865  . . . . . . . Act 12 of 1927.  
Act 5 of 1866  . . . . . . . Act 12 of 1927.  
Act 10 of 1866  . . . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
Act 10 of 1867  . . . . . . . Act 9 of 1887.  
Act 10 of 1868  . . . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
Act 15 of 1869  . . . . . . . Act 12 of 1927.  
Act 1 of 1870  . . . . . . . Act 12 of 1927.  
 
2. Rep. by the A.O. 1950.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LAWS LOCAL EXTENT ACT, 1874.pdf - page 4]
2 of 1927.  
 
2. Rep. by the A.O. 1950.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LAWS LOCAL EXTENT ACT, 1874.pdf - page 5]
5 
 Year and Number   Subject  
11838,  XXV  . . . . Wills executed before the 1st January, 1866.  
21839,  XXIX  . . . . Dower, when marriage was contracted before 1st January, 1866.  
11839,  XXX  . . . . Inheritance, where descent took place before 1st January, 1866.  
1839,  XXXII  . . . . Interest.  
1841,  X . . . . Registration of ships.  
21843,  V . . . . Slavery.  
31850,  V . . . . Coasting Trade.  
1850,  XI . . . . Navigation Laws.  
41850,  XII . . . . Default of Public Accountants.  
1850,  XVIII  . . . . Protection of Judicial Officers.  
1850,  XIX . . . . Binding of Apprentices.  
1850,  XXI . . . . Non-forfeiture of rights by loss of Caste.  
1850,  XXXVII  . . . . Inquiries into the behaviour of Public Servants.  
51853,  II . . . . Burdens on land.  
21854,  XXXI  . . . . Barring entails: Conveyances by married women.  
21855,  XI . . . . Mesne profits and improvements.  
1855,  XII . . . . Executors and Administrators.  
1855,  XIII . . . . Compensation for loss occasioned by death caused by actionable wrong.  
21855,  XXIII  . . . . Administration of mortgaged estates in cases of descents occurring or devises made 
before the 1st January, 1866.  
 61855,  XXIV  . . . . Penal  servitude . 
1855,  XXVIII  . . . . Interest.  
1856,  IX . . . . Bills of Lading.  
  
                                                           
1. Rep. by the A.O. 1950.  
2. Rep.  by Act 48 of 1952.  
3. Rep. by Act 34 of 1939.  
4. Rep. in Assam by Regulation 1 of 1886 . 
5. Rep. by the A.O. 1950.  
6. Rep. by Act 17 of 1949 . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LAWS LOCAL EXTENT ACT, 1874.pdf - page 6]
6 
 Year and Number   Subject  
11856,  XI . . . . Desertion by European Soldiers.  
1856,  XV . . . . Marriage of Hindu Widows.  
21857,  XI . . . . Offences against the State.  
 21857,  XXV  . . . . Forfeiture by Mutineers.  
31858,  XXXV  . . . . Estates of Lunatics not subject  to jurisdiction of Supreme Courts.  
31858,  XXXVI  . . . . Lunatic Asylums.  
1859,  IX . . . . Section s 16, 17, 18 and 20 —Forfeitures.  
1860,  XXI . . . . Registration of Societies.  
1862,  III . . . . Government Seal.  
1863,  XVI . . . . Excise Duty payable on  Spirits used in Arts and Manufactures.  
41863,  XXIII  . . . . Claim s to waste -lands.  
51863,  XXXI  . . . . Gazette of India.  
61864,  III . . . . Foreigners.  
1865,  III . . . . Common Carriers.  
71865, XV . . . . Marriage and Divorce among Parsees.  
1866,  XXI . . . . Dissolution of Marriages of Native Converts.  
81866,  XXVIII  . . . . Trustees and Mortgagees' Powers.  
1867,  XXV  . . . . Printing Presses, etc.  
 
  
                                                           
1. Rep. by the A.O. 1950.  
2. Rep. by Act 4 of 1922.  
3. Rep. by Act 4 of 1912.  
4. Rep. in Bombay by Bombay Act 9 of 1943.  
5. Rep  by Act 1 of 1938.  
6. Rep. by Act 31 of 1946.  
7. Rep. by Act 3 of 1936.  
8. Rep. by Act 48 of 1952.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LAWS LOCAL EXTENT ACT, 1874.pdf - page 7]
7 
 1SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 4)  
(a) MADRAS REGULATIONS  
Year and  Number   
Subject  
1802,  III (s 1, part of s. 16 only)  Procedure of Civil Courts.  
1802,  XIX (s. 2) . . Covenanted Civil Servants forbidden to lend.  
1802,  XXV  . . . . Settlement of Land -revenue.  
1802,  XXVI  (ss. 1, 2 and 3 only)  Registration of malguzari land.  
2[1802,  XXIX  . . . . Karnams.  
1803,  I . . . . Board of Revenue.  
1803,  II . . . . Conduct of Collectors, etc.  
    
                                                           
1. Act 15 of 1874 having been  rep. so far as it relates to the following enactments, by the Acts noted against each, the references 
to those enactments have been  omitted  from the Schedule: — 
Enactments omitted   
Repealing Acts  
Madras Regulation 3 of 1802, s. 11 . . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
Madras Regulation 5 of 1802, s. 30 . . . . . . Act 11 of 1901.  
Madras Regulation 13 of 1802  . . . . . . Act 11 of 1901.  
Madras Regulation 1 of 1805  . . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
Madras Regulation 2 of 1807  . . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
Madras Regulation 4 of 1816  . . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
Madras Regulation 9 of 1816, s. 43 . . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
Madras Regulation 14 of 1816  . . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
Madras Regulation 5 of 1816  . . . . . . Act 12 of 1927.  
Madras Regulation 1 of 1819  . . . . . . Act 12 of 1876.  
Madras Regulation 2 of 1819  . . . . . . The A.O. 1937.  
Madras Regulation 4 of 1821, s. 4 . . . . . . Act 12 of 1876.  
Madras Regulation 3 of 1831  . . . . . . Act 12 of 1876.  
Madras Regulation 7 of 1832  . . . . . . Act 12 of 1876.  
Madras Regulation 11 of 1832  . . . . . . Act 6 of 1878.  
Madras Regulation 14 of 1832  . . . . . . Act 13 of 1889.  
 
2. This Regulation has been  rep. by locally by Madras Act 2 of 1894.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LAWS LOCAL EXTENT ACT, 1874.pdf - page 8]
8 
 Year and Number   Subject  
11804,  V . . . . Court of Wards.  
1806,  II 2(s. 7, clause second)]  Collectors and Karnams.  
31808,  VII . . . . Martial Law.  
1816,  XI . . . . ss. 8, 9, 10 —Heads of villages: section 11, clause 
1—stolen property: section 13 —discovery of 
corpses: section 14 —register of persons confined by 
heads of villages; and section 47 —Magistrates 
charged with maintenance of peace.  
4[1816,  XII . . . . Reference of claims regarding land and produce to 
Village and District Panchayats.  
1817,  VII . . . . Maintenance of Bridges, etc.; Escheats.  
1817,  VIII (s. 9 only)  Sale for arrears of revenue of estate belonging to 
Native Officer or Soldier.  
1822,  IV . . . . Explanation of Madras Regulation XXV, 1802.  
51822,  VII (Clause 1 of s. 3 only)  Native Officers in Revenue and other Public 
Departments.  
1822,  
1823,  IX 
III . . . . 
. . . .  
Embezzlement by public servant s and 
malversation in revenue -matters . 
1828,  VII . . . . Power s of Subordinate and Assistant Collectors.  
1829,  V . . . . Hindu Wills and Estates.  
1830,  I . . . . Prohibition of Widow -burning.  
1831,  V (s. 7, clause 2 only)  Liability of Ministerial Officers for reception of 
improperly stamped document.  
61831,  VI . . . . Hereditary Village Offices.  
                                                           
1. Act 15 of 1874, so far as it relates to the portions of Madras Regulation 5 of 1804 which were  rep. by the Guardians and Wards 
Act, 1890 (8 of 1890), is  rep. by the latter Act. The Regulation was  rep. by the Madras Court of Wards Act, 1902, (Madras 1 of 
1902).  
2. Parts of ss. 1 and 7 were originally referred to in this Schedule. Of the entire Regulation only th e second clause of Section 7 is now in 
force,  see Part III of the Schedule to the Repealing Act, 1876 (12 of 1876).  
3. Rep. by Act 4 of 1922, Section 3 and Schedule.  
4. Madras Regulation 12 of 1816 has been  rep. by the Madras Survey and Boundaries Act, 1897 (Ma
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LAWS LOCAL EXTENT ACT, 1874.pdf - page 8]
.  
4. Madras Regulation 12 of 1816 has been  rep. by the Madras Survey and Boundaries Act, 1897 (Madras 4 of 1897) so far as it applies to cases of 
claims to lands or crops, the validity of which claims may depend upon the determination of an uncertain and disputed boundar y or land -mark.  
5. Rep. by the A.O. 1937.  
6. Rep. by Madras Act 3 of 1895.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LAWS LOCAL EXTENT ACT, 1874.pdf - page 9]
9 
 Year and Number   Subject  
11831,  X . . . . Prohibition of Sale of Estates of Minors for Arrears 
of Revenue.  
1832 , III . . . . Limitation for Suits against orders of Revenue 
Authorities under Madras Regulation VII of 1828.  
(b) ACTS OF THE SUPREME COUNCIL RELATING TO T HE MADRAS PRESIDENCY2 
Year and Number   
Subject  
1837,  XXXVI  . . . . Criminal Jurisdiction of Collectors.  
1839,  VII . . . . Tahsildars.  
31840,  VIII . . . . Awards of Panchayats.  
41846,  I . . . . Pleaders.  
1849,  X . . . . Commissioners of Revenue.  
41853,  XX . . . . Pleaders.  
1857,  VII . . . . Uncovenanted Agency.  
1858,  I . . . . Compulsory Labour.  
1859,  XXIV  . . . . Police.  
 
  
                                                           
1. Act 15 of 1874, so far as it relates to Madras Regulation 10 of 1831, s. 3, is rep. by Act 8 of 1890.  
2. Act 15 of 1874 having been  rep. so far as it relates to the following enactments, by the Acts noted against each, the references to those enactments 
have been  omitted  from this Schedule: — 
Enactments omitted   
Repealing Acts  
Act 12 of 1838  . . . . . . . Act 6 of 1878.  
Act 17 of 1840  . . . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
Act 7 of 1852  . . . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
Act 6 of 1844  . . . . . . . Act 3 of 1937.  
Act 9 of 1846  . . . . . . . Act 12 of 1927.  
Act 10 of 1855, s. 10 . . . . . . . Act 11 of 1901.  
Act 14 of 1855  . . . . . . . Act 8 of 1887.  
Act 21 of 1855  . . . . . . . Act 12 of 1927.  
Act 8 of 1856  . . . . . . . Act 12 of 1927.  
Act 14 of 1858  . . . . . . . Act 8 of 1890.  
Act 28 of 1860  . . . . . . . Act 12 of 1927.  
Act 11 of 1869  . . . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
Act 24 of 1869  . . . . . . . Act 18 of 1877.  
 
3. Rep.  by Madras Act 7 of 1931.  
4. As to the repeal of Acts 1 of 1846 and 20 of 1853 in the Madras Presidency,  see the Legal Practitioners Act, 1879 (18 of 1879), ss. 1 and   42. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LAWS LOCAL EXTENT ACT, 1874.pdf - page 9]
  42. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LAWS LOCAL EXTENT ACT, 1874.pdf - page 10]
10 
 1THIRD SCHEDULE  
 (See section 5)  
(a) BOMBAY REGULATIONS  
Year and 
Number   
Subject   
1827,  II . . . . Section 21 (caste questions);  2[* * *]  
1827,  IV . . . . Section 26 (law applicable to suits): section 69, clauses second and third (attachment 
and distraint of crops).  
1827,  V . . . . Preamble: Section 9 (acknowledgments of debt): section 14 (interest): section 15 
(mortgages and pledges).  
1827,  VIII . . . . Administration of Estates.  
1827,  XII . . . . Section 19 (Magistrate's power to make rules): section 20 (standards of weights and 
measures): section 27, clause 2 (supervision of suspected persons): section 37, clauses 
first and second (responsibility of villages for robberies).  
1827,  XIII . . . . Section 34, clause third (letter substituted for summons).  
1827,  XXII  . . . . Sections 40, 41, 42, 43 (passage of troops).  
31830,  V . . . . Section 1 (Revenue Commissioners): Section 2, clauses 1, 2, 3 (Collectors and              
Sub-Collectors).  
1830,  XIII . . . . Civil jurisdiction of Jagirdars.  
31831,  XV . . . . Village Patels.  
31832,  II . . . . Realization of Revenue.  
31833,  V . . . . Hereditary Officers.  
 
 
                                                           
1. Act 15 of 1874 having been  rep. so far as it relates to the following enactments by the Acts noted against each, the references to those enactments 
have been  omitted  from the Schedule: — 
Enactments omitted   
Repealing Acts  
Bombay Regulation 12 of 1827, preamble  . . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
Bombay Regulation 16 of 1827,  . . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
Bombay Regulation 21 of 1827, Sections 1 -16, 46, 54 -73 . . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
Bombay Regulation 22 of 1827, Sections 18 -20, 45 -47 . . . . . . Act 13 of 1889.  
Bombay Regulation 25 of 1827,  . . . . . . The A.O. 1937.  
 
2. Certain words  rep.by Act 12 of 1927.  
3. Bombay Regulation 4 of 1827, Section 69, and Bombay Regulations 5 of 1830, 15 of 1831, 2 of 1832 and 5 of 1833  re
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LAWS LOCAL EXTENT ACT, 1874.pdf - page 10]
ion 4 of 1827, Section 69, and Bombay Regulations 5 of 1830, 15 of 1831, 2 of 1832 and 5 of 1833  rep. locally by Bombay Act 
5 of 1879 . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LAWS LOCAL EXTENT ACT, 1874.pdf - page 11]
11 
 (b) ACTS OF THE SUPREME COUNCIL RELATING TO T HE BOMBAY PRESIDENCY1  
Year and Number   
Subject  
41838,  XVI . . . . Judiciary.  
21838,  XVIII  . . . . Sureties.  
1838,  XIX . . . . Coasting Vessels.  
31839,  XX . . . . Revenue.  
41840,  XV . . . . Agents of Foreign Sovereigns.  
21842,  XIII . . . . Revenue.  
21842,  XVII  . . . . Revenue Commissioners.  
41844,  XIX . . . . Abolition of Town Duties.  
51846,  I . . . . Pleaders.  
21846,  III . . . . Sections 1, 5 and 6 —Boundary Marks.  
1853, XX . . . . Pleaders.  
 
  
                                                           
1. Act 15 of 1874 having been  rep. so far as it relates to the following enactments, by the Acts noted against each, the references 
to those enactments have been  omitted  from this Schedule: — 
Enactments omitted   
Repealing Acts  
Act 11 of 1843  . . . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
Act 3 of 1852  . . . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
Act 21 of 1852  . . . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
Act 10 of 1855, s. 10 . . . . . . . Act 11 of 1901.  
Act 8 of 1856  . . . . . . . Act 9 of 1894.  
Act 20 of 1864  . . . . . . . Act 8 of 1890.  
 
2. Acts 18 of 1838, 13 and 17 of 1842 and 3 of 1846 rep. locally by the Bombay Land -revenue Code, 1879 (Bombay 5 of 1879) 
Act 18 of 1838 rep. by Act 32 of 1940 . 
3. Rep. by Act 48 of 1952 and Bombay Act 18 of 1953.  
4. Rep. in Bombay by Bombay Act 18 of 1953.  
5. As to the repeal of Acts 1 of 1846 and 20 of 1853 in the Bombay Presidency, see the Legal Practitioners Act, 1879 (18 of 
1879), ss. 1 and 42.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LAWS LOCAL EXTENT ACT, 1874.pdf - page 12]
12 
 1FOURTH SCHEDULE   
(See section 6)  
(a) BENGAL REGULATIONS (LOWER PROVINCES ) 
Year  and 
Number   
Subject  
1793,  I . . . . Perpetual Settlement.  
1793,  II . . . . Collection of land -revenue.  
1793,  VIII . . . . Rules for Decennial Settlement.  
1793,  XI . . . . Native laws of inheritance to Revenue -paying land.  
1793,  XIX . . . . Title to lands exempt from Revenue.  
1793,  XXXVII  . . . . Title to lands exempt from Revenue under badshahi grants.  
1793,  XXXVIII  . . . . Section 1 —Preamble: Section 2 —prohibition of loans by Covenanted Servants.  
1794,  III . . . . Sections 13, 16, 17, 18, 19 and 20—Arrears of Revenue.  
1799,  V . . . . Wills and Intestacies of Natives.  
1800,  VIII . . . . Pargana Register of Lands.  
1801,  I . . . . Arrears of Revenue: Division of Joint Estates.  
21804,  X . . . . Punishment by Courts -martial of certain State offences.  
1806,  XI . . . . Passage of Troops.  
                                                           
1. Act 15 of 1874 having been  rep. so far as it relates to the following enactments, by the Acts noted against each, the references 
to those enactments have been  omitted  from this Schedule: — 
Enactments omitted   
Repealing Acts  
Bengal Regulation 48 of 1793  . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
Bengal Regulation 3 of 1794, s. 12 . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
Bengal Regulation 58 of 1795, ss. 3 and 4  . . . . . Act 12 of 1876.  
Bengal Regulation 15 of 1797  . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
Bengal Regulation 1 of 1798  . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
Bengal Regulation 17 of 1806, ss. 7 and 8  . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
Bengal Regulation 20 of 1810  . . . . . Act 13 of 1889.  
Bengal Regulation 11 of 1811  . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
Bengal Regulation 19 of 1814  . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
Bengal Regulation 5 of 1817  . . . . . Act 6 of 1878.  
Bengal Regulation 20 of 1817, ss. 28 and 32  . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
Bengal Regulation 3 of 1818  . . . . . The A.O. 1937.  
Bengal Regulation 6 of 1819  . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LAWS LOCAL EXTENT ACT, 1874.pdf - page 12]
2 of 1891.  
Bengal Regulation 3 of 1818  . . . . . The A.O. 1937.  
Bengal Regulation 6 of 1819  . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
Bengal Regulation 20 of 1825  . . . . . Act 10 of 1882.  
Bengal Regulation 4 of 1829  . . . . . Act 12 of 1876.  
 
2. Rep. by the Special Laws Repeal Act, 1922 (4 of 1922), s. 3 and Schedule.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LAWS LOCAL EXTENT ACT, 1874.pdf - page 13]
13 
         Year and Number  Subject  
1810,  XIX . . . . Maintenance of Bridges, etc.; Escheats  
1812,  V . . . . Collection of Land -revenue.  
1812,  XI . . . . Removal of Foreign Emigrants.  
1817,  XX . . . . Section 29 —Criminal process in Salt and Opium Departments: section 30, clauses 
1, 2 and 5 —Building forts; Collecting sepoys and stores; Encroaching on roads.  
1819,  II . . . . Resumption of Revenue -free lands.  
1821,  IV . . . . Power s of Collectors and Magistrates.  
11822,  III . . . . Board s of Land -revenue.  
1822,  XI . . . . Section 36 —Khas management of purchases by Government: section 38 —non-
liability of Government for errors of Courts.  
1823,  VI . . . . Indigo Contracts.  
1823,  VII . . . . Prohibition of loans to Covenanted Civil Servants.  
1825,  VI . . . . Passage of Troops.  
1825,  IX . . . . Defaulting Malguzars.  
1825,  XI . . . . Alluvion and diluvion.  
1825,  XIII . . . . Settlement of resumed Lakhiraj land.  
1825,  XIV . . . . Authority to confirm Lakhiraj tenures; Native grants.  
11827,  III . . . . Section 5 —Evidence.  
1827,  V . . . . Management of Estates under attachment.  
1828,  III . . . . Appeals from decisions of Revenue Authorities.  
1828,  IV . . . . Section 1 and section  2, clause 4 —Time during which Collectors are to be 
considered engaged in making settlements.  
1829,  I . . . . Commissioners of Revenue and Board of Revenue.  
1829,  XVII  . . . . Widow -burning.  
1830,  V . . . . Sections 1 and 5 —Indigo Contracts.  
                                                           
1. Rep.by the Bengal Board s of Revenue Act, 1913 (Bengal 2 of 1913).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LAWS LOCAL EXTENT ACT, 1874.pdf - page 14]
14 
 (b) ACTS OF THE SUPREME COUNCIL RELATING TO T HE LOWER PROVINCES1  
Year and Number   
Subject  
1836,  X . . . . Indigo Contracts.  
1836,  XXI . . . . Creating Zilas.  
1841,  XII . . . . Section 2 —No Interest on arrears of Land -revenue.  
1847,  IX . . . . Assessment of new  lands.  
1848,  XX . . . . Land -revenue.  
21850,  XLIV  . . . . Board of revenue.  
31855,  XXXII  . . . . Embankments.  
1856,  XII . . . . Civil Court Amins.  
1857,  XIII . . . . Opium.  
1858,  XXXI  . . . . Settlement of Alluvion.  
1859,  XI . . . . Sales for Arrears of Revenue.  
 
  
                                                           
1. Act 15 of 1874 having been  rep. so far  as it relates to the following enactments, by the Acts noted against each, the references 
to those enactments have been  omitted  from this Schedule: — 
Enactments omitted   
Repealing Acts  
Act 20 of 1836  . . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
Act 11 of 1838  . . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
Act 19 of 1853, s. 26 . . . . . . Act 1 of 1903.  
Act 20 of 1856  . . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
Act 21 of 1856  . . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
Act 40 of 1858  . . . . . . Act 8 of 1890.  
Act 23 of 1860  . . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
 
2. Rep. by the Bengal Board of Revenue Act, 1913 (Bengal 2 of 1913).  
3. Act 32 of 1855 has been  rep. locally  in Bengal by the Bengal Embankments Act, 1873 (Bengal 6 of 1873).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LAWS LOCAL EXTENT ACT, 1874.pdf - page 15]
15 
 FIFTH SCHEDULE   
(See section 7)  
(a) BENGAL REGULATIONS (NORTH -WESTERN PROVINCES )1  
Year and Number   
Subject  
1793,  XXXVIII  . . . . Section 1 —Preamble: section 2 —prohibition of loans by Covenanted Servants.  
1799,  V . . . . Wills and  Administration to Natives.  
2[1804,  X . . . . Punishment by Courts -martial of certain State offences.  
1806,  XI . . . . Passage of Troops.  
1812,  XI . . . . Removal of Foreign Emigrants.  
1822,  XI . . . . Section 38 —Non-liability of Government for errors of Courts.  
1823,  VI . . . . Indigo Contracts.  
1823,  VII . . . . Prohibition of loans to Covenanted Civil Servants.  
1825,  VI . . . . Passage of Troops.  
1825,  XI . . . . Alluvion and Diluvion.  
1827,  III . . . . Section 5 —Evidence.  
1827,  V . . . . Management of Estates under Attachment.  
1829,  XVII  . . . . Widow -burning.  
                                                           
1. Act 15 of 1874 having been  rep. so far as it relates to the following enactments, by the Acts noted against each, the references 
to those enactments have been  omitted  from this Schedule: — 
Enactments omitted   
Repealing Acts  
Bengal Regulation 1 of 1798  . . . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
Bengal Regulation 17 of 1806, ss. 7 and 8  . . . . . . . Act 12  of 1891.  
Bengal Regulation 19 of 1810  . . . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
Bengal Regulation 20 of 1810  . . . . . . . Act 13 of 1889.  
Bengal Regulation 5 of 1817  . . . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
Bengal Regulation 3 of 1818  . . . . . . . The A.O. 1937.  
Bengal Regulation 6 of 1819  . . . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
Bengal Regulation 20 of 1825  . . . . . . . Act 10 of 1882.  
Bengal Regulation 6 of 1831, s. 6 . . . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
Bengal Regulation 11 of 1831, ss. 4 and 8  . . . . . . . Act 12 of 1891.  
Bengal  Regulation 1 of 1833  . . . . . . . Act 8 of 1875.  
 
2. Rep.  by Act 4 of 1922, s. 3 and Schedule.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LAWS LOCAL EXTENT ACT, 1874.pdf - page 15]
3 and Schedule.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LAWS LOCAL EXTENT ACT, 1874.pdf - page 16]
16 
 Year and Number                              Subject  
1830,  V . . . . Sections 1 and 5 —Indigo Contracts.  
1831,  XI . . . . Sections 1, 2, 5, 6 —Police -powers of Tahsildars.  
1833,  IX . . . . Deputy Collectors.  
(b) ACTS OF THE SUPREME COUNCIL RELATING TO THE NORTH -WESTERN PROVINCES1 
Year and Number   
Subject  
1836,  X . . . . Indigo Contracts.  
1854,  XVI . . . . Police.  
1856,  XII . . . . Civil Court Amins.  
21856,  XX . . . . Chaukidars.  
1857,  XIII . . . . Opium.  
 
  
                                                           
1. Act 15 of 1874 having been  rep.so far as it relates to the following enactments, by the Acts noted against each, the references to 
those enactments have been  omitted  from this Schedule: — 
Enactments omitted   
Repealing Acts  
Act 21 of 1836  . . . . . . . Act 1 of 1903.  
Act 19 of 1853, s. 26 . . . . . . . Act 1 of 1903.  
Act 40 of 1858  . . . . . . . Act 8 of 1890.  
 
2. Act 20 of 1856 has been  rep. in the U.P. by the U.P. Town Areas Act, 1914 (U.P. 2 of 1914), s. 41. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LAWS LOCAL EXTENT ACT, 1874.pdf - page 17]
17 
 SIXTH SCHEDULE   
(See sections 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7)  
PART I  
SCHEDULED DISTRICTS , MADRAS  
I.—In Ganjam  
(1) The Gumsur Maliahs, including Chokapad.  
(2) The Surada Ma liahs. 
(3) The Chinna Kimedi Maliahs.  
(4) The Pedda Kimedi Maliahs.  
(5) The Bodaguda Maliahs.  
(6) The Surangi Maliahs.  
(7) The Parla Kimedi Maliahs.  
(8) The Muttas of Korada and Ronaba (otherwise called Srikarma).  
1[* * *]  
(10) The Jurada Maliah.  
(11) The Jalantra Maliah.  
(12) The Mandasa Maliah.  
(13) The B udarashinghi Maliah.  
(14) The Kuttingia Maliah.  
II.—In Vizagapatam  
(1) The Jeypur Zamindari.  
(2) Golconda Hills, west of the River Boderu.  
(3) The Madugol Maliahs.  
(4) The Kasipur Zamindari.  
                                                           
1. Item (9), “The Chighatti Maliah”, was  rep. by Act 12 of 1891.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LAWS LOCAL EXTENT ACT, 1874.pdf - page 18]
18 
 (5) The Panchipenta Maliahs.  
(6) Mondemkolla, in the Merangi Zami ndari.  
1[(7) The Konda Mutta of Merangi.]  
(8) The Gumma and Konda Muttas of Kurpam.  
(9) The Kottam, Ram and Konda Muttas of Palkonda.  
III.—In the Godavari District2 
(1) The Bhadrachalam Taluq.  
(2) The Rakapilli Taluq.  
(3) The Rampa Country.  
IV.—In the Indian Ocean  
The Laccadive Islands, including Minicoy.  
PART II  
SCHEDULED DISTRICTS , BOMBAY  
I.—The Province of Sindh3  
4[* * *]  
III.—Aden.5  
IV.—The villages belonging to the following Mehwassi Chiefs: — 
(1) The Parvi of Kathi.  
(2) The Parvi of Nal.  
(3) The Parvi of Singpur.  
(4) Walwi of Gaohalli.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 12 of 1891, for “(7) The Konda Mutta of Belgam”.  
2. The Ducharti and Guditeru Muttas in the Golconda Hills  have been transferred from the Vizagapatam to the Godavari 
district.  See Fort St. George Gazette, 1881, Part I, p. 336.  
Certain villages and estates in the Godavari district became Scheduled Districts for the purposes of the Scheduled Districts Act, 
1874 (14 of 1874); but they are not “Scheduled Districts” within the meaning of the Laws Local Extent Act, 1874.  
3. Ceased to be part of India from 15 -8-1947.  
4. Item II, “The Panch Mahals”, was  rep. by Act 7 of 1885, with effect from 1 -5-1885. 
5.  Aden ceased to be part of India from 1 -4-1937.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LAWS LOCAL EXTENT ACT, 1874.pdf - page 19]
19 
 (5) The Wassawa of Chikhli.  
(6) The Parvi of Nawalpur.  
PART III  
SCHEDULED DISTRICTS , BENGAL  
I.—The Jalpaiguri and Darjeeling   1[Districts].  
II.—The Hill Tracts of Chittagong2.   
III.—The Santhal Parganas.  
IV.—The Chutia Nagpur Division.  3  
V.—The Mahals of Angul and Banki.4  
PART IV  
SCHEDULED DISTRICTS , NORTH -WESTERN PROVINCES  
5[* * *]  
II.—The Province of Kumaon and Garhwal.  
III.—The Tarai Parganas, comprising —Bazpur, Kashipur, Jaspur, Rudarpur, Godarpur, Kilpuri, 
Nanak -Mattha and Bilheri.  
IV.—In the Mirzapur district — 
(1) The tappas of Agori Khas and South Kon in the Pargana of Agori.  
(2) The tappa of British Singrauli in the Pargana of Singrauli.  
(3) The tappas of Phulwa, Dudhi and Barha in the Pargana of Bichipar . 
(4) The portion lying to the South of the Kaimor Range.  
                                                           
1. Subs . by Act 12 of 1891, for “Divisions”.  
2. Ceased to be part of India from 15 -8-1947.  
3. The Thanas of Raipur and Khattra, which formerly formed portion of the Chutia Nagpur Division, were transferred to the distri ct 
of Bankura, and ceased to be a Scheduled District on 1 -10-1879.  See the Raipur and Khattra Laws Act, 1879 (19 of 1879).  
The Estate of Porahat now forms part of the Chutia Nagpur Division Scheduled District for the purpose s of the Scheduled 
Districts Act, 1874,  see the Porahat Estate Act, 1893 (2 of 1893), s. 3, but it is not a “Scheduled District” within the meaning of 
the Laws Local Extent Act, 1874.  
4. The Mahal of Banki ceased t o be a Scheduled District on 1 -4-1882,  see the Banki Laws Act, 1881 (25 of 1 881).  
The Khondmals in Orissa, which previously formed part of the Angul district [ see the Angul Laws Regulation, 1913 (3 of 1913)] 
and now form and independent district [ see the Khondmals Laws Regulation, 1936 (4 of 1936)] became a Scheduled District for 
the purposes of the Scheduled Districts Act, 1874 (14 of 1874); but they are not “Scheduled 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LAWS LOCAL EXTENT ACT, 1874.pdf - page 19]
ct for 
the purposes of the Scheduled Districts Act, 1874 (14 of 1874); but they are not “Scheduled District” within the meaning of t he 
Laws Local Extent Act, 1874.  
5. Item I, “The Jhansi Division, comprising the districts of Jhansi, Jalaun and Laltapur”, was  rep. by Act 20 of 1890, s. 8(1).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LAWS LOCAL EXTENT ACT, 1874.pdf - page 20]
20 
 1[* * *]  
VI.—The tract of country know as Jaunsar Bawar in the Dehra Dun district.  
PART V  
SCHEDULED DISTRICTS , PUNJAB  
The districts2 of Hazara, Peshawar, Kohat, Bannu, Dera Ismail Khan, Dera Ghazi K han, Lahaul and 
Spiti.  
PART VI  
3SCHEDULED DISTRICTS , CENTRAL PROVINCES  
Chattisgarh Zamindaris  
1. Khariar.  13. Matin.  
2. Bindra Nawagarh.  14. Uprora.  
3. Sahezpur.  15. Kenda.  
4. Gandai.  16. Lapha.  
5. Silheti.  17. Chhuri.  
6. Barbaspur.  18. Korba.  
7. Thakurtola.  19. Chapa.  
8. Lohara.  20. Bora Sambhar.  
9. Gondardehi.  21. Phuljhar.  
10. Fingeswar.  22. Kolabira.  
11. Pandaria.  23. Rampur.  
12. Pendra.   
  
                                                           
1. Item V, “The Family Domains of the Maharaja of Benares, comprising the following parganas: —Bhadohi and Kheyra Mangror 
in the Mirzapur district; Kaswa Raja in the Benares district”, was  rep. by Act 14 of 1881, s. 14. 
2. Except Lahaul and Spiti, these districts ceased to be part of India from 15 -8-1947.  
3. The taluqs of Nugur, Albaka and Cherla which were transferred to the Madras Presidency with effect from 1 -7-1909 had, from 
17-1-1905, became Scheduled Districts within t he meaning of the Scheduled Districts Act, 1874 (14 of 1874).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LAWS LOCAL EXTENT ACT, 1874.pdf - page 21]
21 
 Chanda Zamindaris  
1. Ahiri.  11. Muramgaon.  
2. Ambagarh Chauki.  12. Panabaras.  
3. Aundhi.  13. Palasgarh.  
4. Dhanora.  14. Rangi.  
5. Dudhmala.  15. Sirsundi.  
6. Gewarda.  16. Sonsari.  
7. Jharapapra.  17. Chandala.  
8. Khutgaon.  18. Gilgaon.  
9. Koracha.  19. Pawi Mutanda.  
10. Kotgal.  20. Pategaon.  
Chhindwara Jagirdaris  
1. Harai.  7. Pachmarhi.  
2. Chhater.  8. Partabgarh.  
3. Gorakhghat.  9. Almod.  
4. Gorpani.  10. Sonpur.  
5. Bakhtagarh.  11. Bariam Pagara.  
6. Bardagarh   
PART VII  
The Chief Commissionership of Coorg.  
PART VIII  
The Chief Commissionership of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands.  
PART IX  
The Chief Commissionership of Ajmer and Merwara.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LAWS LOCAL EXTENT ACT, 1874.pdf - page 22]
22 
 PART X  
1The Chief Commissionership of Assam.  
PART XI  
The Hill Tracts of Arakan .—[Repealed by the A.O. 1937 .] 
PART XII  
The Pargana of Manpur .—[Repealed by the Repealing Act, 1938  (1 of 1938 ), s. 2 and Schedule .] 
PART XIII  
The Cantonment of Morar .—[Repealed by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1891  (12 of 1891).]  
  
                                                           
1. The Lushai Hills, which include the North and South Lushai Hills and the Mokokchang Sub -division of the Naga Hills District, 
became Scheduled Districts for the purposes of the Scheduled Distr icts Act, 1874 (14 of 1874), but they are not Scheduled 
Districts within the meaning of this Act.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LAWS LOCAL EXTENT ACT, 1874.pdf - page 23]
23 
 SEVENTH SCHEDULE   
Enactments Repealed. —[Repealed by the Repealing Act, 1876  (12 of 1876).]  
———  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LEGAL PRACTITIONERS ACT, 1879.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE LEGAL PRACTITIONERS ACT, 187 9 
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
PREAMBLE   
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. [Repealed. ]. 
2. [Repealed .]. 
3. [Repealed. ]. 
CHAPTER II  
OF ADVOCATES,  VAKILS  AND ATTORNEYS  
4. [Repealed. ]. 
5. [Repealed. ].  
CHAPTER  III 
OF PLEADERS  AND MUKHTARS  
6. [Repealed .]. 
7. [Repealed .]. 
8. [Repealed. ].  
9. [Repealed. ].  
10.  [Repealed. ].  
11.  [Repealed. ].  
12.  [Repealed .]. 
13.   [Repealed .]. 
14.  [Repealed .]. 
15.  [Repealed .]. 
16.  [Repealed. ].  
CHAPTER IV  
OF REVENUE -AGENTS  
17. [Repealed. ].  
18. [Repealed .]. 
19. [Repealed. ].  
2 0  [Repealed. ].  
2 1 .[Repealed .].  
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LEGAL PRACTITIONERS ACT, 1879.pdf - page 2]
2 
 SECTIONS  
22.  [Repealed .]. 
23.  [Repealed .]. 
24.  [Repealed .]. 
CHAPTER V  
OF CERTIFICATES  
25. [Repealed. ].  
26. [Repealed. ].  
  
CHAPTER VI  
OF THE REMUNERATION  OF PLEADERS , MUKHTARS  AND REVENUE -AGENTS  
27. [Repealed. ].  
28. [Repealed. ].  
29. [Repealed .]. 
30. [Repealed .]. 
31. [Repealed .]. 
CHAPTER VII  
PENALTIES  
32. [Repealed. ].  
33. [Repealed. ].  
34. [Repealed. ].  
35. [Repealed. ].  
36. [Repealed. ].  
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
37. [Repealed .]. 
38. [Repealed. ].  
39. [Repealed .]. 
40. [Repealed .]. 
41. [Repealed. ].  
42.  [Repealed ]. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE .—[Repealed .].  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE. —VALUE OF STAMPS FOR CERTIFICATES.   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LEGAL PRACTITIONERS ACT, 1879.pdf - page 3]
3 
 THE LEGAL PRACTITIONERS ACT, 1879  
ACT NO. 18 OF 18791 
[29th October , 1879.]  
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to Legal Practitioners.  
Preamble. —WHEREAS  it is expedient to consolidate and amend the law relating to 
Legal Practitioners in 2[certain Provinces, and to empower the Provincial Government of 
every other Province to extend thereto] such portions of this Act as such Government may 
think fit; It is hereby enacted as follows: —  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. [Short title. commencement .] Rep. by the Advocates  (Amendment)  Act, 2023  (33 of 2023 ),                  
s. 3 (w.e.f . 30-9-2024).]. 
2. [Repeal of enactments .] Rep. by the Repealing Act, 1938 ( 1 of 1938 ), s. 2 and 
Schedule .  
3. [Interpretation -clause .] Rep. by the Advocates  (Amendment)  Act, 2023  (33 of 2023 ), s. 3                    
(w.e.f. 30-9-2024).] 
CHAPTER II  
OF ADVOCATES , VAKILS AND ATTORNEYS  
4. [Advocates  and Vakils .] Rep. by the Advocates Act, 1961 (25 of 1961), s. 50 ( 3)                    
(w.e.f. 15-6-2011).  
5. [Attorneys of High Court .] Rep. by s. 50(3), ibid. (w.e.f.  15-6-2011).  
CHAPTER III 
OF PLEADERS  AND MUKHTARS  
6. [Powers to make rules as to qualifications, etc., of pleaders and mukhtars. Publication of rules. ] 
Rep. by the Advocates Act, 1961 (25 of 1961), s. 50 (2) (w.e.f. 1-12-1961).  
7. [Certificates to pleaders and mukhtars. ] Rep. by s. 50 (2), ibid.  (w.e.f. 1-12-1961).  
8. [Pleaders on enrolment may practise in Courts and revenue -offices .] Rep. s. 50 (5), ibid.                     
(w.e.f. 15-6-2011).  
9. [Mukhtars on en rolment may practise in Courts .] Rep. by s. 50 (5), ibid.                          
(w.e.f. 15-6-2011 ). 
                                                      
1. This Act has been extended to Berar by the Berar Laws Act, 1941 (4 of 1941). It has been declared to be in force in the Angul 
District by the Angul Laws Regulation, 1936 (5 of 1936), s. 3 and Sch., and also by notification under 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LEGAL PRACTITIONERS ACT, 1879.pdf - page 3]
trict by the Angul Laws Regulation, 1936 (5 of 1936), s. 3 and Sch., and also by notification under s. 3 of the Scheduled 
Districts Act, 1874 (14 of 1874), in the Districts of Hazaribagh, Lohardaga and Manbhum and Pargana Dhalbhum and the 
Kolhan i n the District of Singbhum, see Gazette of India, 1881, Pt. I, p. 504. The District of Lohardaga (now called the Ranchi 
District, see Calcutta Gazette, 1889, Pt. I, p. 44) included at this time the District of Palamau, which was separated in 1894.  
 It has been amended in its application to —  
 Bengal by Ben. Act 5 of 1942 ;  
 C. P. and Berar by C. P. & Berar Act 25 of 1939;  
 Madras by Mad. Acts 3 of 1943, 14 of 1944, 9 of 1947, 17 of 1950 and 12 of 1960;  
 Orissa by Orissa Act 6 of 1938; and  
 U. P. by U.P. Act s 4 of 1925 and 4 of 1936.  
 The Act has not been extended to the State of Manipur, vide Act 30 of 1950, s. 3 and Sch . I as amended by Act 68 of 1956.  
 The Act has been extended to the whol e of Madhya Pradesh by M.P. Act  23 of 1958 (when notified) and to transferred 
territories in Punjab by Punjab Act 41 of 1960.  
2. Subs. by the A. O. 1948, for “the Lower Provinces of Bengal, the North -Western Provinces, the Punjab , Oudh, the Central 
Provinces and Assam, and to empower ea ch of the Local Governments of the rest of British India to extend to the territories 
administered by it ”. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LEGAL PRACTITIONERS ACT, 1879.pdf - page 4]
4 
 10. [No person to practise as pleader or mukhtar unless qualified .] Rep. by s. 50 (3), ibid.                 
(w.e.f. 15-6-2011).  
11. [Power to  declare functions of mukhtars .] Rep. by s. 50 (5), ibid. (w.e.f. 15-6-2011 ). 
12. [Suspension and dismissal of pleaders and mukhtars convicted of criminal offence. ] Rep by          
s. 50 (4), ibid . (w.e.f 1-9-1963).  
13. [Suspension and dismissal of pleaders and mukhtars guilty of unprofessional conduct. ] Rep. by s. 
50 (4), ibid. (w.e.f. 1-9-1963).  
14. [Procedure when charge of unprofessional conduct is brought in Court or revenue  office. 
Suspension pending investigation. ] Rep. by the Advocates Act, 1961 (25 of 1961), s. 50 ( 4)                                 
(w.e.f. 1-9-1963). 
15. [Power to call for rec ord in case of acquittal under section 14.] Rep. by s. 50 (4), ibid.               
(w.e.f. 1-9-1963).  
16. [Power to make rules for mukhtars o n appellate side of High Court .] Rep. by s. 50 (5), ibid.                      
(w.e.f. 15-6-2011).  
CHAPTER IV  
OF REVENUE -AGENTS  
17. [Power to make rules as to qualifica tions, etc., of revenue -agents .] Rep. by the Advocates Act, 
1961 (25 of 1961), s. 50 (5)   (w.e.f. 15-6-2011).  
18. [Certificates to revenue -agents .] Rep. by s. 50 (2), ibid.  (w.e.f. 1-12-1961).  
19. [Enrolment of revenue -agent .] Rep. by s. 50 (5), ibid.    (w.e.f. 15-6-2011).  
20. [No person to act as agent in revenue -offices unless qualified .] Rep. by s. 50 (3) , ibid.              
(w.e.f. 15-6-2011).  
21. [Dismissal of revenue -agent convicted of criminal offence. ] Rep. by s. 50(4) , ibid.                       
(w.e.f. 1-9-1963).  
22. [Suspension and dismissal of revenue -agents guilty of unprofessional conduct. ] Rep. by 
s. 50(4), ibid . (w.e.f. 1-9-1963).  
23. [Procedure when revenue -agent is so charged in subordinate office. ] Rep. by                       
s. 50 (4), ibid.  (w.e.f. 1-9-1963).  
24.  [Power to Chief Controlling Revenue -authority to call for
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LEGAL PRACTITIONERS ACT, 1879.pdf - page 4]
 50 (4), ibid.  (w.e.f. 1-9-1963).  
24.  [Power to Chief Controlling Revenue -authority to call for record .] Rep. by  s. 50 (4), ibid.               
(w.e.f. 1-9-1963).  
CHAPTER V  
OF CERTIFICATES  
25. [Fee for certificates .] Rep. by the Advocates Act, 1961 (25 of 1961), s. 50 (5)                        
(w.e.f. 15-6-2011).  
26. [Dismissed practitioners to surrender certificates .] Rep. by s. 50(5), ibid.   (w.e.f. 15-6-2011).  
CHAPTER VI  
OF THE REMUNERATION  OF PLEADE RS, MUKHTARS  AND REVENUE -AGENTS  
27. [High Court and Chief Controlling Revenue -authority to fix fees on civil and revenue -
proceedings .] Rep. by the Advocates Act, 1961 (25 of 1961), s. 50 (5)   (w.e.f. 15-6-2011).  
28. [Agreements with clients .] Rep. by the Legal Practitioners (Fees) Act, 1926 (21 of 1926), s. 6. 
29. [Power to modify or cancel agreements .] Rep. by s. 6, ibid. 
30. [Agreements to exclude further claims .] Rep. by s. 6, ibid. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LEGAL PRACTITIONERS ACT, 1879.pdf - page 5]
5 
 31. [Reservation of responsibility for negligence .] Rep. by s. 6, ibid.  
CHAPTER VII  
PENALTIES  
32. [On persons illegally practising as pleaders, mukhtars or revenue -agents .] Rep. by the 
Advocates Act, 1961 (25 of 1961), s. 50 (5)   (w.e.f. 15-6-2011).  
33. [On suspended or dismissed pleader, etc., failing to deliver certificate .] Rep. by the 
Advocates Act, 1961 (25 of 1961), s. 50 (5)   (w.e.f. 15-6-2011).  
34. [On suspended or dismissed practitioner practising during suspension or after 
dismissa l.] Rep. by s. 50 (5), ibid.   (w.e.f. 15-6-2011).  
35. [Revision of fines .] Rep. by s. 50 (5), ibid.    (w.e.f. 15-6-2011).  
36. [Power to frame and publish lists of touts .] Rep. by the Advocates  (Amendment)  Act, 2023  
(33 of 2023 ), s. 3 (w.e.f. 30-9-2024).  
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
37. [State Government to appoint examiners. ] Rep. by the Advocates Act, 1961 (25 of 1961), s. 50(2) 
(w.e.f. 1-12-1961).  
38. [Exemption of High Court practition ers from certain parts of Act .] Rep. by s. 50 (5), ibid.                
(w.e.f. 15-6-2011).  
39. [Suspension or dismissal of  person holding mukhtar and revenue -agent’s certificate. ] Rep. by the 
Advocates Act, 1961 (25 of 1961), s. 50(4) (w.e.f . 1-9-1963).  
40. [Pleaders, etc., not to be suspended or dismissed without being heard. ] Rep. by s.  50(4), ibid.  
(w.e.f.  1-9-1963).  
41. [Power for certain High Courts to enrol advocates .] Rep. by s. 50 (5), ibid.  (w.e.f. 15-6-2011).  
42. [Repeal of Chapter VI of Bo m. Reg. II of 1827 and Acts 1 of 1846 and 20 of 1853. ] Rep. by the 
Repealing Act, 1938 (1 of 1938),  s. 2 and Sch.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LEGAL PRACTITIONERS ACT, 1879.pdf - page 6]
6 
 FIRST SCHEDULE. —[Enactments repealed. ] Rep. by the Repealing Act, 1938 (1 of 1938),         
s. 2 and Sch edule . 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LEGAL PRACTITIONERS ACT, 1879.pdf - page 7]
7 
 SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See Section 25)  
VA L UE  OF  ST A MPS   FOR   CE RT IFI CAT ES  
I 
For a  certificate authorizing the holder to practise as a pleader —  
(a) in the  High Court and any subordinate Court —rupees fifty : 
(b) in any Court of Small Causes in a Presidency -town—rupees twenty -five: 
(c) in all other subordinate Courts —rupees twenty -five: 
(d) in the Courts of Subordinate Judges, Munsifs, Assistant Commissioners,  Extra Assistant 
Commissioners and Tahsildars, in Courts of Small Causes outside the Presidency -towns and in all 
Criminal Courts subordinate to the High Court —rupees fifteen : 
(e) in the Courts of Munsifs and any Civil or Criminal Court of first instance no t hereinbefore 
specifically mentioned —rupees five.  
II 
For a certificate authorizing the holder to practise as a mukhtar —  
(f) in the High Court and any subordinate Court —rupees twenty -five: 
(g) in any Court of Small Causes in a Presidency -town—rupees fifteen : 
(h) in all other subordinate Courts —rupees fifteen : 
(i) in the Courts of Subordinate Judges, Munsifs, Assistant Commissioners, Extra 
Assistant Commissioners and Tahsildars, in Courts of Small Causes outside the                        
Presidency -towns and in all Criminal Courts subordinate to the High Court --rupees ten : 
(j) in the Courts of Munsifs and any Civil or Criminal Court of first instance not hereinbefore 
specifically mentioned —rupees five.  
III 
For a certificate authori sing the holder to practise as a revenue -agent—  
(k) in the office of the Chief Controlling Revenue -authority and in any revenue -office 
subordinate to such authority — rupees fifteen : 
(l) in the office of a Commissioner and in any revenue -office subordinate to a Commis sioner—
rupees ten : 
(m) in the office of a Collector and in any revenue -office subordinate to a Collector —
rupees five.  
 
 
____________  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES’ SUITS ACT, 1855.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES’  SUITS ACT, 1855  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_____________  
Preamble . 
SECTIONS  
1. Executors may sue and be sued in certain cases for wrongs committed in lifetime 
of deceased.  
2. Death of either party not to abate suit. Proviso.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES’ SUITS ACT, 1855.pdf - page 2]
2 
  
1[THE LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES’  SUITS ACT, 1855] 
ACTNO. 12 OF 1855  
[27th March, 1855 .] 
An Act to enable Executors, Administrators or Representatives to sue and be sued for certain 
wrongs.2 
 
Preamble .—WHEREAS it is expedient to enable executors, administrators or representatives in 
certain cases to sue and be sued in respect of certain wrongs which, according to the present law, do not 
survive to or against such executors, administrators or representatives; It is enacted as follows :— 
1. Executors may sue and be sued in certain cases for wrongs committed in lifetime of 
deceased .—An action may be maintai ned by the executor s, administrators  or representatives
                                                      
1. Short title given by the Indian Short Titles Act, 1897 (14 of 1897).  
This Act has been declared to be in force in the whole of India, except Part BStates and the Scheduled Districts, by the 
Laws Local Extent Act, 1874 (15 of  1874), s. 3.  
The Act has been extended to and brought into force in Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 andthe 
First Schedule (w.e.f. 1-7-1965) and to the ( Union Territory of Pondicherry by Act 26 of 1968, s. 3, and  
Schedule . 
The Act came into force in the State of Sikkim on 1 -9-1984 vide Notifn. No. S. O. 653(E), dt. 24 -8-1984.  
It has also been declared in force in the Khondmals District by the Khondmals Laws Regulation, 1936 (4 of 
1936), s. 3 and the Schedule .; in the Angul Dist rict by the Angul Laws Regulation, 1936 (5 of 1936), s. 3 and 
Sch.; and in the SonthalParganas by the SonthalParganas Settlement Regulation, 1872 (3 of 1872), s. 3.  
It has been declared,  by notification under s. 3 (a)of the Scheduled Districts Act, 1874 (14  of 1874), to be in force in the 
following Scheduled Districts, namely: — 
West Jalpaiguri  See Gazette of India,  1881, Pt. I, p. 74.  
The Districts-of Hazaribagh,  
Lohardaga(now the Ranchi  
Disrtict, see Calcutta Gazette, 1899, Pt. I, p. 
44), and 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES’ SUITS ACT, 1855.pdf - page 2]
 Hazaribagh,  
Lohardaga(now the Ranchi  
Disrtict, see Calcutta Gazette, 1899, Pt. I, p. 
44), and Manbhum, and ParganaDhalbhum 
and the Kolhan in the District of  
Singbhum  . . . . Ditto  1881, Pt. I, p. 504.  
The Scheduled portion of  
TheMirzapur District  . Ditto  1879, Pt. I, p. 383.  
JaunsarBawar  . Ditto  1879, Pt. I, p. 382.  
The District of Lahaul  Ditto  1886, Pt. I, p. 301. 
The Scheduled Districts of  
the Madhya Pradesh  . Ditto  1879, Pt. I, p. 771.  
The Scheduled Districts in Ganjam and Vizagapatam  Ditto  1898, Pt. I, p. 870.  
Assam (except the North Lushai Hills)  Ditto  1897, Pt. I, p. 299.  
The Porahat Estate in the Singbhum District  Ditto  1897, Pt. I, p. 1059.  
It has been extended, by notification under s. 5 of the last -mentioned Act, to the following Scheduled Districts, 
namely: — 
 Kum aon and Garhwal  . See Gazette of India,  1876, Pt. I, p. 606.  
TheTarai of the Province of Agr a Ditto  1876, Pt. I, p. 505.  
It has been extended to the New Provinces and Merged States, see Act 59 of 1949, and to the States of Tripura, Manipur 
and Vindhya Pradesh, see Act 30 of 1950.  
2. See the CivilProcedure Act, 1833 (3 and 4 Will. 4, c. 42), s. 2.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES’ SUITS ACT, 1855.pdf - page 3]
3 
 of any person deceased, for any wrong committed in the time of such person, which has 
occasioned pecuniary loss to his estate, for which wrong an action might have been 
maintained by such person, so as such wrong shall have bee n committed within one year 
before his death 1***; and the damages, when recovered, shall be part of the personal estate 
of such person;  
and further, an action may be maintained against the executors or administrators or heirs 
or representatives of  any person deceased for any wrong committed by him in his lifetime 
for which he would have been subject to an action, so as such wrong shall have 
been committed within one year before such person ’s death 2*** and the damages to  
be recovered in such action  shall, if recovered against an executor or administrator bound to administer 
according to the English law, be payable in like order of administration as the simple contract debts of 
such person.  
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Karnataka  
Amendment of Central Act XII of 1 855.—Section 1 of the Legal  Representatives ’ Suits Act,  
1855 (Central Act XII of 1855) shall be renumbered  as section 1A and before the section 1A 
as so renumbered, the following sec tion shall be inserted, namely: — 
“1. Short title and extent. —This Act may be called the Legal Representatives’ Suits Act, 
1855.  
(2) It extends to the whole of the State of Karnataka”.  
[Vide  Karnataka 33 of 1978, s. 4].  
2. Death of either party not to abate suit. Proviso. —No action commenced under the 
provisions of this Act shall  abate by reason of the death of either party, but the  same may be 
continued by or aga inst the executors, administrators or representatives of the party deceased: 
Provided that, in any case in which any such action shall be continued against the executors,  
admini strators or representatives of a deceased party, such executors, administrators or re -
presentatives may set up a want of assets as a defence to the action, either wholly or in part
<|CHUNK|>
[THE LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES’ SUITS ACT, 1855.pdf - page 3]
 re -
presentatives may set up a want of assets as a defence to the action, either wholly or in part, in 
the same manner as if the action had been originally commenced against them.  
__________  
                                                      
1.The words “and provided such action shall be brought within one year after the death of such person ” rep. by Act 9 of 1871, s. 
2 and the First Schedule , see now the Indian Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963).  
2. The  words “and so as such action shall be commenced within two years after the committing of the wrong ” rep. by s. 2  and 
the First Schedule ibid, see now Act 36 of 1963.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS CITY CIVIL COURT ACT, 1892.pdf - page 1]
1 THE MADRAS CITY CIVIL COURT ACT, 1892  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Constitution of the City Court.  
4. Appointment, suspension and removal of Judges.  
5. Judge of City Court to be Judge of  Small Clause Court.  
6. Powers of Judges when City Court consists of more than one Judge.  
7. Appointment, powers, duties and punishment of ministerial officers.  
8. Questions arising in suits, etc., under Act to be dealt with according to law administered b y High 
Court.  
9. Valuation of immoveable property for jurisdictional purposes.  
10. Process -fees.  
11. Appointment of Receivers.  
12. [Repealed. ]. 
13. Repayment of half fees on settlement before hearing.  
14. Allowance for fees paid in City Court in cases remo ved to High Court.  
15. Appeals.  
16. Saving of original civil jurisdiction of High Court.  
17. Seal to be used.  
18. Holidays and vacations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                 Subject to verification  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS CITY CIVIL COURT ACT, 1892.pdf - page 2]
2 THE MADRAS CITY CIVIL COURT ACT, 1892  
ACT NO. 7 OF 1892  
[12th August , 1892.]  
An Act to establish an additional Civil Court for the City of Madras.  
WHEREAS  it is expedient to establish an additional Civil Court for the City of Madras; It is hereby 
enacted as follows: — 
1. Title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Madras City Civil Court Act, 1892; 
1*** 
2*   *   *   *   * 
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless there is something repugnant in the subject or context, — 
(1) “City Court” means the Court established under the next following section;  
(2) “City of Madras” means the area within the local limits for the time being of the ordinary 
origina l civil jurisdiction of the High Court;  
(3) “High Court” means the High Court of Judicature at Madras; and  
(4) “Small Cause Court” means the Court of Small Causes of Madras.  
3. Constitution of the City Court. —The Local Government may, by notification in th e official 
Gazette, establish a Court, to be called the Madras City Civil Court, with jurisdiction to receive, try and 
dispose of all suits and other proceedings of a civil nature not exceeding two thousand five hundred 
rupees in value and arising within t he City of Madras, except suits or proceedings which are cognizable — 
(a) by the High Court as a Court of Admiralty or Vice -Admiralty or as a Colonia l Court of 
Admiralty , or as a Court having testamentary, intestate or matrimonial jurisdiction, or  
(b) by the Court for the relief of inso0lvent debtors, or  
(c) by the Small Cause Court.  
4. Appointment, suspension and removal of Judges. —The Local Government may, by notification 
in the official Gazette, appoint so many persons as it may think fit to be Judges of the City Court; and 
may, for any misconduct by a like notification, suspend or remove any Judge so appointed.  
5. Judge of City Court to be Judge of Small Clause Court. —(1) Every person appointed a Judge 
of the City Court shall be, by virtue of his offic e, a J
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS CITY CIVIL COURT ACT, 1892.pdf - page 2]
ourt. —(1) Every person appointed a Judge 
of the City Court shall be, by virtue of his offic e, a Judge of the Small Cause Court with respect to cases 
cognizable by that Court.  
(2) Every such Judge shall be liable to perform any duties of a Judge of the Small Cause Court which 
the Chief Justice of the High Court may require him to perform.  
6. Powe rs of Judges when City Court consists of more than one Judge. —When the City Court 
consists of more than one Judge, — 
(a) each of the Judges may exercise all or any of the powers conferred on the Court by this Act or 
any other law for the time being in force ; 
                                                           
    Subject to verification  
1. The word “and” omitted by Act 17 of 1914, s. 3 and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 16 -9-1914).  
2. Sub -section ( 2) omitted by s. 3 and the Second Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -9-1914).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS CITY CIVIL COURT ACT, 1892.pdf - page 3]
3 (b) the Local Government may appoint any one of the Judges to be the principal Judge; and  
(c) the principal Judge may, from time to time, make such arrangements as he may think fit for 
the distribution of the business of the Court among the various Judge s thereof.  
7. Appointment, powers, duties and punishment of ministerial officers. —(1) The Judge of the 
City Court, or, when the Court consists of more than on Judge, the principal Judge, may from time to 
time, with the sanction of the Local Government, app oint as many clerks, bailiffs and other ministerial 
officers as may be necessary for the administration of justice by the Court and for the exercise and 
performance of the powers and duties conferred and imposed on it by this Act or any other law for the 
time being in force.  
(2) The officers so appointed shall exercise such powers and discharge such duties of a ministerial 
nature as the said Judge or principal Judge may from time to time direct.  
(3) The said Judge or principal Judge may, subject to the control of the High Court, — 
(a) suspend or remove any officer so appointed, or  
(b) fine any such officer who is guilty of misconduct or neglect in the performance of the duties 
of his office.  
(4) Any fine imposed on an officer under sub -section ( 3) may be deducted from his salary.  
8. Questions arising in suits, etc., under Act to be dealt with according to law administered by 
High Court. —All questions which arise in suits or other proceedings under this Act in the City Court 
shall be dealt with and determin ed according to the law for the time being administered by the High Court 
in the exercise of its ordinary original civil jurisdiction.  
9. Valuation of immoveable property for jurisdictional purposes. —When the subject -matter of 
any suit or other proceeding is land or a house or a garden, its value for the purposes of the jurisdiction 
conferred on the City Court by this Act shall, subject to the other provisions of this Act, b
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS CITY CIVIL COURT ACT, 1892.pdf - page 3]
ction 
conferred on the City Court by this Act shall, subject to the other provisions of this Act, be fixed in 
manner provided by the Court -fees Act, 1870  (7 of 1870) , section 7, clause v.  
10. Process -fees.—Fees chargeable for serving or executing processes issued by the City Court, or 
served or executed under its direction or control, shall be such as the High Court may prescribe with the 
approval of the Governor of Fort St. Georg e in Council  1***. 
11. Appointment of Receivers. —The powers conferred  by Chapter XXXVI of the Code of Civil 
Procedure (14 of 1882 ), on High Courts and District Courts as to the appointment of Receivers may be 
exercised by the City Court or any Judge thereof.  
12. [Amendm ent of Act  15 of 1882, section  31].—Rep. by the Repealing Act , 1938 (1 of 1938), s. 2 
and the Schedule  (w.e.f . 26-2-1938).  
13. Repayment of half fees on settlement before hearing. —Whenever any suit or proceeding in the 
City Court is settled by agreement of  the parties before issues have been settled or any evidence recorded, 
half the amount of the institution fees paid by the plaintiff shall be repaid to him by the Court.  
14. Allowance for fees paid in City Court in cases removed to High Court. —When, under   
section 13 of the letters Patent for the High Court, dated the twenty -eight day of December, 1865, or 
under section 25 of the Code of Civil Procedure  (14 of 1882 ), the High Court has removed for trial by 
itself any suit from the City Court, fees on the scale for the  time being in force in the High Court as a 
Court of ordinary original civil jurisdiction shall be payable in that Court in respect of the suit and 
proceedings therein:  
                                                           
1. The words “and the sanction of the Governor General in Council” omitted by Act 4 of 1914, s. 2 and the Schedule , Part I,                        
(w.e.f. 24 -2-1914).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS CITY CIVIL COURT ACT, 1892.pdf - page 3]
        
(w.e.f. 24 -2-1914).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS CITY CIVIL COURT ACT, 1892.pdf - page 4]
4 Provided that, in the levy of any such fees which, according to the practice of the Cou rt, are credited 
to the Government, credit shall be given to the plaintiff in the suit for any fee which in the City Court he 
has already paid under the Court -fees Act, 1870, on the plaint.  
15. Appeals. —(1) The Court authorized to hear appeals from the Cit y Court shall be the High Court.  
(2) The period of limitation for an appeal from a decree or order of the City Court shall be the same as 
that provided by law for an appeal from a decree or order of the High Court in the exercise of its original 
jurisdicti on. 
16. Saving of original civil jurisdiction of High Court. —Nothing in this Act contained shall affect 
the original civil jurisdiction of the High Court:  
Provided that — 
(1) if any suit or other proceeding is instituted in the High Court which, in the opin ion of the 
Judge who tries the same (whose opinion shall be final), ought to have been instituted in the City 
Court, no costs shall be allowed to a successful plaintiff, and a successful defendant shall be allowed 
his costs as between attorney and client;  
(2) in any suit or other proceeding pending at any time in the High Court, and Judge of such 
Court may at any stage thereof make an order transferring the same to the City Court if in his opinion 
such suit or proceeding is within the jurisdiction of that C ourt and should be tried therein;  
(3) in any suit or other proceeding so transferred, the Court -fees Act, 1870  (7 of 1870) , shall 
apply, credit being given for any fees levied in the High Court.  
17. Seal to be used. —The City Court shall use a seal of such form and dimensions as may be for the 
time being prescribed by the local Government.  
18. Holidays and vacations. —(1) The Judge of the City Court, or, when the Court consists of more 
than one Judge, the principal Judge, shall, at the commencement of each year, draw up a list of holidays 
and vacations to be observed in the Court, a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS CITY CIVIL COURT ACT, 1892.pdf - page 4]
 commencement of each year, draw up a list of holidays 
and vacations to be observed in the Court, and shall submit the same for the approval of the Local 
Government.  
(2) Such list, when it has received such approval, shall be published in the official Gazette, and the 
said holidays and va cations shall be observed accordingly.  
 
___________  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS CITY LAND REVENUE ACT, 1851.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE MADRAS CITY LAND REVENUE  ACT, 1851  
ACT NO. 12 OF 1851  
[Passed on the  14th November , 1851 .] 
1. Assessable lands in Madras not assessed, to be assessed at customary rates.  
2. Lakhiraj tenures of sixty years standing and none of less to be valid.  
3. Collector to determine rate of assessment, subject to an appeal.  
4, 5, 6. Collector may have rent -paying lands measured to ascertain the exactness of assessed                 
quantity : and (5) order an abatement when assessed at too much ; and (6) an incr ease when assessed at 
too little.  
7. After demand in writing, rent may be recovered by distress and sale of goods and chattels. Colle ctor 
may appoint bailiffs and appraisers to make and appraise, &c. d istresses.  
8. Rent paid to East India Company by under tenant may be deducted by him from his own rent.  
9. Land revenue or rent of East India Company to have priority over all other claims as respects 
property liable.  
10. Distress to proceed notwithstanding liability d isputed, unless amount is deposited.  
11. Arrears of rent removeable for six years after due or after acknowledgement in writing.  
12. Claim to hold land rent free  to be referred by Collector to Board, if disa llowed by B oard, land to 
be assessed, subject to Civil Suit.  
13. Obstructing Collector, &c.  to be punishable by fine and in default of payment by imprisonment.  
14. Collector may punish contempts.  
15. Collector to act under superior revenue authorities.   
16. Ground rents of East India Company to be deemed revenue within 21 Geo. 3 Cap. 70.  
17. Actions for trespass or injury committed under color of Act to be tried in East India Company’s 
Courts, &c. and no action to lie more than 6 months after cause arose.  
18. Interprets the words “Collector” and Board of Revenue.  
An Act for sec uring the Land R evenue of Madras.  
Whereas it is expedient that the land revenue acc ruing due to the East India Company at Madras, within 
the limits of the Town of Mad
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS CITY LAND REVENUE ACT, 1851.pdf - page 1]
and revenue acc ruing due to the East India Company at Madras, within 
the limits of the Town of Madras as defined in Section XII., Regulation II.  of 1802., of the Madras Code, 
should be ascertained and col lected in as summary a manner as in other parts of the territories under the 
Government of the East India Company, It i s enacted as follows:  
I. All assessable lands not the property of the East India Company, within the limits of the Town 
Madras, as defined in Section XII., Regulation II. of 18 02, of the Madras Code, of which the rate of 
assessment is not known, or which have not heretofore been assessed, shall be assessed at the rates 
customarily charged upon lands of a similar description in the neighbourhood according as they  may be 
situated description in the neighbourhood according as they may be situated respectively within or without 
the wa lls of Black Town.  
II. Lakiraj tenures of land in Madras, of which uninterrupted possession has been held under alleged 
grants, exempt or partially exempt from assessment for sixty years, shall be valid : no other lakiraj  tenures 
of land in Madras shall be deemed valid, unless the same are or shall be held under an unexpired grant from 
the British Government.  
III. The Collector of Madras shall determine the rate of assessment to be laid on assessable land under 
Section I. of this Act, with reference to the rate assessed upon other land of a similar description in the 
neighbourhood, subject to an appeal to the Board of Revenue, to be made within six months from the 
notification by the Collector of the assessment fixed by him . The decision of the Board of Revenue upon 
such appeal shall be final.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS CITY LAND REVENUE ACT, 1851.pdf - page 2]
2 
 IV. The Collector may order any asse ssable land, or land already assessed, or charged with a rent 
payable to the East India Company, to be measured, for the purpose of determining the amount of 
assessment to be imposed, or, in the case of land already assessed or charged with a rent, for the purpose of 
ascertaining whether the actual dimensions, and the dimensions upon which the amount of assessment or 
rent, was calculated, correspond.  
V. Whenever, upon the measurement of any land under the preceding Section, it shall be found that the 
dimensions upon which the amount of assessment or rent was calculated exceed the actual dimensions, a 
proportionate abatement shall be made for the excess , on the demand of the party entitle to claim it.  
VI. On the other hand, when the actual dimensions exceed the dimensions upon which the amount of 
assessment or rent was calculated, the excess shall be charged at the same rate as the rest of the land, the 
possession being left undisturbed. Provided that, when it shall appear that the excess has been earned by 
the surreptitious usurpation of ground belonging to another tenure, the act of the Collector in assessing it 
shall not prejudice the holder of such ot her tenure in any effort he may make to recover the ground usurped 
from it. An appeal shall lie to the Board of Revenue against any extra assessment or additional rent charged 
by the Collector for excess by measurement under this Section, if preferred with in six months from the date 
of the Collector's order. Upon each appeal the decision of the Board of Revenue shall be final.  
VII. If any owner of assessed land or any person holding land subject to a rent payable to the East India 
Company, shall upon the written demand of the Collector, refuse or neglect to pay any sum at which the 
land is assessed, or with which it is charged as re nt, the Collector may levy the same by distress and sale of 
the goods and chattels, wherever found, of such owners or les
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS CITY LAND REVENUE ACT, 1851.pdf - page 2]
levy the same by distress and sale of 
the goods and chattels, wherever found, of such owners or lessee; or, after written demand upon the tenant 
or occupier, and of his refusal or neglect to pay the sum lawfully demanded, by distress and sale of any 
goods and chattels found Upon the land, in the manner appointed for regulating distresses for small rents 
in Calcutta by Act VII. of 1847, extended to Madras by Section 89, Act IX. of 1850, and for the purpose of 
any such distress and sale,  the Collector shall have all the powers of a Judge of the Court of Small Causes 
under Section 89, Act IX. of 1850 aforesaid; and the Collector shall have power to appoint any of his 
Officers to perform the duties of Bailiffs and Appraisers, and of the Chi ef Clerk of the said Court, as 
provided by the said Act VII. of 1847, and all the provisions of the said Act relating to the Commissioners 
for the recovery of small debts and their Court shall be deemed to apply to the said Collector and his Office 
in the execution of this Act.  
VIII.  In the case of payment by any tenant of occupier not holding immediately under the East India 
Company, or the seizure and sale of his property, he may deduct the amount of the payment or levy from 
the next payment of rent to hi s landlord.  
IX. The claim of the East India Company for land revenue or rent has priority over all other claims 
upon the land, or to which property distrained upon the land may be liable.  
X. If the Collector's claim for arrears of rent is disputed, the pro cess of distraint and sale shall not be 
stayed unless the amount claimed be lodged with the Collector.  
XI. Arrears of rent or revenue due to the East India Company and recoverable within six years next 
after the same are due, or next after an acknowledgmen t of the same in writing has been given by the person 
by whom the same is payable, or his Agent, and not afterwards.  
XII. When a claim to hold land lakiraj, or free of assessment, shall be set up un
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS CITY LAND REVENUE ACT, 1851.pdf - page 2]
 not afterwards.  
XII. When a claim to hold land lakiraj, or free of assessment, shall be set up under this Act, the 
Collector shall inquire into the claim; taking such evidence as the claimant may offer, or the public records 
supply; and shall report his proceedings in the case for the consideration of the Board of Revenue. If the 
Board of Revenue are satisfied of the validity of the claim, they shall make an  order accordingly, and such 
order shall be final. If they are not satisfied of the validity of the claim, they shall direct the Collector to 
assess the land, leaving the claimant to contest the Collector's demand in the Civil Courts, as herein 
provided.  
XIII. Any person obstructing or molesting the Collector, or any of his subordinate officers in the 
execution of their duty, shall, on conviction before a Magistrate of the Town of Madras, be liable to a fine 
not exceeding five hundred rupees, and, in defaul t of payment, to imprisonment in the common gaol for a 
term not exceeding six months, or until the fine is sooner paid.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS CITY LAND REVENUE ACT, 1851.pdf - page 3]
3 
 XIV.  The Collector may punish any contempt committed in his presence in open cutcherry or office, 
by fine not exceeding two hundred rupe es, and, in default of payment, by imprisonment in the common 
gaol for a term not exceeding one month. From every such order of fine or imprisonment an appeal shall 
lie to the Board of Revenue, whose decision shall be final.  
XV. The Collector shall act in the execution of this Act, under the usual control of the superior revenue 
authorities.  
XVI.  The ground rents payable to the East India Company from lands in Madras are revenue within 
the meaning of the Act of Parliament, 21 Geo. III. Cap. 70; and the Supr eme Court of Judicature established 
by Royal Charter at Madras has not any civil jurisdiction concerning the said ground rents, or concerning 
any thing ordered or done in the assessment or collection thereof.  
XVII.  All actions concerning any trespass or in jury committed by any revenue officer, acting under 
colour of this Act, or concerning any claim in respect of any goods taken by, or any monies paid to, any 
revenue officer under this Act, or concerning any claim of rent or revenue on the part of the East India 
Company under this Act, shall be tried and determined in the Civil Courts established by the East India 
Company, in the Zillah of Chingleput, notwithstanding that the cause of action in respect of which such 
action is brought, arose, or the defendant  therein reside, within the limits of the Town of Madras, and every 
such action shall be brought within six months after the cause of action arose, and not afterwards.  
XVIII.  The words “Collector” and “Board of Revenue” used in this Act, shall be taken to mean any 
person or persons lawfully appointed to exercise the powers vested in the Collector and Board of Revenue 
respectively under this Act.  
_______ __ 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS CIVIL COURTS’ ACT, 1873.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE MADRAS CIVIL COURTS’ ACT, 1873  
______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______  
PREAMBLE.  
______  
PART I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS . 
1. Short title.  
Local extent.  
Commencement.  
2. [Repealed .]. 
______  
PART II.  
ESTABLISHMENT  AND CONSTITUTION  OF CIVIL COURTS . 
3. Number of District Courts.  
4. Number of Subordinate Judges and District Munsifs.  
5. Court ’s locality.  
6. Appointment to vacancy in office of District Judge or Subordinate Judge.  
7. Appointment to vacancy in office of District Munsif.  
Publication of appointments.  
Annulment of appointments.  
8. District Courts, Subordinate Judges , and District Munsifs.  
9. Seal of Court.  
______  
PART III.  
JURISDICTION . 
10. Local limits of jurisdiction of District Court or Subor dinate Judge.  
Local limits of jurisdiction of each of seve ral subordinate Judges.  
11. Local jurisdiction of District Munsifs.  
12. Jurisdiction of District Judge or Subordinate Judge in   original suits.  
Jurisdiction of District Munsif.  
13. Appeals from decrees of District Courts.  
Appellate jurisdiction of District Court.  
Appellate jurisdiction of Subordinate Judge.  
Disposal of appeal by District Judge.  
 
 
* Subject to verification and confirmation by the Department.    
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS CIVIL COURTS’ ACT, 1873.pdf - page 2]
2 
 SECTIONS.  
14. Valuation of suits for immovable property.  
15.  Power to require witness or party to make oath or affirmation.  
16. Law administered by Courts t o Natives.  
17. Judges not to try suits in which they are interested;  
nor to try appeals from decrees passed by them in  other capacities.  
Mode of disposing of su ch suits and appeals.  
______  
PART IV.  
MISCONDUCT OF JUDGES . 
18. Suspension of Judge by Local Government.  
19. Suspension of Subordinate Judge by High Court.  
20. Suspension of District Munsif by High Court. Com mission of Inquiry.  
Exercise by High Court of powers conferred on Govern ment by Act  XXXVII  of 1850.  
21. Suspension of District Munsif by District Judge.  
 Report to High Court.  
______  
PART V.  
MINISTERIAL  OFFICERS . 
22. Appointment, suspension or removal of Ministerial  Officers of District Courts.  
23. Appointment and removal of ministerial officers of subordinate Courts . 
24. R ules regulating such appointments.  
Duties of Ministerial Officers.  
Present Ministerial Officers.  
24A.  Transfer of Ministerial Officers.   
______  
PART VI.  
MISCELLANEOUS . 
25. Temporary discharge  of duties of District Judge.  
26. District Judge may nominate to vacancy in office of District Munsif.  
27. District Judge to control Civil Courts of District.  
28. Investiture of District or Subordinate Judge w ith Small Cause  jurisdiction.  
Investiture of District Munsif with similar jurisdiction.  
29. Exercise by Subordinate Judge of jurisdiction of District Judge in certain proceedings.   
30. Vacation.  
SCHEDULE  . — [Repealed ]. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS CIVIL COURTS’ ACT, 1873.pdf - page 3]
3 
 THE MADRAS CIVIL COURTS’ ACT, 1873  
ACT NO. 3 OF 1873 
 
[21st January , 1873.]  
An Act  to consolidate and amend the law relating to the Civil Courts of the Madras 
Presidency subordinate to the High Court . 
 
Preamble. —WHEREAS it is expedient to consolidate and amend the law relating to the Civil Courts of 
the Madras Presidency subordinate to the High Court; It is hereby enacted as follows : —  
______  
 
PART I.  
 
PRELIMINARY . 
 
1. Short title. —This Act may be called “The Madras Civil Courts ’ Act, 1873 ”: 
 
Local extent. —It extends to all the territories for the time being under the government of the 
Governor of Fort. St. George in Council, except the Tracts respectively under the jurisdicti on of the 
Agents for Ganjam and  Vizagapata m; 
 
Commencement. —And it shall come into force on the first day of March 1873.  
 
2. [Repeal of enactments ].—Rep. by the Repealing Act, 1873 (1 2 of 1873), s. 2 and the  Schedule.  
______  
 
PART I I. 
 
ESTABLISHMENT AND CONSTITUTION OF CIVIL COURTS . 
 
3. Number of District Courts. —The number of District (heretofore designated Zila) Courts to be 
established or continued under this  Act, shall be fixed, and may from time to time be altered, by the 
Local Government :  
Provided that no increase to the number of such Courts shall be made by such Government without 
the previous sanction of the Governor General in  Council.  
4. Number of Subordinate Judges and District Munsifs. —The number of Subordinate Judges 
and Dis trict M unsifs to be appointed under this Act for each District, shall be fixed, and may from 
time to time be altered, by the Local Government :  
Provided that no addition to the number of such officers shall be  made by such Government 
without the previous sanction  of the Governor General in Council.  
5. Court’s locality. —The place at which any Court under this Act shall be held may be fixed, and 
may, from time to time, be altered,  
in the case of a District Court or a Subordina
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS CIVIL COURTS’ ACT, 1873.pdf - page 3]
 be fixed, and 
may, from time to time, be altered,  
in the case of a District Court or a Subordinate Judge ’s Court, by the Local Governmen t, 
in the case of a District M unsif’s Court, by the High Court.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS CIVIL COURTS’ ACT, 1873.pdf - page 4]
4 
 1[The places fixed for any Court under this section shall be deemed to be within the local 
jurisdiction of that Court.]  
6. Appointment to vaca ncy in office of District Judge or Subordinate J udge. —Whenever the 
office of the Judge of a District Court (hereinafter called a ‘District Judge ’) or of a Subordinate Judge 
under this Act is vacant,  
or whenever the Governor General in Council has sanctioned an addition to the number of District 
Judges or Subordinate Judges under the provisions of section three or section four,  
the Local Government shall appoint to the office such duly qualified person as it thinks proper.  
7. Appointment to vacancy in office of District Munsif .—Whenever the office of a District 
Mun sif under this Act is vacant,  
Or whenever the Governor General in Council has sanctioned an addition to the number of District 
Munsifs under the provisions of section four,  
the High Court shall appoint to the office such person as it thinks fit :  
Provided that he possesses the qualifications for the time being required by the rules in this behalf 
which the High Court, with the previous sanction of the  Local Government, are hereby empowered to 
make and al ter. 
Publication of appointments. —Every appointment made under this section shall be  published in 
the same manner as appointments made  by the Local Government.  
Annulment of appointments .—The Local Government may, for good and sufficient reason, 
annul any a ppointment made under this section.  
8. District Courts, Sub ordinate Judges, and District Munsifs. —The present Zila Courts, 
Principal S adr Amins, and District Munsifs, shall be respectively the first  “District Courts, ”                         
“Subordinate Judges, ” and “District Munsifs ” under this Act.  
9. Seal of Court. —Every Court under this Act shall use a seal of  such form and dimensions as are, 
for the time being,  prescribed by the Local Government.  
______  
PART  III. 
JURISDICTION . 
10. Local limits 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS CIVIL COURTS’ ACT, 1873.pdf - page 4]
being,  prescribed by the Local Government.  
______  
PART  III. 
JURISDICTION . 
10. Local limits of jur isdiction of District Courts or Subordinate Judge. —The Local 
Government shall fix, and may from time to time vary , the local limits of the juris diction of any 
District Judge  or Subordinate  Judge under this Act:  
Local limits of jurisdiction of each of sever al Subordinate Judges. —Provided that, where more 
than one Subordinate Judge is appointed to any district, the District Judge may assign to each such 
Subordinate Judge the local limits of his particular jurisdiction within such  district.  
The present local l imits of the jurisdiction of every Civil Court (other than the High Court) shall be 
deemed to have been fixed under this Act.  
11. Local Jurisdiction of District Munsifs .—The High Court shall fix, and may from time to 
time modify, the local jurisdiction of District Munsifs.  
2[If the High Court assigns the same local jurisdiction to two or more District Munsifs, it shall 
declare which of them shall be deemed the Principal Di strict Munsif, and the other, or others, shall be 
called Additional District Munsifs, and shall take cognizance only of such suits and applications as 
may, by special or general order in this behalf, be directed by the District Judge. ] 
12. Jurisdiction of District Judge or subordinate  Judge in original suits. —The jurisdiction of 
a District Judge or a Sub ordinate Judge extends, subject to the rules contain ed in the Code of Civil 
Procedure, to all original suits  and proceedings of a civil nature.  
                                                      
1. Added by Act 21 of 1885, s. 2.  
2. Added by s.  3, ibid.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS CIVIL COURTS’ ACT, 1873.pdf - page 5]
5 
 Jurisdict ion of District Munsif .—The jurisdiction of a District Munsif extends to all like suits 
and proceedings, not otherwise exempted from his cognizance, of which the amount or value of  the 
subject -matter  does not exceed two thousand five hundred rupees.  
13. Appeals from decrees of D istrict Court s.—Regular or special appeals, 1*** shall, when 
such appeals are allowed by law, lie from the  decrees and orders of a District Court to the High  Court.  
Appellate jurisdiction of District Court. —Appeals from the decrees and orders of Subordin ate 
Judges and District Mirnsifs shall, when such appeals are allowed by law, lie to the District Court, 
except when the amount or value of the subject -matter of the suit exceeds rupees five thousand, in 
which case the appeal shall l ie to the High Court:  
Appellate jurisdiction of Subordinate Judge. —Provided that, whenever a Subordinate Judge ’s 
Court is established in any District at a place remote from the station of the District Court, the High 
Court may, with the previous sanction o f the Local Government, direct that appeals from the decrees 
or orders of District Munsifs within the local limits of the jurisdiction of such Subordinate Judge be 
preferred in the Court of the latter : 
Disposal of appeal by District Judge. —Provided also, that the District Judge may remove 
to his own Court, from time to time, appeals so pre ferred, and dispose of them himself, or may, 
subject to the orders of the High Court, refer any appeals from the decrees and orders of 
District Munsifs, pre ferred in the  District Court, to any Subordinate Judge within the District.  
14. Valuation of suits for immovable property. —When the subject -matter of any suit or pro -
ceeding is land, a house or a garden, its value shall, for the purposes of the jurisdiction conferred 
by this Act, be fixed in manner provided by the Court Fees ’ Act, 1870, section seven clause v.  
15. Power to require witness or party to make oath or 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS CIVIL COURTS’ ACT, 1873.pdf - page 5]
t Fees ’ Act, 1870, section seven clause v.  
15. Power to require witness or party to make oath or affirmation.  —Every Court under this 
Act may require a wit ness or party to any suit or other proceeding pe nding in such Court to make such 
oath or affirmation as is prescribed by the law for the time being in force.  
16. Law administered by Courts to Natives. —Where, in any suit or proceeding, it is neces sary 
for any Court under this Act to decide any question regarding succession, inheritance, marriage or 
caste, or any religious usage or institution,  
(a.) the  Muhammadan law in cases where the parties are Muhammadans,   
and the Hindu law in cases where the parties are Hindus, or  
(b.) any custom (if such there be ) having the force of law and governing the parties or property 
concerned,  
shall form the rule of decision, unless such law or custom has, by legislative enactment, been 
altered or abolished.  
(c.) In cases where no specific rule exists, the Court shall act  according to justice, equity and 
good conscience.  
17. Judges not to try suits in which they are interested ;—No District Judge, Subordinate Judge 
or District Munsif, shall try any suit to or in which he is a party or personally interested, or shall 
adjudicate upon any proceeding connected with, or arising out of, such suit.  
nor to try appeals form decrees passed by them in other capacities. —No District Judge or 
Subordinate Judge, shall try any appeal against a decree or order passed by himself in ano ther 
capacity.  
Mode of disposing of such suits and appeals. —When any such suit, proceeding or appeal comes 
before any such officer, he shall report the circum stances to the Court to which he is immediately          
subordinate.  
                                                      
1. The words  and figures “or appeals under Madras Regulation XI of 1832, section nine ,” rep. by Act 12 of 1891, the  First  
Schedule .  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS CIVIL COURTS’ ACT, 1873.pdf - page 5]
 by Act 12 of 1891, the  First  
Schedule .  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS CIVIL COURTS’ ACT, 1873.pdf - page 6]
6 
 The superior Court shall t hereupon dispose of the case in the manner prescribed by the Code of 
Civil Procedure, section six.  
Nothing in the last preceding clause of this section shall be deemed to affect the extraordinary 
original civil jurisdiction of the High Court.  
______  
PART I V. 
MISCONDUCT OF JUDGES.  
18. Sespension of Judge by Local Government. —Any District Judge, Subordinate Judge, or 
District Munsif may, for any misconduct, be suspend ed or removed by the Local Government.  
 
19. Suspension of Subordinate Judge by High Court. —The High Court may, whenever it sees 
urgent necessity for so doing, suspend a Subordinate Judge pending the orders of the Local 
Government.  
The High Court shall immediately report the cir cumstances of such suspension,  
and the Local Government shall make su ch order thereon as it thinks fit . 
20. Suspension of District Munsif by High Court . Commission of Inquiry. —The High Court 
may suspend any District Munsif who is alleged to have misconducted himself, or  may appoint a 
commission for enquiring into his alleged misconduct.  
Exercise by High Court of powers conferred on Government by Act XXXVII  of 1850. —The 
provisions of Act No . XXXVII  of 1850 ( for regulating enquiries into the behaviour of public                         
servants ) shall apply to enquiries under this section, the powers conferred by that Act on the 
Government being exercised by the High Court.  
On receiving the report of the result of any such enquiry, the High Court may, if it think fit, 
remov e the Munsif from office, or suspend him, or reduce him to a lower grade.  
21. Suspension of District Munisf by District Judge. —The District Judge may suspend from 
office,  whenever he sees urgent necessity for so doing, any District Munsif under his control . 
Report to High Court. —Whenever a District Judge exercises the power to conferred by this 
section, he shall forthwith send to  the High Court the a full report of the circumsta
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS CIVIL COURTS’ ACT, 1873.pdf - page 6]
rred by this 
section, he shall forthwith send to  the High Court the a full report of the circumstances of the case, 
together with the evidence, if any, and the  High Court shall m ake such order thereon as it  thinks fit.  
______ _ 
PART V.  
MINISTERIAL OFFICERS . 
22. Appointment, suspension or removal of Ministerial Officers of District Courts.  —The 
Ministerial Officers of the District Courts shall be appointed, and may be suspended or removed, by 
the Judges of such Courts, whose orders in such matters shall 1[subject to the control of the High 
Court] be final.  
2[23. Appointment and removal of min isterial officers of subordinate  Courts. —The 
Ministerial Officers of the Courts of the Subordinate Judges and District Munsifs shall be appointed 
by such Subordinate Judges and District Munsifs, respectively, subject to the approval or confirmation 
of the District Judge within whose jurisdiction such Courts are situate, and may 1[Subject to the 
control of the High Court] be suspended or removed from offices either by the said District Judge or 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 21 of 1885, s. 4 . 
2. Subs. by Act 19 of 1877, s. 2, for section 23.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS CIVIL COURTS’ ACT, 1873.pdf - page 7]
7 
 (subject to his approval or confirmation) by such Subordinate Judges and District Munsifs 
respectively. ] 
24. Rules regula ting such appointments. — Every appointment under this Part shall be made 
subject to such rules as the Local Government from time to tim e prescribes on this behalf.  
Duties of Ministerial Officers. —Every person appointed under this Part shall perform such duties 
as may from time to time be imposed upon him by the presiding officer of the Court to which he 
belongs.  
Present Ministerial Office rs.—The present Ministerial Officers of the Courts under this Act shall 
be deemed to have been appointed under this Part.  
1[24A. Transfer of Ministerial Officers.  — The Local Government may, at the instance of the 
District Judge, transfer from any  Court, e xcept the High Court, all or any of the ministerial officers of 
the Court of such Judge, or of any Subordinate Judge or Distric Munsif under his control.  
The District Judge may transfer all or any of the minist erial officers of any Court under his control 
to any other such Court.]  
Present Ministerial Officers.  —The present Minist erial Officers of the Courts un der this Act 
shall be deemed to have been appointed  under this Part.  
_______  
PART VI.  
MISCELLANEOUS . 
25. Temporary Discharge of duties of District Judge. —In the event of the death of the District 
Judge,   
or of his being incapacitated by illness or otherwise for the performance of his duties,  
or of his absence from the station in which his Court is held,  
the senior Subordinate Judge of the District sh all, without interruption to his ordinary duties, 
assume charge of the District Judge ’s office, and shall dis charge such of the current duties thereof as 
are con nected with the filing of suits and appeals, the ex ecution of processes and the like,  
and sh all continue in charge of the office until the same is resumed or assumed by an officer duly 
appoint ed thereto.  
26. District Judge may nominate to
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS CIVIL COURTS’ ACT, 1873.pdf - page 7]
e is resumed or assumed by an officer duly 
appoint ed thereto.  
26. District Judge may nominate to vacancy in office of District Munsif. —The District Judge, 
on the occurrence within his district of any vacan cy in the office of District Munsif may, pending the 
orders of the High Court thereon, appoint such person as he thinks fit to act in such office ;   
and he shall at once report to the High Court the occurrence of every such vacancy and such 
appoint ment.  
27. District Judge to control Civil Courts of District. —Subject to the other provisions of this 
Act and to the rules for the time being in force and prescribed by the High Court in this behalf, the 
general control over all the Civil Courts under this Act in  any District is vested in the District Judge.  
28. Investiture of 2[District or] Subordinate Judge with Small Cause jurisdiction. —The Local 
Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, invest, within such local limits as it shall 
from time to t ime appoint,  
any 2[District or] Subordinate Judge with the jurisdiction of a Judge of a Court of Small Causes for 
the trial of suits cognizable by such Courts up to the amount of rupees  3[one thousand] , 
                                                      
1. Ins . by Act 19 of 1877, s. 3.  
2. Ins. by Act 21 of 1885, s. 5.  
3. Subs. by Act 18 of 1926, s. 2, for “ five hundred ”.    
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS CIVIL COURTS’ ACT, 1873.pdf - page 8]
8 
 Investiture of District Munsif with similar jurisdict ion.—and any District Munsif with the same 
jurisdiction up to the amount of rupees fifty  1[or on the recommendation of the High Court up to any 
amount not exceeding rupees 2[three  hundred ]], 
and may, by like notification, whenever it thinks fit, withdraw s uch jurisdiction from the Subordinate 
Judge or Munsif so invested.  
3[29. Exercise by Subordinate Judge of jurisdiction of District Judge in certain             
proceedings. —(1) The High Court may, by general or special order, authori se any Subordinate Judge 
to take cognizance of, or any District Judge to transfer to any Subordinate Judge under his control, 
any proceedings under the Indian Succession Act, 1925  (39 of 1925) , which cannot be disposed of by 
District Delegates.  
(2)  The Dist rict Judge may withdraw any such proceedings taken cognizance of by, or transferred 
to, a Subordinate Judge, and may either himself dispose of them or transfer them to a Court under his 
control competent to dispose of them.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything con tained in section 13, proceedings taken cognizance of by, or 
transferred to, a Subordinate Judge under the provisions of this section shall be disposed of by him 
subject to the law applicable to like proceedings when disposed of by the District Judge.]  
30. Vacation. —The High Court may permit the Civil Courts  under its control to adjourn from 
time to time for  periods not exceeding in the aggregate two months in  each year.  
SCHEDULE .—[Enactments repealed .] Rep. by the Repealing Act , 1873 (12 of 1873), s. 2 and the 
Schedule . 
 
_______  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 21 of 1885, s. 5.  
2. Subs. by Act 18 of 1926, s. 2, for “two hundred”  
3. Ins. by Act 14 of 1926, s. 2.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS DISTRICT POLICE ACT, 1859.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE MADRAS DISTRICT POLICE  ACT, 18 59 
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Interpretation.  
2. Laws repealed.  
3. Jurisdiction of Officers appointed under Regulation XI, 1816.  
4. Superintendence vested in Governor in Council.  
5. Inspector -General of Police,  &c. 
6. Powers of Police, &c.  
7. Inspector -General to be appointed a Justice of the Peace.  To have the powers of a Magistrate but 
to exercise such powers under the orders of Government. District Superintendent may be 
appointed a Magistrate.  In what cases he may act in that capacity.  
8. Constitution of the Force.  
9. Inspector -General to control Force and make rules.  
10. Appointment and dismissal of Police Officers.  
11. Police Officers to receive certificates of Office.  
12. Police Superannuation Fund.  
13. Additional Police Officers empl oyed at the cost of Individuals.  
14. Appointment of additional Force in the neighbourhood of Railway and other works.  
15. Payment of money for support of additional Police Force.  
16. Special Police Officers.  
17. Powers of special Police Officers.  
18. Refusal to serve.  
19. Police Officers not to  resign without leave or two months’ notice.  
20. Unlawful assumption of Police functions, personation of Police, &c.  
21. Duties of Police Officers.  
22. Police Officer may arrest without warrant.  
23. Persons arrested without warrant to be taken to Station Ho use until brought before Magistrate or 
bailed.  
24. Release on bail.  
25. Superior Officer of Police may take recognizance for appearance of prosecutor or witness.  
26. Condition of recognizance.  
27. Remands.  
28. Entering drinking shops, &c. without a warrant.  
29. Inspection of weig hts and measures.  
30. Police Officer not to receive complaints of petty offences.  
31. Police Officers may lay informations, &c.   
32. All warrants &c. to be executed by Officers of the Police Force.  
33. Warrant to be endorsed.  
34. Service of summonses, &c.  
35. War
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS DISTRICT POLICE ACT, 1859.pdf - page 1]
fficers of the Police Force.  
33. Warrant to be endorsed.  
34. Service of summonses, &c.  
35. Warrant without sum mons.  
36. Notification of substance of warrant.  
37. Warrant how to be executed.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS DISTRICT POLICE ACT, 1859.pdf - page 2]
2 
 SECTIONS  
38. No unnecessary restraint.  
39. Breaking of outer door of window.  
40. Breaking open Zenanah or female apartment.  
41. Party arrested to be brought immediately to the authority mentioned in t he warrant.  
42. No threat or promise, to compel disclosure by party arrested.  
43. Police Officer may require assistance. Penalty for refusal to assist.  
44. Penalties for neglect of duty &c.  
45. Penalty for receiving unauthorized fees, &c.  
46. Penalty for extortion, &c.  
47. Penalty for obstructing a Police Officer in the execution of his duty.  
48. Certain duties of Police Officers within the limits of Towns. Obstructions and nuisances in roads.  
49. Regulation of public processions, &c., and of carriages and persons at places of publi c resort. 
Licenses for use of music in streets.  
50. Jurisdiction.  
51. Liability to prosecution for higher penalties not affected.  
52. Levy of fines.  
53. Limitation of action.  
54. Plea that act was done under a warrant.  
55. Operation of Act.  
 
SHEDULE.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS DISTRICT POLICE ACT, 1859.pdf - page 3]
3 
 THE MADRAS  DISTRICT POLICE  ACT, 18 59 
ACT NO. XXIV  OF 1859 
 
PASSED  BY THE LEGISLATIVE  COUNCIL  OF INDIA  
(Received the assent of the Governor General on the  6th September  1859.) 
An Act for the better regulation of the Police within the Territories subject to the Presidency of Fort           
St. George.  
Preamble .—WHEREAS  it is expedient to make the Police Force throughout the Madras Presidency a 
more efficient instrument at the disposal of the Magistrate for the prevention and detection of crime, and 
to re -organize the Police Force and improve the condition of the Village Police:  it is enacted as                 
follows:  — 
I. Interpretation. —The following words and expressions in  this Act shall have the meanings hereby 
assigned to them, unless there be something in the subject or context repugnant to such construction (that 
is to say),  
“Magistrate. ” — The word "Magistrate" shall include all persons, within their respective 
jurisdictions, exercising all or any of the powers of a Magistrate;  
“Subordinate .”—The word “Subordinate,” as applied to Police functionaries, shall mean 
District Superintendents a nd their Assistants.  
“Police.” —The word “Police” shall include General and Village Police, Cuttoobadies, 
Kavilgars, and all other persons, by whatever name known, who exercise any Police functions 
throughout the Madras Presidency.  
“General Police District. ” - The expression "General Police District" shall embrace all districts 
to which the operation of this Act shall be extended;  
“Property. ” - The word "property" shall include any movable property, money or valuable 
security;   
Number. —Words importing the singular mumber shall include the plural number, and words 
importing the plural number shall include the singular number.  
Gender. —Words importing the masculine gender shall include females.  
“Person.” —The word “person” shall include comp any or corporation.  
“Month.” —The word  “month” shall mean calendar mon
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS DISTRICT POLICE ACT, 1859.pdf - page 3]
person” shall include comp any or corporation.  
“Month.” —The word  “month” shall mean calendar month.  
“Cattle.” — The word "cattle" shall, besides horned cattle, include elephants, camels, horses, 
asses, mules, sheep, goats and swine.  
II. Laws repealed. —The several Regulations and Acts  mentioned in the Schedule hereunto annexed 
are hereby repealed and amended to the extent and in the manner therein set forth, within the limits of the 
General Police District; except so far as they repeal the whole or any part of any other Regulation or A ct, 
and except as to any act or offence which shall have been done or committed, or to any fine or penalty 
which shall have been incurred or to any proceedings which shall have been commenced, before this Act 
shall come into operation  : Proviso. Provided a lso that nothing in this Section shall be construed to affect 
any judicial function or jurisdiction original or appellate, which by any existing law may be exercised by 
any of the Officers mentioned in the enactments above repealed.  
III. Jurisdiction of Officers appointed under Regulation XI. 1816. —Nothing contained in this Act 
shall affect the powers of appointment given to Magistrates by Section XL of Regulation XI. 1816 of the 
Madras Code or the jurisdiction or functions of Officers appointed under suc h powers, save only that no 
Officer so appointed shall be competent to exercise any of the functions or duties of Executive Police 
Officers.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS DISTRICT POLICE ACT, 1859.pdf - page 4]
4 
 IV. Superintendence vested in the  Governor in Council. —The superintendence of the police 
throughout the General Pol ice District shall vest in, and be exercised by the Governor in council, and, 
except as authorized by him  under the provisions of this Act, no person, Officer, or Court shall be 
empowered to  appoint, supersede, or control any Police functionary, any Regul ation Act or usage to the 
contrary notwithstanding.  
V. Inspector -General of Police, &c. —The administration of the Police throughout the General 
Police District shall be vested in an Officer to be styled the Inspector -General of Police for the Presidency 
of Madras, and in such Subordinates as to the Governor in Council shall seem fit, who shall from time to 
time be appointed by the Governor in Council, and may be removed by the same authority, and who shall 
receive such salary as the Governor General of Indi a in Council shall allow.  
VI. Powers of Police, etc.  — All powers not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act which up to 
the passing of this Act belonged by law to the existing police authorities shall be vested in the Police 
authorities appointed under this Act:  Provided that always that no police functionary so appointed shall 
possess or exercise any judicial or revenue authority.  
VII. Inspector -General to be appointed a Justice of the Pea ce. To have the powers of a 
Magistrate but to exercise such  powers under the orders of Government. District Superintendent 
may be appointed a Magistrate. In what cases he may act in that capacity .—The Inspector -General 
of Police shall be appointed a Justice of the Peace; he shall also have the full powers of a Mag istrate 
throughout the General Police District, but shall exercise these powers subject to such orders as may from 
time to time be issued by the Governor in Council. The Governor in Council may vest any District 
Superintendent of Police with all or any of the powers of a Magistrate within such limits as he
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS DISTRICT POLICE ACT, 1859.pdf - page 4]
ict 
Superintendent of Police with all or any of the powers of a Magistrate within such limits as he may deem 
proper; but such Superintendent shall exercise the powers with which he shall be so invested only so far 
as may be necessary for the peace, the prevention of crime, and the detection, apprehensio n, and detention 
of offenders in order to their being brought before a Magistrate, and as far as may be necessary for the 
performance of the duties assigned to him by this Act.  
VIII. Constitution of the Force. —The entire Police establishment of the Madras Presidency shall for 
the purposes of this Act be deemed to be one Police Force, and shall be formally enrolled, and shall 
consist of such number of Officers and men, and shall be otherwise constituted in such manner, as shall 
be from time to time ordered by the Governor in Council with the sanction of the Governor General of 
India in Council.  
IX. Inspector - General to control Force and make rules. —The Inspector -General may from time 
to time, subject to the appr oval of the Governor in Council, f rame such orders and regulations as he shall 
deem expedient, relative to the general government and distribution of the Force, the places of residence, 
the classification, rank, and particular service of the members thereo f; their inspection ; the description of 
arms, accoutrements, and other necessaries to be furnished to them ; to the collecting and communicating 
intelligence and information ; and all such other orders and regulations relative to the said Police Force as 
the said Inspector -General shall, from time to time, deem expedient for preventing abuse or neglect,  and 
for rendering such Force efficient in the Discharge of all its duties.  
X. Appointment and dismissal of Police Officers. —The appointment of all Police O fficers shall, 
under such rules as the Governor in Council shall from time to time sanctions, rest with the Inspector -
General of Police and the Deputy Superintendents, wh
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS DISTRICT POLICE ACT, 1859.pdf - page 4]
me to time sanctions, rest with the Inspector -
General of Police and the Deputy Superintendents, who may under such rules as aforesaid at any time 
dismiss, suspend, or fine to any amoun t not exceeding one month’s pay, any Police Officer whom they 
shall think remiss or negligent in the discharge of his duty, or otherwise unfit for the same.  
XI. Police Officers to receive certificates of Office. —Every person so appointed shall receive on h is 
enrolment a certificate (A)  under the seal of the Inspector -General, by virtue of which he shall be vested 
with the powers, functions, and privileges of the Police Officer. Such certificate shall cease to have effect 
whenever the person named in it is s uspended or dismissed, or otherwise removed from employment in 
the Police Force, and shall thereupon be immediately surrendered to his superior Officer, or other person 
empowered to receive it.  
XII. Police Superannuation Fund. —There shall be deducted from the pay of every Police Officer of 
a class not entitled to the benefit of the Uncovenanted Service Pension Rules, a sum after such rate as the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS DISTRICT POLICE ACT, 1859.pdf - page 5]
5 
 Governor in Counci l shall direct, not being a greater rate than one anna in the Rupe e; which sum so 
deducted and also the monies accruing from stoppages from the pay of Police Officers during absence 
from sickness or other cause, and fines imposed on Police Officers for misconduct, and from fines 
imposed by Magistrates and other upon drun ken persons, or for assaults upon Police Officers, and all 
monies arising from the sale of worn or cast -off clothing, or other articles supplied for the use of the 
Police, or from any other miscellaneous sources which shall be permitted by the Governor in Council, 
shall from time to time be invested in such manner and in such securities as the Governor in Council may 
direct, and the interest and dividends thereof, or so much of the same as shall not be required for the 
purposes herein mentioned, shall be li kewise in vested as aforesaid, and accumulate, so as to form a Fund 
to be called “The Police Superannuation Fund”; and shall be applied from time to time to the payment of 
superannuation or retiring allowances, or gratuities, under such rules as may be pas sed by the said 
Governor in Council : Proviso .-provided always that any Police Officer may be dismissed or removed 
without superannuation allowance; and that no Police Officer shall be entitled or right to any allowance 
from this Fund; or shall retain any right to a refund of any deduction made from him pay while he may 
have been a Police Officer.  
XIII. Additional Police Officers employed at the cost of individuals. —It shall be lawful for the 
Inspector -General of Police, or any District Superintendent, if t hey shall think fit, on the application of 
any person showing the necessity thereof, to depute any additional number of Police Officers to keep the 
peace at any place within the General Police District, at the charge of the person making the application, 
but subject to the orders of the said Inspector -General or District Superintendent and for
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS DISTRICT POLICE ACT, 1859.pdf - page 5]
cation, 
but subject to the orders of the said Inspector -General or District Superintendent and for such time as they 
shall think fit;  provided alays that it shall be lawful for the person on whose application such deputation  
shall have been made, on giving one mon th’s notice in writing to the Inspector -General or District 
Superintendent, to require that the Officers so appointed shall be discontinued: such person shall be 
relieved from the charge of such additional force from the expiration of such notice.  
XIV. App ointment of additional Force in the neighbourhood of  Railway and other works.  —
Whenever any Railway, Canal, or other Public work shall be carried on, or be in operation in any part  of 
the country, and it shall appear to the Inspector -General that the Appointment of an additional Police 
Force in such neighbourhood is rendered necessary by the behaviour or reasonable apprehension of the 
behaviour of the persons employed upon such work,  it shall be lawful for the Inspector -General, with the 
consent of the Governor in Council, to direct the employment of such additional Force, and to maintain 
the same so long as such necessity shall continue; and to make orders from time to time upon the 
Treasurer or other Officer having the control or custody of the Funds of any Company carrying on such 
works, for the payment of the extra Force so rendered necessary as aforesaid.  
XV. Payment of money for support of additional Police Force. —All monies paid  in respect of 
such additional Force ad is mentioned in the two last preceding Sections, shall be paid into a fund to be 
called “The General Police Fund,” and shall be applied to the maintenance of the Police Force under such 
orders as the Governor in Coun cil may pass; and all sums of money payable under those Sections shall be 
recoverable by suit in any competent Court or by distress and sale of the goods of the defaulter under the 
warrant of a Magistrate.  
XVI. Special Police Officers. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS DISTRICT POLICE ACT, 1859.pdf - page 5]
e of the goods of the defaulter under the 
warrant of a Magistrate.  
XVI. Special Police Officers. —When i t shall appear  that any tumult, riot, or outrage has taken place, 
or may be reasonably apprehended in any place, and that the ordinary Officers appointed for preserving of 
the inhabitants, and the security of property in such place, it shall be lawful for any Police Off icer not 
below the rank of Inspector to apply to the nearest Magistrate to appoint so many of the public or village 
servants, or residents of the neighbourhood, as such Police Officer may require to act as special Police 
Officers for such time and in such manner as he shall deem necessary; and it shall be the duty of such 
Magistrate at once to comply with such applications.  
XVII. Powers of special Police Officers. —Every special Police Officer so appointed shall have the 
same powers, privileges, and protecti on, and be liable to all such duties and penalties, and be subordinate 
to the same authorities as the ordinary Officers of Police.  
XVIII. Refusal to serve. —If any person being appointed a special Police Officer as aforesaid, shall 
without sufficient excuse  neglect or refuse to serve as such, or to obey such lawful order or direction as 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS DISTRICT POLICE ACT, 1859.pdf - page 6]
6 
 may be given him for the performance of his duties, he shall be liable upon conviction before a Magistrate 
to a fine not exceeding fifty Rupees for such neglect , refusal, or disobedience.  
XIX. Police Officers not to resign without leave or two months’ notice. —No Police Officer shall 
be at liberty to resign his office, or withdraw himself from the duties thereof, unless expressly allowed to 
do so in writing by the District Superintendent; or unless he shall have given to his superior Officer two 
months’ notice i n writing of his intention to do so. Nor shall any such Police Officer engage in any 
employment or office whatever, other than his duties under this Act, unless expressly permitted to do so 
in writing under the seal of the Inspector -General.  
XX. Unlawful a ssumption of Police functions, personation of Police, &c. —Farm and after the 
passing of this Act, every person, not being, or having ceased to be, a duly enrolled Police Officer, who 
shall unlawfully assume any function or power belonging to the Police; an d who shall not forthwith 
deliver up his certificate, and all the clothing, accoutrements, and appointments, and other necessaries 
which may have been supplied to him for the execution of his duty; or who shall have in his possession 
any distinctive articl e of the dress or appointment directed to be worn exclusively by the Police Force, 
without being able to account satisfactorily for his possession thereof; or who shall put on the dress of any  
Police Officer, or any dress designed to represent it, or to b e taken for it; or who shall otherwise personate 
the character of act the part of any Police Officer for any purpose whatever; shall, in addition to  any other 
punishment to which he may be liable for any offence committed under the assumed character,  be l iable 
on conviction before a Magistrate to a penalty not exceeding t wo hundred  Rupees, o r to imprisonment, 
with or without he rd labor,  for a period not exceeding s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS DISTRICT POLICE ACT, 1859.pdf - page 6]
wo hundred  Rupees, o r to imprisonment, 
with or without he rd labor,  for a period not exceeding six months, or both.  
XXI.  Duties of Police Officers. —Every Police Officer shall, for all pur poses in this Act contained, 
be considered to be always on duty and shall have the powers of a Police Officer in every part of the 
General Police District. It shall be his duty to use his best endeavours and ability to prevent all crimes, 
offences, and pub lic nuisances; to preserve the peace; to apprehend disorderly and suspicious character; to 
detect and bring offenders to justice; to collect and communicate intelligence affecting the public peace; 
and promptly to obey and execute all orders and warrants l awfully issued to him.  
XXII. Police Officer may arrest without warrant. —It shall be the duty of every Police Officer, and 
he is hereby authorized, to arrest without warrant — 
1. Person charged with or suspected of grave crimes. —Any person who is charged on credible 
information, or whom he has reasonable ground to suspect of having been concerned in any grave or 
forcible crime or outrage.  
2. Persons charged with aggravated assault recently committed. —Any person who is charged 
with committing an aggravated ass ault in every case in which he shall have good reason to believe 
that such assault has been committed, although not in his view, and that by reason of the recent 
commission of the offence a warrant could not have been issued.  
3. Persons committing a breach  of the peace. —Any person committing, or attempting to commit, 
any breach of the peace in his view, and who refuses to desist on being required thereto.  
4. Persons found injuring public buildings, &c. —Any person found injuring the public buildings, 
roads, tanks, and water channels, or committing any offence p unishable by law. Proviso . Provided 
always that where such offence is of a slight and petty nature, it shall not be necessary for the Police 
Officer to arrest, if, from the circu
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS DISTRICT POLICE ACT, 1859.pdf - page 6]
ht and petty nature, it shall not be necessary for the Police 
Officer to arrest, if, from the circumstances of the case, there is no reason to apprehend that the party 
will abscond.  
5. Vagrants and susp icious persons. —Any vagrant whom he shall find disturbing the public 
peace, or whom he shall have good cause to suspect of having committed, or being about to commit a 
crime; all persons whose name and residence is unknown, or whom he may find by night lyi ng or 
loitering in any high -way, road, or other place, and who, in either case, are unable to give a 
satisfactory account of themselves.  
6. Persons assaul ting Police Officer. —Any person who assaults, resists, or obstructs such Police 
Officer in the executi on of his duty or aids or excites others so to do.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS DISTRICT POLICE ACT, 1859.pdf - page 7]
7 
 7. Persons escaping from legal custody. —All persons who, having been in legal custody, shall 
have escaped therefrom.  
8. Persons charged with an offence, refusing to give name. —All persons who are charged with 
having done any injury or damage to the person or property of another, and who refuse to give their 
name and residence, or who give one which there is ground to believe to be false, may be detained 
solely for the purpose of ascertaining such name and residence, with a view to future proceedings.  
XXIII. Persons arrested without warrant to be taken to Station House until brought before 
Magistrate or bailed. —Every person taken into custody by any Police Officer, without warrant, except 
persons detained fo r the mere purpose of ascertaining their name and residence, shall forthwith be 
delivered into the custody of the Police Officer in charged of a Station House, in order that such person 
may be secured until he brough t before a Magistrate to be dealt with a ccording to law, or may give bail 
for his appearance before a Magistrate, if the Officer in charge shall deem it prudent to take bail as 
hereinafter mentioned; Proviso.  Provided always that, where bail is not taken, the prisoner shall be 
brought before a M agistrate within twenty -four hours, unless circumstances render delay unavoidable.  
XXIV. Release on bail. —Whenever any person shall be brought in custody, without a warrant, to 
any Station House, at a time when he cannot at one be sent before a Magistrate,  and shall be charged with 
any bailable offence, or with any unbailable offence of which it shall appear to the Officer in charge of 
the Station House that the prisoner is falsely accused, it shall be lawful for such Police Officer to release 
the accused o n bail or on his own recognizance to appear before the Magistrate when required.  
XXV.  Superior Officer of Police may take recognizance for appearance of prosecutor or 
witness. —It shall be lawful for every Police Office
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS DISTRICT POLICE ACT, 1859.pdf - page 7]
e recognizance for appearance of prosecutor or 
witness. —It shall be lawful for every Police Officer in charge of a Station, or other superior Officer of 
Police, to bind by recognizance any person to appear as prosecutor or as a witness before the Magistrate 
by whom any grave charge in being or is about to be investigated ; and if any such prosecutor or witness 
shall refuse to execute su ch recognizance, it shall be competent to such Officer to forward the person in 
custody to the Magistrate’s Court.  
XXVI. Condition of  recognizance. —Every Recognizance so taken shall be without fee or reward 
and shall be conditioned for the appearance of th e person there by bound before a Magistrate at such time 
and place as may be required, and the time and place of appearance, and the sum thereby acknowledged, 
not exceeding one thousand Rupees, shall be specified in the said recognizance, or in the conditi on 
thereof; and the Officer taking the recognizance shall return the same forthwith to the Magistrate present 
at the time and place when and where the party is bound to appear.  
XXVII. Remands. —If from the absence of witnesses, or from any other reasonable cause, it shall 
become necessary or advisable to defer the examination of any case, or the further examination of any 
witnesses, it shall be lawful for any Magistrate form time to time by his warrant to remand the accused to 
the custody of any Police Offic er, for such time as he shall deem necessary and reasonable, not exceeding 
eight clear days, to be secured in any Station House or jail or to be otherwise detained in custody as to the 
said Magistrate shall appear expedient: Proviso . provided always that a ny such Magistrate may order 
such accused party to be brought before him at any time or place before the expiration of the time for 
which such accused party shall have been remanded; or may discharge such accused party on his 
recognizances, with or without  sureties, conditioned for his appearance 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS DISTRICT POLICE ACT, 1859.pdf - page 7]
such accused party on his 
recognizances, with or without  sureties, conditioned for his appearance at the time and place appointed 
for such further examination.   
XXVIII. Entering drinking shops, &c. without a warrant. —It shall be lawful for any Police 
Officer without a warrant to enter and inspect all drinking shops gaming houses and other resorts of loose 
and disorderly characters all premises of persons suspected of receiving stolen property any locality 
vessel boat or conveyance in any part of which places he shall have just cause to believe that crime has 
been or is about to be committed or which he reasonably suspects to contain stolen property; and then and 
there to take all necessary measures for the effectual prevention and detection of crime and to take charge 
of all property reasonably suspected to have  been stolen and of all articles or things which may serve as 
evidence of the crime supposed to have been committed.  
XXIX. Inspection of weights and measures. —Every Police Officer, not below the grade of 
Inspector, shall be an inspector of weights and measures, and may enter any shop or premises for the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS DISTRICT POLICE ACT, 1859.pdf - page 8]
8 
 purpose of in specting the weights and measures and instruments for weighing kept or used therein,  and 
may se ize any weight, measure, or instrument for weighing, which he may have reason to believe is false.  
XXX. Police Officer not to receive complaints of petty offences. —No Police Officer shall receive 
any complaint of any petty offence; or take into his custody  any person brought to him accused of such 
petty offences, trespass, assault, quarrelling,  or the like; and it shall be lawful for any Police Officer to 
refuse to receive any charge of an offence of a grave character, if he shall on enquiry made of the 
complainant alone, see good grounds for doubting its truth: Proviso .- Provided always that, if the charge 
be not of such a nature as under ordinary circumstances would justify the Police Officer in refusing to 
receive it, the particular reasons for refusing i t are to be recorded by such Officer at the time.  
XXXI. Police Officers may lay informations, &c .—It shall be lawful for any Police Officer to lay 
any information before the Magistrate, and to apply for summons, warrant, search warrant, or such other 
legal  process as may by law issue and may be expedient under the circumstances, against any person 
committing an offence against any law or enactment, or against any regulation for the protection of the 
Revenue, or against any person committing or falling to re move any public nuisance or unwarrantable 
obstructions, keeping disorderly houses, harbouring thieves, disturbing the peace, obstructing the due 
course of justice, and the like, and to prosecute such offenders up  to final judgment; Proviso .-provided 
always  that any rewards, forfeitures, and p enalties, or shares of rewards, forfeitures, or penalties, which 
by law are payable to informers, and all costs of prosecution which may by any enactment be awarded to 
the prosecutor, shall be paid into the “General Pol ice Fund.”  
XXXII. All warrants &c. to be executed by Offic
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS DISTRICT POLICE ACT, 1859.pdf - page 8]
or, shall be paid into the “General Pol ice Fund.”  
XXXII. All warrants &c. to be executed by Officers of the Police Force. —From and after the 
passing of this Act, all summonses, warrants, search warrants, warrants of commitment for trial, or orders 
for the escort and conveyance of prisoners, and  all other processes issued by any Officer in any Criminal 
proceeding, shall be directed and delivered to Officers of the Police alone; and such processes shall be 
served and executed by them and none others.  
XXXIII. Warrant to be endor sed.—Where any such warrant, order, or process shall be directed or 
delivered to any of the said Officers, unless it be necessary for the due execution thereof that such warrant 
be executed without delay, the person receiving it shall deliver the same to any Officer authorize d for that 
purpose, who shall take charge of it, and appoint by endorsement thereon one or more Police  Officers to 
execute the same, or endorse it to any other Officer for a like purpose and every Police Officer whose 
name shall be so endorsed thereon sha ll be so endorsed thereon shall have the same powers, privileges, 
and protection as if the same had originally been directed to him by name; Proviso . Provided also that 
every such process shall be executed with all secrecy and dispatch; and shall have full  force in any part of 
the Madras Presidency except within the limits of the Supreme Court, without further formality or local 
endorsement; and that all Police authorities shall every where be assisting in the execution of such 
process.  
XXXIV. Service of su mmonses, &c. —Every summons, notice, or other Criminal process may be 
served on the party named personally, or be left with some adult male member of his family, or a copy 
thereof may be affixed on some adult male member of his family, or a copy thereof par ty failing or 
neglecting to obey such summons or notice duly served, shall be liable, at the discretion of the Magistrate 
or Court tha
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS DISTRICT POLICE ACT, 1859.pdf - page 8]
ch summons or notice duly served, shall be liable, at the discretion of the Magistrate 
or Court that issued the process, to a penalty not exceeding ten Rupees unless such person shall be able to 
prove that he was prevente d by unavoidable accident or other satisfactory cause from obeying such 
summons, notice, or the like.  
XXXV. Warrant without summons. —A Magistrate may, without issuing any summons, forthwith 
issue his warrant to bring before him any person charged with an o ffence cogni zable by him, or whose 
attendance it may for any reason be necessary to enforce, whenever it shall appear probable that such 
person will not attend unless compelled so to do.  
XXXVI. Notification of substance of warrant. —A Police Officer executing a warrant of arrest shall 
notify the substance of the warrant, and if required so to do shall show the warrant.  
XXXVII. Warrant how to be executed. —In making an arrest, the Police Officer executing the 
warrant shall actually touch or confine the body of the person to be arrested, unless there be a submission 
to the custody by ward or action.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS DISTRICT POLICE ACT, 1859.pdf - page 9]
9 
 XXXVIII. No unnecessary restraint. —After arrest the prisoner shall not be subjected to any more 
restraint than such as may be necessary to prevent his escape.  
XXXIX. Breaking of outer door or window. —Any Police Officer authorized by a warrant to arrest 
a person accused of any offence for which a warrant may issue on complaint, may break open any outer 
or inner door or window of a dwelling  house, whether that of  the person accused or of any other person, 
in order to execute such warrant, if, after notification of his authority and purpose, and demand of 
admittance duly made, he cannot otherwise obtain admittance.  
XL. Breaking open Zen anah or female apartment. —If information be received that a person 
accused of any offence for which a warrant may issue, has concealed himself in a Zenanah or female 
apartment in the actual occupancy of women, the Officer employed to execute the warrant shall take such 
precautions as may be necessary to prevent the escape of the accused; and if such person shall not deliver 
himself up , the Police Officer authorized to execute the warrant, may break open the Zenanah, and 
execute the process intrusted to him giving notice at the same tim e to any woman in the Zenanah that she 
is at liberty to withdraw.  
XLI. Party arrested to be brought immediately to the authority mentioned in the warrant. —
After arrest made, the Police Officer executing the warrant shall without unnecessary delay bring the  
person arrested before the Magistrate or other authority described in the warrant.  
XLII . No threat or promise, to compel disclosure by party arrested. —No Police Officer shall 
offer to the person arrested any in ducement, by threat or promise or otherwise,  to make any disclosure. 
But no Police Officer shall prevent the person arrested, by any caution or otherwise, from making any 
disclosure which he may be disposed to make of his own free will.  
XLIII . Police Officer may require assistance. Penalty for refus al to
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS DISTRICT POLICE ACT, 1859.pdf - page 9]
 make of his own free will.  
XLIII . Police Officer may require assistance. Penalty for refus al to assist. —If any Police Officer 
shall at any time find himself unable to effect an arrest, it shall be lawful for him to require any and every 
person present to assist and aid him in making the arrest; and any person who shall refuse or neglect to 
comp ly with such requisition, shall be liable, on conviction before a Magis trate, to a fine not exceeding 
fifty Rupees, or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding three months, or both.  
XLIV . Penalties for neglect of duty, etc. — Every Police -officer who sha ll be guilty of any violation 
of duty or  wilful breach of any lawful order s and regulations not punishable under Section X of this Act ;  
or who shall cease to perform the duties of his office without leave, or without having given two months ’ 
notice as pro vided by this enactment, or engage without authority in any employment other than his 
Police duty, or who shall maliciously and without probable cause prefer any false, vexatious or frivolous 
charge or information against any individual, or who shall knowi ngly and wilfully and with evil intent 
exceed his powers, or shall be guilty of any wilful and culpable neglect of duty, in not bringing any 
person who shall be in his custody without a warrant before a Magistrate as provided by law, or who shall 
offer any  unwarrantable personal violence to any person in his custody, shall be liable, on conviction, 
before a Magistrate, to a penalty not exceeding three months pay, or to imprisonment with or without hard 
labour not exceeding three months or both.  
XLV . Penalty  for receiving unauthori zed fees, &c. —Any Police -officer who shall on any pretext, 
or under any circumstances, directly or indirectly collect or receive any fee, gratuity, diet -money 
allowance or recompense, other than he may be duly authori zed by the  Inspector -General or other Officer 
acting under his order to collect or r
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS DISTRICT POLICE ACT, 1859.pdf - page 9]
duly authori zed by the  Inspector -General or other Officer 
acting under his order to collect or receive shall, on conviction before a Magistrate be liable to a penalty 
not exceeding six months ’ pay, or to imprisonment, with or without hard labour, not exceeding six 
months or both . 
XLVI . Penalty for extortion, &c.—Any Police  Officer who shall directly or indirectly extort, 
extract, seek , or obtain any bribe or unauthori zed reward or consideration, by any illegal threat or 
pretence, or for doing or omitting or delaying to do any act  which it may be his duty to do or to cause to 
be done, or for withholding or delaying any information which he is bound to afford or to communicate, 
or who shall attempt to commit any of the offences above said, or shall be guilty of cowardice, shall be 
liable, upon conviction before a Magistrate, to a fine not exceeding twelve months pay, or to 
imprisonment with or without hard labor not exceeding twelve months, or both:  Proviso . Provided always 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS DISTRICT POLICE ACT, 1859.pdf - page 10]
10 
 that nothing in the three last preceding sections shall be d eemed to preclude the Magistrate from 
committing for trial any cases of this nature too serious for his cognizance.  
XLVII . Penalty for obstructing a Police Officer in the execution of his duty .—If any person shall 
assault or resist any Police  Officer in th e execution of his duty ; or shall aid or incite any other person so to 
do; or shall maliciously and without probable cause prefer any false or frivolous charge against any 
Police -officer, such person shall, on conviction of such offence before any Magistra te, be liable to a fine 
not exceeding fifty rupees, or to imprisonment, with or without hard labour, not exceeding three months, 
or both.  
XLVIII . Certain duties of Police Officers within the limits of Towns. Obstructions and 
nuisances in roads. —Any person who in any street, road, thoroughfare, or passage, within the limits of 
any Tow n, commits any of the following offences, to the obstruction, inconvenience, annoyance, risk, or 
damage of the residents and passengers, shall, on conviction before a Magistrate , be liable to a fine not 
exceeding fifty Rupees, or to imprisonment not exceeding eight days; and it shall be lawful for any Police 
Officer to take into custody without warrant any person who within view commits any such offence.  
First . slaughtering cattle, furious riding, &c. — Any person who shall slaughter any cattle or clean 
any carcase in the streets; any person riding or driving any cattle recklessly and furiously, or training 
or breaking any horse or other cattle on or near any pu blic road, to the danger of the passers:  
Second . Cruelty to animals. —Any person who wantonly or cruelly abuses or tortures any animal:  
Third . Obstructing passengers. —Any person who shall keep any cattle, or conveyance of any 
kind standing in any road or st reet longer than is required for loading or unloading, or for taking up or 
setting down passengers; or who shall leave
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS DISTRICT POLICE ACT, 1859.pdf - page 10]
 required for loading or unloading, or for taking up or 
setting down passengers; or who shall leave any conveyance in such a manner as to cause 
inconvenience or danger to the public.  
Fourth . Exposing goods for sale on road. —Any person ex posing goods for sale on the road so as 
to obstruct  passengers:  
Fifth . Throwing dirt into street. —Any person who throws or lays down any dirt, filth, rubbish, or 
any stones or building materials; or who constructs any pial, cowshed, stable, or the like wit hin the 
bounds of any thoroughfare; or who causes any offensive matter to run from any house, factory, dung 
heap, or the like into the street:  
Sixth.  Being Found drunk in any thoroughfare. —Any person found in any thoroughfare drunk 
and riotous or incapable  of taking care of himself.  
Seventh.  Indecent exposure person. —Any person who willfully and indecently exposes his 
person, or any offensive deformity or disease, or commits nuisance by easing himself in or by the side 
of, or near any public street or thoroughfare; or by bathing or washing in any tank or reservoir, not 
being a place set apart for that purpose:  
Eighth . Neglect to protect dangerous places. —Any person who neglects to fence in or duly to 
protect any well, tank, or other dangerous place  or structure.  
XLIX. Regulation of public processions, &c., and of carriages and persons at places of public 
resort.  Licenses for use of music in streets. —The Superintendent and Superior Officers of Police may, 
as occasion req uires, direct the conduct of all as semblies and processions in the public roads, streets, or 
thoroughfares, prescribe the routes by which, and the times at which such processions may pass ; keep 
order in the public roads, streets, thoroughfares, ghauts, and landing places, and all other pla ces of public 
resort, and prevent obstructions on the occasion of such assemblies and processions and in the 
neighbourhood of places of worship during the time of public worship, and 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS DISTRICT POLICE ACT, 1859.pdf - page 10]
d processions and in the 
neighbourhood of places of worship during the time of public worship, and in any case when the roads, 
streets or, thoroughfares, ghauts or landing places, may be thronged, or may be liable to be obstructed ; 
they may also regulate the use of music in the streets, on the occasion  of native festivals and ceremonies; 
and may direct all crowds of twelve or more persons to disperse, when they have direct all crowds of 
twelve or more persons to disperse, when they have reason to apprehend any breach of the peace ; and 
every person opposing, or not obeying the orders so issued as aforesaid, or violating the conditions of 
such license, shall be liable to a fi ne not exceeding one hundred Rupees. Provided always that nothing in 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS DISTRICT POLICE ACT, 1859.pdf - page 11]
11 
 this Section contained shall be deemed to interfere with the general control of the Magistrate over such 
matters.     
L. Jurisdiction. —In all cases of convictions under this Act, the Magistrate trying the case shall be 
restrained within the limits of his ordinary jurisdiction as to the amount of fine or imprisonment he may 
inflict ; Proviso provided always that such charges against Police Officers above the rank of a Private 
shall only  be adjudicated on by European functionaries, and  that Village Watchers alone shall be liable to 
conviction by Heads of Villages.  
LI. Liability to prosecution for higher penalties  not affected. — Nothing contained in this Act shall 
be construed to prevent any person from being prosecuted for any offence made punishable on conviction 
by this Act  ; or to prevent any person from being liable under any other law, Regulation , or Act to any 
other or higher penalty or punishment than is provided for such offence b y this Act . Proviso .- Provided 
always that no person shall be punished twice for the same offence.  
LII. Levy of fines.  —All fines and penalties imposed , and all sums of money recoverable under the 
authority of this Act , may, in case of non -payment thereof, be levied by distress and sale of the  goods and 
chattels of the offender by warrant of the Magistrate , in manner provided by Act II of 1839 . 
LIII. Limitation of action.  - All actions and prosecutions against any person , which may be lawfully 
brought for any  thing done or intended to be done , under the provisions of this Act, or under the  general 
Police powers hereby given, shall be commenced within three months after the act complained of shall 
have been committed , and not otherwise; and notice in writing of such action and of the cause thereof , 
shall be given to the defendant; or to the Superintendent or other superior officer of the district in which 
the act was committed, one month at least before the commencemen t of the action;
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS DISTRICT POLICE ACT, 1859.pdf - page 11]
district in which 
the act was committed, one month at least before the commencemen t of the action; and no plaintiff shall 
recover in any such action, if tender of sufficient amends shall have been made before such action 
brought, or if a sufficient sum of money shall have been paid into Court after such action, brought by or 
on behalf o f the defendant; and though a decree shall be given for the plaintiff in any such action, such 
plaintiff shall not have cost against the defendant unless the Judge, before whom the trial shall be, shall 
certify his approbation of the action:  Proviso . provided always that no action shall, in any case lie where 
such officers shall have been prosecuted criminally for the same act.  
LIV. Plea that act was done under warrant. — When any action, prosecution , or proceeding shall 
be brought against any Police -officer  for any act done by him in such capacity, it shall be lawful for him 
to plead that such act was done by him under the authority of a warrant issued by a Magistrate; and such 
plea shall be proved by the production of the warrant directing the act and purpo rting to be signed by a 
Magistrate. And the defendant shall, thereupon, be entitled to a decree in his favour, notwithstanding any 
defect of jurisdiction in such Magistrate. And no proof of the signature of such official shall be necessary, 
unless the Cour t shall see reason to doubt it being genuine:  Proviso. - Provided always that any remedy 
which the party may have against the authority issuing such warrant shall remain entire.  
LV. Operation of Act. — This Act shall take effect in any and every such Distric t as the  Governor in 
Council shall by notification published in the Official Gazette.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS DISTRICT POLICE ACT, 1859.pdf - page 12]
12 
 SCHEDULE.  
_____  
 
LAWS REPEALED.  
 
The following words in Section XXX VI of Regulation IX. 1816: “The Officer entrusted with the 
service of the summons in such cases, as well as in all other cases wherein bail may not be required, shall 
demand only an acknowledgment of the receipt of it, and in the absence of the party, the su mmons may 
be served on the principal person in his house or family, if such person be willing to receive the same and 
to return an acknowledgment for the party;” and Section XLII.  
 
Regulation XI. 1816, Sections III, IV, V, VI, VII, XI, XV, XVI, XVII, XVIII, XXI, XXII, XXIII, 
XXIV, XXV, XXVI Clause 2, XXIX, XXXV, XXXVIII, XXXIX, XL, XLI, XLVIII, and LV.  
 
Regulation IV. 1821, Section III.  
 
So much of Clause 2 Section II of Regulation IV. 1821 as declares that all Subordinate Officers of 
Police of every d escription shall be subject to the authority of the Tuhseeldars of their respective Districts.  
 
So much of Section VII of Regulation VI. 1831, as affects Village Watchers or other persons holding 
village offices in the Police Department.  
 
Act VII of 1843, Sections XXXIX and XL.  
_____  
 
 LAWS AMENDED.  
 
So much of Clause 4 S ection XIII of Regulation XI. 1816, as directs the Head of the Village to 
apprehend any person supposed to have committed a murder.  
 
So much of Clause 1 Section XXVII of Regulation XI. 1816  as directs the Head of the Village to 
make every exertion to apprehend any person accused or suspected of having committed the offences 
referred to in the said Clause.  
_____  
 
 FORM A.  
A. B. has been appointed a Member of the Police Force under Act XXIV of  1859, and is vested with 
the powers, functions, and privileges of a Police Officer.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS RENT AND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1839.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE MADRAS RENT AND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1839  
________________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
SECTIONS  
1. [Repealed .]. 
2. Tahs ildars empowered to sell property distrained . 
3. Control of tahsildars in exer cise of such power . 
4. [Repealed .]. 
5. Fees for selling property to be credited  to Government . 
6. Delegation of tahsildars powers.  
 
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS RENT AND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1839.pdf - page 2]
2 
 ACT NO . VII OF 18391
2.  Tahs ildars empowered to sell property distrained. — 
[THE MADRAS  RENT AND REVENUE  SALES  ACT, 1839.]  
[18th March , 1839.]  
1. [Repeal of Reg . XXVIII of 1802, s . 23] Rep ., Act  XIV of  1874.  
2
6. Delegation of tahsildars powers.—And it is herby enacted that tahsildars shall have authority, 
subject to the orders of the Collector, to delegate the powers vested in them by the second section  of this 
Act to any public servants placed under their authority; and that the provisions of  **** All tahsildars within the territories 
subject to the  Presidency of Fort St. George shall be vested with the powers of Commissioners for the sale 
of property distrained for arrears of r ent or of revenue, and shall be subject to all rules and provisions to 
which by any law or regulation such Commissioners are subject.  
3. Control of tahsildars in exerc ise of such power. —Provided always that in respect of the exercise 
of those powers tahsildars sh all be subj ect to the control and superintendence of the Collector, and sha ll 
not be subject to the author ity of the Zila Judge, except in the case of any judicial  proceedings.  
4. [Their liabilities  in exercise of same power.] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act , 1891                
(XII of  1891).  
5. Fee s for selling property to be credited  to Government .—Provided also that tahsildars shall not 
be entitled to any fee or commission for selling such distrained property; but that all fees or commission 
which may be now lawfully taken by Commissioners for the sale of such distrained property shal l be 
taken and carried to the account of Government.  
3
                                                           
1. The short title was given by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1901 (XI of 1901).  
This Act was declared to be in force in the whole of the Madras Presidency, except the Scheduled Districts, by the Laws Local 
Extent Act, 1874 (XV of 1874), s. 4. G eneral Acts, Vol.  I
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MADRAS RENT AND REVENUE SALES ACT, 1839.pdf - page 2]
 Scheduled Districts, by the Laws Local 
Extent Act, 1874 (XV of 1874), s. 4. G eneral Acts, Vol.  II. 
It was  extended, under s. 5 of the Scheduled Districts Act, 1874, to the Scheduled Districts in Ganjam and Vizagapatam —see 
Gazette of India, 1898, Pt. I, p. 872 ; and to the Scheduled Districts in Godawari except the Xu gar Tah iq—see ibid, 1910, Pt. I, p. 
1161. 
2. The words “ And it is hereby enacted that from the said day ” were repealed by the Repealing Act, 1873 (XII of 1 873). 
3. The words and figures in square brackets have been substituted for the words “ the three last procee ding sections ” by the 
Amendin g Act, 1801 (XII of 189 1). General Acts, Vol.  IV. [sections 3 a nd 5] of 
this Act shall apply to all public servants to whom those powers shall have so delegated in the same 
manner as they apply to tahsildars.  
 
*** 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MAJORITY ACT, 1875.pdf - page 1]
1 
    
THE MAJORITY ACT, 1875  
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
 
PREAMBLE . 
 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
Local extent.  
Commencement and operation.  
2. Saving.  
3. Age of majority of persons domiciled in India.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MAJORITY ACT, 1875.pdf - page 2]
2 
 THE MAJORITY ACT, 1875  
ACT NO. 9 OF 18751 
[2nd March , 1875 .] 
An Act to amend the law respecting the age of majority.  
Preamble. —Whereas,  in the case of persons domiciled in  2[India] it is expedient 3[to specify the 
age of majority] ; It is hereby enacted as follows:  — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the 4*** Majority Act, 1875.  
Local extent. —5[It extends to the whole of India  6[excep t the State of Jammu and Kashmir]] ; 
Commencement and operation. —and it shall come into force and have effect only on the 
expiration of three months from the passing thereof.  
2. Saving .—Nothing herein contained shall affect: — 
(a) the capacity of any persons  to act in the following matters (namely), —marriage, dower, 
divorce and adoption;  
(b) the religion or religious rites and usages of any class of  7[citizens of India]; or  
(c) the capacity of any person who before this Act comes into force has attained major ity under 
the law applicable to him.  
8[3. Age of majority of persons domiciled in India .—(1) Every person domiciled in India shall 
attain the age of majority on his completing the age of eighteen years and not before.  
(2) In computing the age of any person , the day on which he was born is to be included as a whole 
day and he shall be deemed to have attained majority at the beginning of the eighteenth anniversary of 
that day.]  
                                                           
1. This Act has been extended to Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s.  2 and the First Schedule,  and the whole of 
the Union territory of Lakshadweep by Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 and Sch edule . 
This Act has been extended to Pondicherry by Act 26 of 1968, subject to the following modification:  
In section 1 at the end, insert: — 
“Provided that nothing contained in this Act shall apply to the Renoncants of the Union territory of Pondicherry. ”. 
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule, for “Part A States and Part C States”.  
3. Su
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MAJORITY ACT, 1875.pdf - page 2]
”. 
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule, for “Part A States and Part C States”.  
3. Subs. by Act 33 of 1999, s. 2, for “ to prolong t he period of nonage, and to attain more uniformity and certainty respecting 
the age of majority that now exists”  (w.e.f. 16 -12-1999) .  
4. The word “Indian” omitted by s. 3, ibid (w.e.f. 16 -12-1999 ).  
5. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for the original para.  
6. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule for “except Part B States”.  
7. Subs. by  the A.O. 1950, for “His Majesty’s subject s in India” . 
8. Subs. by Act 33 of 1999, s. 4 , for section s 3 and 4 (w.e.f. 16 -12-1999).   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MARRIED WOMEN’S PROPERTY ACT, 1874.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE MARRIED WOMEN’S PROPERTY ACT, 1874  
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
 
PREAMBLE  
I. —PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
2. Extent an d application.  
3. [Repeal ed.]. 
II.—MARRIED  WOMEN’S  WAGES AND EARNINGS  
4. Married women’s earnings to be their separate property.  
III.—INSURANCES BY WIVES AND HUSBANDS  
5. Married woman may effect policy of insurance.  
6. Insurance by husband for benefit of wife.   
IV.—LEGAL  PROCEEDINGS BY AND AGAINST  MARRIED  WOMEN  
7. Married wom an may take legal proceedings.  
8. Wife’s liability for postnuptial debts.   
V.—HUSBAND’S  LIABILITY FOR WIFE’S DEBTS  
9. Husband not liable for wife’s antenuptial debts.  
VI.—HUSBAND’S  LIABILITY FOR WIFE’S  BREACH OF TRUST OR DEVASTATION  
10. Extent of husband’s liability for wife’s breach of trust or devastation.
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MARRIED WOMEN’S PROPERTY ACT, 1874.pdf - page 2]
2 
 THE MARRIED WOMEN ’S PROPERTY ACT, 1874  
ACT NO. 3 OF 18741 
[24th February , 1874] . 
An Act to explain and amend the law relating to certain married women, for other purposes . 
Preamble. —WHEREAS  it is expedient to make such provision as hereinafter appears for the 
enjoyment of wages and earnings by women married before the first day of January, 1866, and for 
insurances on lives by persons married before or after that day:  
AND WHEREAS by the India n Succession Act, 18652 (10 of 1865), section 4, it is enacted that no 
person shall by marriage acquire any interest in the property of the person whom he or she marries, 
nor become incapable of doing any act in respect of his or her own property, which he or she could 
have done, if unmarried:  
AND WHERE AS by force of the said Act all women to whose marriages it applies are absolute 
owners of all property vested in, or acquired by , them, and their husbands do not by their marriage  
acquire any interest in such property, but the said Act does not protect su ch husbands from liabilities 
on account of the debts of their wives contracted before marriage, and does not expressly provide for 
the enforcement of claims by or against such wives:  
It is hereby enacted as follows: — 
I.—PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title. —This Act  may be called the Married Women’s Property Act, 1874.  
2. Extent and application .—3[It extends to the whole of India  except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir *.] 
But nothing herein contained applies to any married woman who at the time of her marriage 
professed the  Hindu, Muhamm adan, Buddhist, Sikh or Jain a religion, or whose husband, at the time 
of such marriage, professed any of those religions.  
And the  4[State Government] may from time to time, by  order, either retrospectively from the 
passing of thi s Act or prospectively, exempt from the operation of all or any of the provisions of this 
Act the  members of any race, sect or tribe or part of a race, sect or tribe, to whom
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MARRIED WOMEN’S PROPERTY ACT, 1874.pdf - page 2]
sions of this 
Act the  members of any race, sect or tribe or part of a race, sect or tribe, to whom it may consider it 
impossible or inexpedient to apply such provisions.  
The 4[Stat e Government] may also revoke any such  order, but not so that the revocation  shall have 
any retrospective effect.  
All orders and revocations under this section  shall be published in the Official Gazette.  
 5*    *    *   *    * 
3. [Commencement .] Rep. by the Repealing Act , 1876  (12 of 1876), s. 1 and Schedule . 
II.—MARRIED  WOMEN’S  WAGES  AND EARNINGS  
64. Married women ’s earnings to be their separate property .—The wages and earnings of any 
married woman acquired or gained by her after the passing of this Act,  in any employment, 
occupation or trade carried on by her and not by her husband,  
                                                           
1. The Act has been extended to and  brought into force in Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and the First 
Schedule (with modification) (w.e.f. 1 -7-1965).  
2. The relevant provision of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925) may now be referred to.  
3. Subs. by Act 61 of 1959, s. 2, for  the former para.  (w.e.f. 1-3-1960).  
4. The original words “G.G. in C.” have successively been amended by Act 38 of 1920, the A.O. 1937 and the A.O. 1950 to 
read as above.  
5. The last paragraph rep . by Act 39 of 1925, s. 392 and the Ninth Schedule.  
6. Cf. the Married Women’s Property Act 1870 (33 and 34 Vict., c. 93), s. 1, now rep. by Married Women’s Property Act, 
1882 (45 and 46 Vict., c. 75).  
*. Vide Notification No. S.O. 3912 (E), dated 30th October, 2019, this Act is made applicable to the Union territ ory of 
Jammu and Kashmir and the Union territory of Ladakh.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MARRIED WOMEN’S PROPERTY ACT, 1874.pdf - page 3]
3 
  
 
and also any money or  other  property so acquired by her through the exercise of any literary, 
artistic or scientific skill,  
and all savings from and investments of such wag es, earnings and property,  
shall be deemed to be her separate property, and her receipts alone  shall be good discharges for 
such wages, earnings and property.  
III. —INSURANCES BY WIVES AND HUSBANDS  
15. Married women may effect policy of insurance .—Any married woman may effect a policy 
of insurance on her own behalf and independently of her husband; and the same and all benefit  
thereof, if expressed on the face of it to be so effected,  shall ensure  as her separate property, and the 
contract evidenced  by such policy  shall be as valid as if made with an unmarried woman.  
26. Insurance by husband for benefit of wife .—3[(1) A policy of insurance effected by any 
married man on  his own life, and expressed on the face of it to be for the benefit of  his wife, or of  his 
wife and children, or any of them,  shall ensure and be deemed to be a trust for the benefit of  his wife, 
or of  his wife and children, or any of them, according to the interest so expressed, and  shall not, so 
long any object of the trust remains, be subject to the c ontrol of the husband or to  his creditors, or 
form part of  his estate.  
When the sum secured by the policy becomes payable, it  shall, unless special trustees are duly 
appointed to receive and hold the same, be paid to the Official Trustee  of the  4[State] in which the 
office at which the insurance was effected is situated, and  shall be received and held by  him upon the 
trusts expressed in the policy, or such of them as are then existing.  
And in reference to such sum he  shall stand in the sa me position in all respects as if he had been 
duly appointed trustee thereof by a  High Court, under Act  No. 17 of 1864  5[to constitute an Office of 
Official Trustee], s.10. 
Nothing herein contained  shall operate to destroy or impe
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MARRIED WOMEN’S PROPERTY ACT, 1874.pdf - page 3]
e an Office of 
Official Trustee], s.10. 
Nothing herein contained  shall operate to destroy or impede the right of any credit or to be paid out 
of the proceeds of any policy of assurance which may have been effected with intent to defraud 
creditors.  
6[(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in  s. 2, the provisions of  sub-section ( 1) shall apply in 
the case of any policy of insurance such as is referred to therein which effected — 
(a) by any  Hindu, Muhamma dan, Sikh or Jain — 
(i) in Madras, after the thirty -first day of December,  1913, or  
(ii) in any  other  territory to which this Act extended immediately before the commencement of 
the Married Women ’s Property (Extension) Act,  1959  (61 of 1959) , after the first day of 
April,  1923, or  
(iii) in any territory to which this Act extends on and from the commencement of the Married 
Women ’s Property (Extension) Act,  1959  (61 of 1959) ; 
(b) by a Buddhist in any territory to which this Act extends, on or after the commencement of the 
Married Women ’s Property (Extension) Act,  1959  (61 of 1959) : 
                                                           
1. Cf. the Married Women’s Property Act, 1870 (33 and 34 Vict., c. 93), s. 10, para. 1.  
2. Cf. the Married Women’s Property Act, 1870 (33 and 34 Vict., c. 93), s.10, para. 2.  
3. S. 6 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) of that section by Act 13 of 1923, s. 2.  
4. The word “Presidency” has been successively amended by the A.O. 1937, the A.O. 1950 and the Adaptation of Laws     
(No. 2) Order, 1956, to read as above.  
5. The relevant provisions of the Offici al Trustees Act, 1913 (2 of 1913) may be referred to.  
6. Subs. by Act 61 of 1959, s. 3  for sub -section ( 2), (w.e.f. 1 -3-1960) , Earlier inserted by 13 of 1923, s. 2.   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MARRIED WOMEN’S PROPERTY ACT, 1874.pdf - page 4]
4 
 Provided that nothing herein contained  shall affect any right or liability whic h has accrued or been 
incurred under any decree of a competent court passed  — 
(i) before the first day of April,  1923, in any case to which  sub-clause  (i) or sub-clause  (ii) of 
clause (a) applies ; or 
(ii) before the commencement of the Married Women ’s Property (Extension) Act,  1959               
(61 of 1959) , in any case to which  sub-clause  (iii) of clause (a) or clause (b) applies.]  
IV.—LEGAL  PROCEEDINGS BY AND AGAINST MARRIED  WOMEN  
17. Married women may take legal proceedings .—A married woman may maintain a suit in her 
own name for the recovery of property of any description which, by force of the said Indian 
Succession Act,  18652 (10 of 1865) or of this Act, is her separate property; and  she shall have, in her 
own name, the sam e remedies, both civil and criminal, against all persons, for the protection and 
security of such property, as i f she were unmarried, and  she shall be liable to such suits, processes 
and orders in respect of such property as  she would be liable to if  she w ere unmarried.  
8. Wife ’s liability for postnuptial debts .—If a married woman (whether married before or after 
the first day of January,  1866) possesses separate property, and if any person enters into a contract 
with her with reference to such property, or  on the faith that her obligation arising out of such contract 
will be satisfied out of her separate property, such person  shall be entitled to sue her, and , to the extent 
of her separate property, to recover against her whatever he might have recovered in  such suit had  she 
been unmarried at the date of the contract and continued unmarried  at the execution of the decree : 
3[Provided that nothing herein contained  shall — 
(a) entitle such person to recover anything by attachment and sale or  otherwise out of any  
property which has been transferred to a woman or for her benefit on condition that  she s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MARRIED WOMEN’S PROPERTY ACT, 1874.pdf - page 4]
 of any  
property which has been transferred to a woman or for her benefit on condition that  she shall have 
no power during her marriage to transfer or charge the same or her beneficial interest therein, or  
(b) affect the liability of a husband for debts contracte d by  his wife ’s agency expressed or 
implied.]  
V.—HUSBAND'S LIABILITY FOR WIFE'S DEBTS  
49. Husband not liable for wife ’s antenuptial debts .—A husband married after the thirty -first 
day of December, 1865 shall not by reason only of such marria ge be liable to  the debts of hi s wife 
contracted before marriage, but the wife shall be liable to be sued for, and shall, to the extent of her 
separate property, be liable to satisfy such debts as if he had continued unmarried:  
Proviso .—Provided that nothing contained in  this section shall  5*** invalidate any contract into 
which a husband may, before the passing of this Act, have  entered in consideration of hi s wife ’s                   
ante-nuptial debts.  
6[VI.—HUSBAND ’S LIABILITY FOR  WIFE’S  BREACH OF TRUST O R DEVASTATION  
10. Extent of husband’s liability for wife’s breach of trust or devastation. —Where a woman is 
a trustee, executrix or administratrix, either before or after marriage, her husband shall not, unless he 
acts or intermeddles in the trust or administration, be liable for any breach of trust committed by her, 
or for any misapplication, l oss or damage to the estate of the deceased caused or made by her, or for 
any loss to such estate arising from her neglect to get in any part of the property of deceased.]    
______ _ 
                                                           
1. Cf. the Married Women’s Property Act, 1870 (33 and 34 Vict ., c.93), s. 11, rep. By the Married Women’s Property Act, 
1882 (45 and 46 Vict., c.75).    
2. See now the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925).  
3. Subs. by Act 21 of 1929, s. 2, for the proviso.  
4. Cf. the Married Woman’s Property Act, 1870 (33 and 34  Viet., c. 93), s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MARRIED WOMEN’S PROPERTY ACT, 1874.pdf - page 4]
 s. 2, for the proviso.  
4. Cf. the Married Woman’s Property Act, 1870 (33 and 34  Viet., c. 93), s. 12.  
5. The words “affect any suit instituted before the passing of this Act, no r” rep. by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and the First 
Schedule.  
6. Ins. by Act 18 of 1927, s. 3.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MATERNITY BENEFIT ACT, 1961.pdf - page 1]
1 THE MATERNITY BENEFIT ACT, 1961 
_________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
__________ 
SECTIONS 
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Application of Act.  
3. Definitions.  
4. Employment of, or work by, women prohibited duri ng certain periods.  
5. Right to payment of maternity benefit.  
5A. Continuance of payment of maternity benefit in certain cases.  
5B. Payment of maternity benefit in certain cases.  
6. Notice of claim for maternity benefit and paymen t thereof.  
7. Payment of maternity benefit in case of death of  a woman.  
8. Payment of medical bonus.  
9. Leave for miscarriage, etc.  
9A. Leave with wages for tubectomy operation.  
10. Leave for illness arising out of pregnancy, del ivery, premature birth of child, miscarriage, medic al 
termination of pregnancy or tubectomy operation.  
11. Nursing breaks.  
12. Dismissal during absence of pregnancy.  
13. No deduction of wages in certain cases.  
14. Appointment of Inspectors.  
15. Powers and duties of Inspectors.  
16. Inspectors to be public servants.  
17. Power of Inspector to direct payments to be mad e.  
18. Forfeiture of maternity benefits.  
19. Abstract of Act and rules thereunder to be exhi bited.  
20. Registers, etc.  
21. Penalty for contravention of Act by employer.  
22. Penalty for obstructing Inspector.  
23. Cognizance of offences.  
24. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
25. Power of Central Government to give directions.  
26. Power to exempt establishments.  
27. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with  this Act.  
28. Power to make rules.  
29. Amendment of Act 69 of 1951.  
30. Repeal. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MATERNITY BENEFIT ACT, 1961.pdf - page 2]
2 THE MATERNITY BENEFIT ACT, 1961 
ACT  NO. 53 OF 1961 
[12 th December , 1961.] 
An Act to regulate the employment of women in certa in establishments for certain periods before 
and after child-birth and to provide for maternity benefit and certain other benefits.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twelfth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement.— (1) This Act may be called the Maternity Benefit Act,  
1961. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India 1***. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date 2 as may be notified in this behalf in the Official Gazette, — 
3[( a) in relation to mines and to any other establishme nt wherein persons are employed for the 
exhibition of equestrian, acrobatic and other perfo rmances, by the Central Government; and] 
(b) in relation to other establishments in a State, b y the State Government. 
2. Application of Act.—4[(1) It applies, in the first instance, — 
(a) to every establishment being a factory, mine or p lantation including any such establishment 
belonging to Government and to every establishment wherein persons are employed for the exhibition 
of equestrian, acrobatic and other performances; 
(b) to every shop or establishment within the meaning  of any law for the time being in force in 
relation to shops and establishments in a State, in  which ten or more persons are employed, or were 
employed, on any day of the preceding twelve months :] 
Provided that the State Government may, with the ap proval of the Central Government, after giving 
not less than two months’ notice of its intention o f so doing, by notification in the Official Gazette , 
declare that all or any of the provisions of this A ct shall apply also to any other establishment or c lass of 
establishments, industrial, commercial, agricultura l or otherwise. 
(2) 5[Save as otherwise provided in 6[sections 5A and 5B], nothing contained in this Act ] shall apply 
to any factory or other establishment to which the p
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MATERNITY BENEFIT ACT, 1961.pdf - page 2]
], nothing contained in this Act ] shall apply 
to any factory or other establishment to which the provisions of the Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1 948 
(34 of 1948), apply for the time being. 
3. Definitions.— In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appropriate Government” means, in relation to an  establishment being a mine, 7[or an 
establishment wherein persons are employed for the exhibition of equestrian, acrobatic and other 
performances,] the Central Government and in relati on to any other establishment, the State 
Government; 
(b) “child” includes a still-born child; 
                                                           
1. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ” omitted by Act 51 of 1970, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 1-9-1971).   
2. 1st November, 1963, vide  notification No. S.O. 2920 (E), dated 5th October,  1963, see  Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3 ( ii ). 
3. Subs. by Act 52 of 1973, s. 2, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 1-3-1975).  
4. Subs. by Act 61 of 1988, s. 2, for the opening p aragraph (w.e.f. 10-1-1989).  
5. Subs. by Act 21 of 1972, s. 2, for “Nothing cont ained in this Act” (w.e.f. 1-6-1972).  
6. Subs. by Act 53 of 1976, s. 2, for “section 5A” (w.e.f. 1-5-1976).  
7. Ins. by Act 52 of 1973, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-3-1975).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MATERNITY BENEFIT ACT, 1961.pdf - page 3]
3 1[( ba ) “commissioning mother” means a biological mother who uses her egg to create an embryo 
implanted in any other woman;] 
(c) “delivery” means the birth of a child; 
(d) “employer” means — 
(i) in relation to an establishment which is under th e control of the Government, a person or 
authority appointed by the Government for the super vision and control of employees or where no 
person or authority is so appointed, the head of th e department; 
(ii ) in relation to an establishment under any local a uthority, the person appointed by such 
authority for the supervision and control of employ ees or where no person is so appointed, the 
chief executive officer of the local authority; 
(iii ) in any other case, the person who, or the authori ty which, has the ultimate control over 
the affairs of the establishment and where the said  affairs are entrusted to any other person 
whether called a manager, managing director, managi ng agent, or by any other name, such 
person; 
2[( e) “establishment” means — 
(i) a factory; 
(ii ) a mine; 
(iii ) a plantation; 
(iv ) an establishment wherein persons are employed for  the exhibition of equestrian, acrobatic 
and other performances; 3*** 
4[( iva) a shop or establishment; or] 
(v) an establishment to which the provisions of this Act have been declared under sub-section 
(1) of section 2 to be applicable;] 
(f) “factory” means a factory as defined in clause( m) of section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 
1948); 
(g) “Inspector” means an Inspector appointed under se ction 14; 
(h) “maternity benefit” means the payment referred to  in sub-section ( 1) of section 5;  
5[( ha ) “medical termination of pregnancy” means the term ination of pregnancy permissible under 
the provisions of Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971 (34 of 1971);]  
(i) “mine” means a mine as defined in clause ( j) of section 2 of the Mines Act, 1952 (35 of 1952);  
(j) “miscarriage” means expulsion of the contents of a pregnant uterus at any
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MATERNITY BENEFIT ACT, 1961.pdf - page 3]
, 1952 (35 of 1952);  
(j) “miscarriage” means expulsion of the contents of a pregnant uterus at any period prior to or 
during the twenty-sixth week of pregnancy but does not include any miscarriage, the causing of 
which is punishable under the Indian Penal Code (45  of 1860);  
(k) “plantation” means a plantation as defined in cla use ( f) of section 2 of the Plantations Labour 
Act, 1951 (69 of 1951); 
(l) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under  this Act; 
(m) “State Government”, in relation to a Union territ ory, means the Administrator thereof; 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 6 of 2017, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-4-2017). 
2. Subs. by Act 52 of 1973, s. 4, for clause ( e) (w.e.f. 1-3-1975).  
3. The word “or” omitted by Act 61 of 1988, s. 3 (w .e.f. 10-1-1988).  
4. Ins. by s. 3, ibid . (w.e.f. 10-1-1988).  
5. Ins. by Act 29 of 1995, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-2-1996).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MATERNITY BENEFIT ACT, 1961.pdf - page 4]
4 (n) “wages” means all remuneration paid or payable in  cash to a woman, if the terms of the 
contract of employment, express or implied, were fu lfilled and includes — 
(1) such cash allowances (including dearness allowanc e and house rent allowance) as a 
woman is for the time being entitled to; 
(2) incentive bonus; and 
(3) the money value of the concessional supply of foo d grains and other articles, 
but does not include — 
(i) any bonus other than incentive bonus; 
(ii ) over-time earnings and any deduction or payment m ade on account of fines; 
(iii ) any contribution paid or payable by the employer to any pension fund or provident fund 
or for the benefit of the woman under any law for t he time being in force; and 
(iv ) any gratuity payable on the termination of servic e; 
(o) “woman” means a woman employed, whether directly or through any agency, for wages in 
any establishment. 
4. Employment of, or work by, women prohibited duri ng certain periods.— (1) No employer 
shall knowingly employ a woman in any establishment  during the six weeks immediately following the 
day of her delivery 1[, miscarriage or medical termination of pregnancy] . 
(2) No woman shall work in any establishment during t he six weeks immediately following the day of 
her delivery 1[, miscarriage or medical termination of pregnancy] . 
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 6,  no pregnant woman shall, on a request being 
made by her in this behalf, be required by her empl oyer to do during the period specified in sub-secti on 
(4) any work which is of an arduous nature or which i nvolves long hours of standing, or which in any way  
is likely to interfere with her pregnancy or the no rmal development of the foetus, or is likely to cau se her 
miscarriage or otherwise to adversely affect her he alth. 
(4) The period referred to in sub-section ( 3) shall be — 
(a) the period of one month immediately preceding the  period of six weeks, before the date of her 
expected de
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MATERNITY BENEFIT ACT, 1961.pdf - page 4]
iod of one month immediately preceding the  period of six weeks, before the date of her 
expected delivery; 
(b) any period during the said period of six weeks fo r which the pregnant woman does not avail 
of leave of absence under section 6. 
5. Right to payment of maternity benefit.—2[( 1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, every woma n 
shall be entitled to, and her employer shall be lia ble for, the payment of maternity benefit at the ra te of the 
average daily wage for the period of her actual abs ence, that is to say, the period immediately preced ing 
the day of her delivery, the actual day of her deli very and any period immediately following that day. ] 
Explanation .—For the purpose of this sub-section, the average da ily wage means the average of the 
woman’s wages payable to her for the days on which she has worked during the period of three calendar 
months immediately preceding the date from which sh e absents herself on account of maternity, 3[the 
minimum rate of wage fixed or revised under the Min imum Wages Act, 1948 (11 of 1948) or ten rupees, 
whichever is the highest]. 
(2) No woman shall be entitled to maternity benefit u nless she has actually worked in an 
establishment of the employer from whom she claims maternity benefit, for a period of not less 
than 4[eighty days] in the twelve months immediately prec eding the date of her expected delivery: 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 1995, s. 3, for “or her misca rriage” (w.e.f. 1-2-1996).  
2. Subs. by Act 61 of 1988, s. 4, for the opening p aragraph (w.e.f. 10-1-1989). 
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid ., for “or one rupee a day, whichever is higher.” ( w.e.f. 10-1-1989).  
4. Subs. by s. 4, ibid ., for “one hundred and sixty days” (w.e.f. 10-1-19 89).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MATERNITY BENEFIT ACT, 1961.pdf - page 5]
5 Provided that the qualifying period of 1[eighty days] aforesaid shall not apply to a woman who has 
immigrated into the State of Assam and was pregnant  at the time of the immigration.  
Explanation.—For the purpose of calculating under t his sub-section the days on which a woman has 
actually worked in the establishment, 2[the days for which she has been laid off or was on  holidays 
declared under any law for the time being in force to be holidays with wages] during the period of twe lve 
months immediately preceding the date of her expect ed delivery shall be taken into account.  
3[(3) The maximum period for which any woman shall b e entitled to maternity benefit shall be 4 
4[twenty-six weeks of which not more than eight week s] shall precede the date of her expected delivery: ] 
5[Provided that the maximum period entitled to mater nity benefit by a woman having two or more 
than two surviving children shall be twelve weeks o f which not more than six weeks shall precede the 
date of her expected delivery:] 
6[Provided further that] where a woman dies during t his period, the maternity benefit shall be payable 
payable only for the days up to and including the d ay of her death: 
7[ 8[Provided also that] where a woman, having been del ivered of a child, dies during her delivery or 
during the period immediately following the date of  her delivery for which she is entitled for the 
maternity benefit, leaving behind in either case th e child, the employer shall be liable for the mater nity 
benefit for that entire period but if the child als o dies during the said period, then, for the days u p to and 
including the date of the death of the Child.] 
9[(4) A woman who legally adopts a child below the a ge of three months or a commissioning mother 
shall be entitled to maternity benefit for a period  of twelve weeks from the date the child is handed over 
to the adopting mother or the commissioning mother,  as the case may be. 
(5) In case where the nature of wor
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MATERNITY BENEFIT ACT, 1961.pdf - page 5]
opting mother or the commissioning mother,  as the case may be. 
(5) In case where the nature of work assigned to a woman is of such nature that she may work from 
home, the employer may allow her to do so after ava iling of the maternity benefit for such period and on 
such conditions as the employer and the woman may m utually agree.] 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Assam 
Amendment of Section 5 of Central Act 53 of 1961 (a s amended by Assam Act 12 of 1964). —In 
the explanation appended to sub-section ( 1) of section 5 of the principal Act, as amended by the Assam 
Act 12 of 1964, the word “six” appearing after the words “multiplied by” shall be substituted by the w ord 
“seven”. 
[Vide  Assam Act, 2 of 1984, s. 2.]  
10 [5A. Continuance of payment of maternity benefit in  certain cases.— Every woman entitled to 
the payment of maternity benefit under this Act sha ll, notwithstanding the application of the Employee s’ 
State Insurance Act, 1948 (34 of 1948), to the fact ory or other establishment in which she is employed , 
continue to be so entitled until she becomes qualif ied to claim maternity benefit under section 50 of that 
Act.] 
11 [5B. Payment of maternity benefit in certain cases. —Every woman—  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 61 of 1988, s. 4, for “one hundred and sixty days” (w.e.f. 10-1-1989). 
2. Subs. by, s. 4, ibid ., for the days for which she has been laid off” (w .e.f. 10-1-1989). 
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid ., for sub-section (3) (w.e.f. 10-1-1989). 
4. Subs. by Act 6 of 2017, s. 3 for ‘‘twelve weeks of which not more than six weeks’’ (w.e.f. 1-4-2017 ). 
5. Ins. by s. 3, ibid (w.e.f. 1-4-2017). 
6. Subs. by s. 3, ibid ., for “Provided that” (w.e.f. 1-4-2017) 
7. Subs. by Act 61 of 1988, s. 4, for the second pr oviso (w.e.f. 10-1-1989). 
8. Subs. by Act 6 of 2017, s. 3 for “Provided furth er that” (w.e.f. 1-4-2017). 
9. Ins. by, s. 3, ibid  (w.e.f. 1-4-2017). 
10. Ins. by Act 21 of 1972, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-6-1972).  

<|CHUNK|>
[THE MATERNITY BENEFIT ACT, 1961.pdf - page 5]
 
9. Ins. by, s. 3, ibid  (w.e.f. 1-4-2017). 
10. Ins. by Act 21 of 1972, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-6-1972).  
11. Ins. by Act 53 of 1976, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-5-1976).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MATERNITY BENEFIT ACT, 1961.pdf - page 6]
6 (a) who is employed in a factory or other establishme nt to which the provisions of the 
Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948 (34 of 1948), apply; 
(b) whose wages (excluding remuneration for overtime work) for a month exceed the amount 
specified in sub-clause ( b) of clause ( 9) of section 2 of that Act; and 
(c) who fulfils the conditions specified in sub-secti on ( 2) of section 5, 
shall be entitled to the payment of maternity benef it under this Act.] 
6. Notice of claim for maternity benefit and paymen t thereof.— (1) Any woman employed in an 
establishment and entitled to maternity benefit und er the provisions of this Act may give notice in wr iting 
in such form as may be prescribed, to her employer,  stating that her maternity benefit and any other 
amount to which she may be entitled under this Act may be paid to her or to such person as she may 
nominate in the notice and that she will not work i n any establishment during the period for which she  
receives maternity benefit. 
(2) In the case of a woman who is pregnant, such noti ce shall state the date from which she will be 
absent from work, not being a date earlier than six  weeks from the date of her expected delivery. 
(3) Any woman who has not given the notice when she w as pregnant may give such notice as soon as 
possible after the delivery. 
1[( 4) On receipt of the notice, the employer shall perm it such woman to absent herself from the 
establishment during the period for which she recei ves the maternity benefit.] 
(5) The amount of maternity benefit for the period pr eceding the date of her expected delivery shall 
be paid in advance by the employer to the woman on production of such proof as may be prescribed that 
the woman is pregnant, and the amount due for the s ubsequent period shall be paid by the employer to t he 
woman within forty-eight hours of production of suc h proof as may be prescribed that the woman has 
been delivered of a child. 
(6) The failure to give notice under t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MATERNITY BENEFIT ACT, 1961.pdf - page 6]
be prescribed that the woman has 
been delivered of a child. 
(6) The failure to give notice under this section sha ll not disentitle a woman to maternity benefit or 
any other amount under this Act if she is otherwise  entitled to such benefit or amount and in any such  
case an Inspector may either of his own motion or o n an application made to him by the woman, order th e 
payment of such benefit or amount within such perio d as may be specified in the order. 
 7. Payment of maternity benefit in case of death of  a woman.— If a woman entitled to maternity 
benefit or any other amount under this Act, dies be fore receiving such maternity benefit or amount, or  
where the employer is liable for maternity benefit under the second proviso to sub-section ( 3) of section 
5, the employer shall pay such benefit or amount to  the person nominated by the woman in the notice 
given under section 6 and in case there is no such nominee, to her legal representative. 
2[8. Payment of medical bonus.— (1) Every woman entitled to maternity benefit under t his Act shall 
also be entitled to receive from her employer a med ical bonus of one thousand rupees, if no pre-natal 
confinement and post-natal care is provided for by the employer free of charge. 
(2) The Central Government may before every three yea rs, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
increase the amount of medical bonus subject to the  maximum of twenty thousand rupees.] 
3[9. Leave for miscarriage, etc.— In case of miscarriage or medical termination of pr egnancy, a 
woman shall, on production of such proof as may be prescribed, be entitled to leave with wages at the rate 
of maternity benefit, for a period of six weeks imm ediately following the day of her miscarriage or, a s the 
case may be, her medical termination of pregnancy.]  
4[9A. Leave with wages for tubectomy operation.— In case of tubectomy operation, a woman shall, 
on production of such proof as may be prescribed, b e entitled to leave with wages 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MATERNITY BENEFIT ACT, 1961.pdf - page 6]
 a woman shall, 
on production of such proof as may be prescribed, b e entitled to leave with wages at the rate of mater nity 
benefit for a period of two weeks immediately follo wing the day of her tubectomy operation.] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 61 of 1988, s. 5, for sub-section ( 4) (w.e.f. 10-1-1989).  
2. Subs. by Act 15 of 2008, s. 2, for section 8 (w. e.f. 15-4-2008).  
3. Subs. by Act 29 of 1995, s. 4, for section 9 (w. e.f. 1-2-1996).  
4. Ins. by s. 5, ibid . (w.e.f. 1-2-1996).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MATERNITY BENEFIT ACT, 1961.pdf - page 7]
7 10. Leave for illness arising out of pregnancy, del ivery, premature birth of child 1[, miscarriage, 
medical termination of pregnancy or tubectomy opera tion].— A woman suffering from illness arising 
out of pregnancy, delivery, premature birth of chil d 1[, miscarriage, medical termination of pregnancy or  
tubectomy operation] shall, on production of such p roof as may be prescribed, be entitled, in addition  to 
the period of absence allowed to her under section 6, or, as the case may be, under section 9, to leav e with 
wages at the rate of maternity benefit for a maximu m period of one month. 
11. Nursing breaks.— Every woman delivered of a child who returns to dut y after such delivery 
shall, in addition to the interval for rest allowed  to her, be allowed in the course of her daily work  two 
breaks of the prescribed duration for nursing the c hild until the child attains the age of fifteen mon ths. 
2[11A. Crèche facility.—( 1) Every establishment having fifty or more employee s shall have the 
facility of créche within such distance as may be p rescribed, either separately or along with common 
facilities: 
Provided that the employer shall allow four visits a day to the creche by the woman, which shall also 
include the interval for rest allowed to her. 
(2) Every establishment shall intimate in writing a nd electronically to every woman at the time of her  
initial appointment regarding every benefit availab le under the Act.] 
12. Dismissal during absence of pregnancy.— (1) When a woman absents herself from work in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act, it shal l be unlawful for her employer to discharge or dism iss 
her during or on account of such absence or to give  notice of discharge or dismissal on such a day tha t the 
notice will expire during such absence, or to vary to her disadvantage any of the conditions of her se rvice. 
(2) (a) The discharge or dismissal of a woman at any time  during her pregnancy, if the woman but for 
such disc
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MATERNITY BENEFIT ACT, 1961.pdf - page 7]
discharge or dismissal of a woman at any time  during her pregnancy, if the woman but for 
such discharge or dismissal would have been entitle d to maternity benefit or medical bonus referred to  in 
section 8, shall not have the effect of depriving h er of the maternity benefit or medical bonus: 
Provided that where the dismissal is for any prescr ibed gross misconduct, the employer may, by order 
in writing communicated to the woman, deprive her o f the maternity benefit or medical bonus or both. 
3[( b) Any woman deprived of maternity benefit or medica l bonus, or both, or discharged or dismissed 
during or on account of her absence from work in ac cordance with the provisions of this Act, may, with in 
sixty days from the date on which order of such dep rivation or discharge or dismissal is communicated to 
her, appeal to such authority as may be prescribed,  and the decision of that authority on such appeal,  
whether the woman should or should not be deprived of maternity benefit or medical bonus, or both, or 
discharged or dismissed shall be final.] 
(c) Nothing contained in this sub-section shall affec t the provisions contained in sub-section ( 1). 
13. No deduction of wages in certain cases.— No deduction from the normal and usual daily wages 
of a woman entitled to maternity benefit under the provisions of this Act shall be made by reason only  
of — 
(a) the nature of work assigned to her by virtue of t he provisions contained in sub-section ( 3) of 
section 4; or 
(b) breaks for nursing the child allowed to her under  the provisions of section 11. 
 14. Appointment of Inspectors.— The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint such officers as it thinks fit to be Inspectors for the purposes of this Act and may define 
the local limits of the jurisdiction within which t hey shall exercise their functions under this Act. 
15. Powers and duties of Inspectors.— An Inspector may, subject to such restrictions or c onditions 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MATERNITY BENEFIT ACT, 1961.pdf - page 7]
15. Powers and duties of Inspectors.— An Inspector may, subject to such restrictions or c onditions 
as may be prescribed, exercise all or any of the fo llowing powers, namely: — 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 1995, s. 6, for “or miscarria ge” (w.e.f. 1-2-1996).  
2. Ins. by Act 6 of 2017, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-7-2017). 
3. Subs. by Act 61 of 1988, s. 7, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 10-1-1989).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MATERNITY BENEFIT ACT, 1961.pdf - page 8]
8 (a) enter at all reasonable times with such assistant s, if any, being persons in the service of the 
Government or any local or other public authority, as he thinks fit, any premises or place where 
woman are employed or work is given to them in an e stablishment, for the purposes of examining any 
registers, records and notices required to be kept or exhibited by or under this Act and required thei r 
production for inspection; 
(b) examine any person whom he finds in any premises or place and who, he has reasonable 
cause to believe, is employed in the establishment:  
Provided that no person shall be compelled under th is section to answer any question or give any 
evidence tending to incriminate himself; 
(c) require the employer to give information regardin g the names and addresses of women 
employed, payments made to them, and applications o r notices received from them under this Act; 
and 
(d) take copies of any registered and records or noti ces or any portions thereof. 
16. Inspectors to be public servants.— Every Inspector appointed under this Act shall be d eemed to 
be a public servant within the meaning of section 2 1 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). 
17. Power of Inspector to direct payments to be mad e.—1[( 1) Any woman claiming that — 
(a) maternity benefit or any other amount to which sh e is entitled under this Act and any person 
claiming that payment due under section 7 has been improperly withheld; 
(b) her employer has discharged or dismissed her duri ng or on account of her absence from work 
in accordance with the provisions of this Act, 
may make a complaint to the Inspector. 
(2) The Inspector may, of his own motion or on receip t of a complaint referred to in sub-section ( 1), 
make an inquiry or cause an inquiry to be made and if satisfied that — 
(a) payment has been wrongfully withheld, may direct the payment to be made in accordance 
with his orders; 
(b) she has been discharged or dismissed during or on  account of her abse
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MATERNITY BENEFIT ACT, 1961.pdf - page 8]
rdance 
with his orders; 
(b) she has been discharged or dismissed during or on  account of her absence from work in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act, may pas s such orders as are just and proper according to 
the circumstances of the case.] 
(3) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Inspe ctor under sub-section ( 2) may, within thirty 
days from the date on which such decision is commun icated to such persons, appeal to the prescribed 
authority. 
(4) The decision of the prescribed authority where an  appeal has been preferred to it under sub-
section ( 3) or of the Inspector where no such appeal has been  preferred, shall be final. 
2[( 5) Any amount payable under this section shall be re coverable by the Collector on a certificate 
issued for that amount by the Inspector as an arrea r of land revenue.] 
 18. Forfeiture of maternity benefit.— If a woman works in any establishment after she has  been 
permitted by her employer to absent herself under t he provisions of section 6 for any period during su ch 
authorised absence, she shall forfeit her claim to the maternity benefit for such period. 
 19. Abstract of Act and rules thereunder to be exhi bited.— An abstract of the provisions of this 
Act and the rules made thereunder in the language o r languages of the locality shall be exhibited in a  
conspicuous place by the employer in every part of the establishment in which women are employed. 
 20. Registers, etc.— Every employer shall prepare and maintain such regi sters, records and muster-
rolls and in such manner as may be prescribed. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 61 of 1988, s. 8, for sub-sections (1) and ( 2) (w.e.f. 10-1-1989).  
2. Subs. by s. 8, ibid. , for sub-section ( 5) (w.e.f. 10-1-1989).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MATERNITY BENEFIT ACT, 1961.pdf - page 9]
9 1[21. Penalty for contravention of Act by employer.— (1) If any employer fails to pay any amount 
of maternity benefit to a woman entitled under this  Act or discharges or dismisses such woman during o r 
on account of her absence from work in accordance w ith the provisions of this Act, he shall be punisha ble 
with imprisonment which shall not be less than thre e months but which may extend to one year and with 
fine which shall not be less than two thousand rupe es but which may extend to five thousand rupees: 
Provided that the court may, for sufficient reasons  to be recorded in writing, impose a sentence of 
imprisonment for a lesser term or fine only in lieu  of imprisonment. 
(2) If any employer contravenes the provisions of thi s Act or the rules made thereunder, he shall, if no  
other penalty is elsewhere provided by or under thi s Act for such contravention, be punishable with 
imprisonment which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or 
with both: 
Provided that where the contravention is of any pro vision regarding maternity benefit or regarding 
payment of any other amount and such maternity bene fit or amount has not already been recovered, the 
court shall, in addition, recover such maternity be nefit or amount as if it were a fine and pay the sa me to 
the person entitled thereto.] 
 22. Penalty for obstructing Inspector.— Whoever fails to produce on demand by the Inspector  any 
register or document in his custody kept in pursuan ce of this Act or the rules made thereunder or conc eals 
or prevents any person from appearing before or bei ng examined by an Inspector shall be punishable wit h 
imprisonment 2[which may extend to one year, or with fine which m ay extend to five thousand rupees], or 
with both. 
3[23. Cognizance of offences.— (1) Any aggrieved woman, an office-bearer of a trade union 
registered under the Trade Unions Act, 1926 (16 of 1926) of which such woman is a member or a 
voluntary organ
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MATERNITY BENEFIT ACT, 1961.pdf - page 9]
 under the Trade Unions Act, 1926 (16 of 1926) of which such woman is a member or a 
voluntary organisation registered under the Societi es Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) or an Inspec tor, 
may file a complaint regarding the commission of an  offence under this Act in any court of competent 
jurisdiction and no such complaint shall be filed a fter the expiry of one year from the date on which the 
offence is alleged to have been committed. 
(2) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magis trate or a Magistrate of the first class shall try any 
offence under this Act]. 
 24. Protection of action taken in good faith.— No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shal l 
lie against any person for anything which is in goo d faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of  this 
Act or of any rule or order made thereunder. 
25. Power of Central Government to give directions. —The Central Government may give such 
directions as it may deem necessary to a State Gove rnment regarding the carrying into execution of the  
provisions of this Act and the State Government sha ll comply with such directions. 
26. Power to exempt establishments.— If the appropriate Government is satisfied that hav ing regard 
to an establishment or a class of establishments pr oviding for the grant of benefits which are not les s 
favourable than those provided in this Act, it is n ecessary so to do, it may, by notification in the O fficial 
Gazette, exempt, subject to such conditions and res trictions, if any, as may be specified in the notif ication, 
the establishment or class of establishments from t he operation of all or any of the provisions of thi s Act 
or of any rule made thereunder. 
27. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with  this Act.— (1) The provisions of this Act shall 
have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent t herewith contained in any other law or in the terms  of 
any award, agreement or contract of service, whethe r made before or after the com
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MATERNITY BENEFIT ACT, 1961.pdf - page 9]
in the terms  of 
any award, agreement or contract of service, whethe r made before or after the coming into force of thi s 
Act: 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 61 of 1988, s. 9, for section 21 (w .e.f. 10-1-1989).  
2. Subs. by s. 10, ibid ., for “which may extend to three months, or with f ine which may extend to five hundred rupees” 
(w.e.f. 10-1-1989).  
3. Subs. by s. 11, ibid ., for section 23 (w.e.f. 10-1-1989).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MATERNITY BENEFIT ACT, 1961.pdf - page 10]
10 Provided that where under any such award, agreement , contract of service or otherwise, a woman is 
entitled to benefits in respect of any matter which  are more favourable to her than those to which she  
would be entitled under this Act, the woman shall c ontinue to be entitled to the more favourable benef its 
in respect of that matter, notwithstanding that she  is entitled to receive benefits in respect of othe r matters 
under this Act. 
(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed to preclude a woman from entering into an 
agreement with her employer for granting her rights  or privileges in respect of any matter which are m ore 
favourable to her than those to which she would be entitled under this Act. 
 28. Power to make rules.— (1) The appropriate Government may, subject to the co ndition of 
previous publication and by notification in the Off icial Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purp oses 
of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the gener ality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the preparation and maintenance of registers, rec ords and muster-rolls; 
(b) the exercise of powers (including the inspection of establishments and the performance of 
duties by Inspectors for the purposes of this Act; 
(c) the method of payment of maternity benefit and ot her benefits under this Act in so far as 
provision has not been made therefor in this Act; 
(d) the form of notices under section 6; 
(e) the nature of proof required under the provisions  of this Act; 
(f) the duration of nursing breaks referred to in sec tion 11; 
(g) acts which may constitute gross misconduct for pu rposes of section 12; 
(h) the authority to which an appeal under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 2) of section 12 shall lie; the 
form and manner in which such appeal may be made an d the procedure to be followed in disposal 
thereof; 
(i) the authority to which an appeal shall lie agains t the decision of the Inspector under section 1
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MATERNITY BENEFIT ACT, 1961.pdf - page 10]
i) the authority to which an appeal shall lie agains t the decision of the Inspector under section 17; 
the form and manner in which such appeal may be mad e and the procedure to be followed in disposal 
thereof; 
(j) the form and manner in which complaints may be ma de to Inspectors under sub-section ( 1) of 
section 17 and the procedure to be followed by them  when making inquiries or causing inquiries to be 
made under sub-section ( 2) of that section; 
(k) any other matter which is to be, or may be, presc ribed. 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under t his section shall be laid as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament w hile it is in session for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session 1[or in two or more successive sessions, and if, bef ore the expiry 
of the session immediately following the session or  the successive sessions aforesaid,] both Houses ag ree 
in making any modification in the rule or both Hous es agree that the rule should not be made, the rule  
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so how ever 
that any such modification or annulment shall be wi thout prejudice to the validity of anything previou sly 
done under that rule. 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 52 of 1973, s. 5, for certain words  (w.e.f. 1-3-1975).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MATERNITY BENEFIT ACT, 1961.pdf - page 11]
11  29. Amendment of Act 69 of 1951.— In section 32 of the Plantations Labour Act, 1951. 
(a) in sub-section ( 1), the letter and brackets “( a)” before the words “in the case of sickness”, the 
word “and” after the words “sickness allowance” and  clause ( b) shall be omitted; 
(b) in sub-section ( 2), the words “or maternity” shall be omitted. 
 30. Repeal.— On the application of this Act — 
(i) to mines, the Mines Maternity Benefit Act, 1941 ( 19 of 1941); and 
(ii ) to factories situate in the Union territory of De lhi, the Bombay Maternity Benefit Act, 1929 
(Bom. Act VII of 1929), as in force in that territo ry, shall stand repealed. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE MINES ACT, 1952  
——  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
——  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, exten t and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Act not to apply in certain cases.  
4. References to time of day.  
CHAPTER II  
INSPECTORS AND CERTIFYING SURGEONS  
5. Chief Inspector and Inspectors . 
6. Functions of Inspectors . 
7. Powers of Inspectors of Mines . 
8. Powers of special officer to enter, measure, etc.  
9. Facilities to be afforded to Inspectors . 
9A. Facilities to be provided for occupational health survey . 
10. Secrecy of information obtained . 
11. Certifying surgeons . 
CHAPTER III  
COMMITTEES  
12. Committees.  
13. Functions of the Committee . 
14. Powers , etc., of the Committee s. 
15. Recovery of expenses . 
CHAPTER IV  
MINING OPERATIONS AND MANAGEMENT OF MINES  
16. Notice  to be given of mining operations.  
17. Managers . 
18. Duties and responsibilities of owners, agents and managers.  
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS AS TO HEALTH AND SAFETY  
19. Drinking water. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 2]
2 
 SECTIONS  
20. Conservancy . 
21. Medical appliances . 
22. Powers of Inspectors when causes of danger not expressly provided against exist or when 
employment of persons is dangerous . 
22A. Power to prohibit employment in certain cases . 
23. Notice to be given of accidents . 
24. Power of Government to appoint Court of inquiry in cases of accidents . 
25. Notice of certain diseases . 
26. Power to direct investigation of causes of disease . 
27. Publication of reports . 
CHAPTER VI  
HOURS AND LIMITATION OF EMPLOYMENT  
28. Weekly day of rest.  
29. Compensatory days of rest . 
30. Hours of work above grou nd. 
31. Hours of work below ground.  
32. Night shift . 
33. Extra wages for overtime . 
34. Prohibition of employment of certain persons . 
35. Limitation of daily hours of work including overtime work . 
36. Notices regarding hours of work . 
37. Supervising Staff. 
38. Exemption from provisions regarding employment . 
39. Power to make exempting rules . 
40. Employment of persons below eighteen years of age . 
41. [Omitted. ]. 
42. [Omitted. ]. 
43. Power to require medical examination . 
44. [Omitted. ]. 
45. Prohibition of the p resence of persons below eighteen years of age in a mine . 
46. Employment of women.  
47. [Omitted. ]. 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 3]
3 
 SECTIONS  
48. Registers of persons employed . 
CHAPTER VII  
LEAVEWITH WAGES  
49. Application of Chapter . 
50. Leave defined . 
51. Calendar year defined . 
52. Annual  leave with wages . 
53. Wages during leave period . 
54. Payment in advance in certain cases . 
55. Mode of recovery of unpaid wages . 
56. Power to exempt mines . 
CHAPTER VIII  
REGULATIONS, RULES AND BYE -LAWS  
57. Power of Central Government to make regulations.  
58. Power of Central Government to make rules . 
59. Prior publication of regulation and rules.  
60. Power to make regulation s without previous publication . 
61. Bye -laws. 
61A. Laying  of regulations, rules and bye -laws before Parliament . 
62. Posting up of abstra cts from Act, regulations, etc . 
CHAPTER IX  
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE  
63. Obstruction.  
64. Falsification of records, etc . 
65. Use of false certificates of fitness . 
66. Omission to furnish plans, etc . 
67. Contravention of provisions regarding employment of labour . 
68. Penalty for employment of persons below eighteen years of age . 
69. Failure to appoint manager . 
70. Notice of accidents . 
71. Owner, etc., to report to Chief Inspector in certain cases . 
72. Obligation of pers ons employed in a mine . 
72A. Special P rovision for contravention of certain regulations . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 4]
4 
 SECTIONS  
72B. Special provision for contravention of orders under section 22 . 
72C. Special provision for contravention of law with dangerous results . 
73. General provision for disobedience of orders . 
74. E nhanced penalty after previous conviction . 
75. Prosecution of owner, agent or manager . 
76. Determination of owner in certain cases . 
77. Exemption of owner, agent or manager from liability in certain cases.  
78. Power of court to make orders . 
79. Limitation of prosecutions . 
80. Cognizance of offences . 
80A.  [Omitted. ]. 
81. Reference to Committee in lieu of prosecution in certain cases.  
CHAPTER X  
MISCELLANEOUS  
82. Decision of question whether a mine is under this Act . 
83. Power to exempt from operation of Act, regulations, etc. , 
84. Power to alter or rescind orders . 
85. Application of Act to mines belonging to Government . 
85A. Persons required to give notice, etc., legally bound to do so.  
85B. S igning of returns, notices, etc.  
 85C. No fee or charge to be realised for facilities and conveniences . 
86. Application of certain provisions of Act 63 of 1948 to mines . 
87. Protection of action taken in good faith .  
88. [Repealed .]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 5]
5 
 THE MINES ACT, 1952  
ACT NO. 35 OF 19521 
[15th March , 1952.]  
An Act to amend and consolidate the law relating to the regulation of labour and safety in 
mines.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, exten t and commencement .—(1)This Act may be called the Mines Ac t, 1952.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India 2* * *  
(3) It shall come into force on suc h date3 or dates as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this 
Act and for different States but not later than 3lst December, 1953.  
2. Definitions. —4[(1)] In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
5*   *   *   *  * 
(b) “adult ” means a person who has completed his eighteenth year;  
6[(c) “agent ”, when used in relation to a mine, means every person, whether appointed as such 
or not, who, acting or purporting to act on behalf of the owner, takes part in the management, 
control, supervision or direction of t he mine or of any part thereof; ] 
(d) Chief Inspector means the Chief Inspector of  Mines appointed under this Act;  
7[(e) “Committee ” means a committee constituted under section 12; ] 
(f) “day” means a period of twenty -four hours  beginning at midnight ;  
(g) “district magistrate ” means, in a presidency -town, the person appointed by the Central 
Government to perform the duties of a distric t magistrate under this Act in that town;  
8[(h)a person is said to be “employed ” in a mine who works as the manager or who works 
under appointment by the owner, agent or manager of the mine or with the knowledge of the 
manager, whether for wages or not — 
 (i) in any mining operation (including the concomitant operations of handling and 
transport o f minerals up to the point of de spatch and of gathering sand and transport thereof to 
the mine);  
(ii) in operations or services relating to the development of the mine including 
con
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 5]
 
the mine);  
(ii) in operations or services relating to the development of the mine including 
construction of plan therein but excluding construction of build ings, roads, wells and any 
building work not directly connected with any existing or future mining operations;  
                                                      
1. This Act has been extended to Goa, Daman and Diu with modifications by Reg. 12 of 1962, s.3 and The Schedule and to 
the Union territory of Pondicherry by Act 26 of 1968, s. 3 and The Schedule .  
2. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitte d by Act 25 of 1968, s. 2 and The Schedule.  
 (w.e.f. 15 -8-1968).  
3. 1st July, 1952, vide Notific ation No. S.R.O. 967 , dated 27th May, 1952, Gazette of India 1952, Part. II, sec.3.  
4. Section 2renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 62 of 1959, s. 2 (w.e.f.16 -1-1960).  
5. Omitted by Act 42 of 1983, s. 2 (w.e.f. 31-5-1984).  
6. Subs. by s.2, ibid., for clause (c) (w.e.f .31-5-1984).  
7. Subs. by s.2, ibid., for clause (e) (w.e.f .31-5-1984).  
8. Subs. by s.2, ibid., for cl ause (h) (w.e.f . 31-5-1984).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 6]
6 
 (iii) in operating, servicing, maintaining or repairing any part o f any machinery used in or 
about the mine;  
(iv) in operations, within the premises of the  mine, of loading for despatch of minerals;  
(v) in any office of the mine;  
(vi) in any welfare, health, sanitary or conservancy, services required to be provided 
under  this Act, or watch and ward, within the premises of the mine excluding residential area; 
or 
(vii) in any kind of work whatsoever which is preparatory or incidental to , or connected 
with, mining operations; ] 
(i) “Inspector ” means an Inspector of Mines appo inted under this Act, and includes a district 
magistrate when exercising any power or performing any duty of an Inspector which he is 
empowered by this Act to exercise or perform;  
1*   *   *   *  * 
2[(j) “mine ” means any excavation where any operation for the purpose of searching for or 
obtaining minerals has been or is being carried on and includes — 
(i) all borings, bore holes, oil wells and accessory crude conditioning plants, including the 
pipe conveying mineral oil within the oilfields;  
(ii) all shafts,  in or adjacent to and belonging to a mine, whether in the course of being 
sunk or not;  
(iii) all levels and inclined planes in the course of being driven;  
(iv) all open cast workings;  
(v) all conveyors or aerial ropeways provided for the bringing into or removal from a 
mine of minerals or other articles or for the removal of refuse therefrom;  
(vi) all adits, levels, planes, machinery, works, railways, tramways and sidings in or 
adjacent to and belonging to a mine;  
(vii) all protective works being carried o ut in or adjacent to a mine;  
(viii) all workshops and stores situated within the precincts of a mine and under the same 
management and used primarily for the purposes connected with that mine or a number of 
mines under the same management;  
(ix) all power s tations,  transformer sub -stations, con vertor stations, rectifier stations and 
acc
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 6]
x) all power s tations,  transformer sub -stations, con vertor stations, rectifier stations and 
accumulator storage stations for supplying electricity solely or mainly for the purpose of 
working the mine or a number of mines under the same management;  
(x) any premises for t he time being used for depositing sand or other material for use in a 
mine or for depositing refuse from a mine or in which any operations in connection with such 
sand, refuse or other material is being carried on, being premises exclusively occupied by th e 
owner of the mine;  
(xi) any premises in or adjacent to and belonging to a mine on which any process 
ancillary to the getting, dressing or preparation for sale of minerals or of coke is being carried 
on;] 
                                                      
1. Omitted by Act 42 of 1983, s. 2 (w.e.f. 31-5-1984).   
2. Subs. by s.2, ibid. for clause (j) (w.e.f 31 -5-1984).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 7]
7 
 (jj) “minerals ” means all substances which can be obtained from the earth by mining, digging, 
drilling, dredging, hydraulicing, quarrying or by any other operation and includes mineral oils 
(which in turn include natural gas and petroleum) ; 
1*   *   *   *  * 
(k) “office of the mine” means an office at th e surface of the mine concerned ; 
2[(kk) “open cast working ” means a quarry, that is to say, an excavation where any operation 
for the purpose of searching for or obtaining minerals has been or is being carried on, not being a 
shaft or an excavation which e xtends below superjacent ground ;]  
(l) “owner ”, when used in relation to a mine, means any person who is the immediate 
proprietor or lessee or occupier of the mine or of any part thereof and in the case of a mine the 
business whereof is being carried on by a liquidator or receiver , such liquidator or receiver3*** 
but does not include a person who merely receives a royalty, rent or fine from the mi ne, or is 
merely the proprietor of the mine, subject to any lease, grant or licence for the working thereof, or  
is merely the owner of the soil and not interested i n the minerals of the mine ; but 4[any contractor 
or sub -lessee] fo r the working of a mine or any part thereof shall be subject to this Act in like 
manner as if he were an owner, but not so as to exempt the  owner from any liability;  
(m) “prescribed “ means prescribe d by rules, regulations or bye -laws, as the case may be;  
5[(n) “qualified medical practitioner ” means a medical practitionerwho possesses any 
recognised medical qualification as defined in clause  (h) of section 2 of the Indian Medical 
Council Act, 1956  (102 of 1956)  and who is enrolled on a State medical register as defined in 
clause ( k) of that section ;]  
(o) “regulations ”, “rules ” and “bye-laws” mean respectively regulations, rules and bye -laws 
made under this Act;  
(p) where work of the same kind is carried out by two or more sets of persons wor
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 7]
 under this Act;  
(p) where work of the same kind is carried out by two or more sets of persons working during 
different periods of the day each of such sets is called a “relay ”6[and each of such periods is called 
a “shift”]; 
7[(pp) “reportable injury ” means any injury other than a serious bodily injury which involves, 
or in all probability will involve, the enforced absence of the injured person from work for a 
period of seventy -two hours or more;]  
8[(q) “serious bodily injury ” means any injury which i nvolves, or in all probability will 
involve, the permane nt loss of any part or section of a body or the use of any part or section of a 
body, or the permanent loss of or injury to the sight or hearing or any permanent physical 
incapacity or the fracture of  any bone or one or more joints or bones of any phalanges of hand or 
foot;  
(r) “week ” means a period of seven days beginning at midnight on Saturday night or such 
other night as may be approved in writing for a particular area by the Chief Inspector or an  
Inspector .] 
                                                      
1. Clause ( jjj) omitted by Act 42 of 1983, s. 2 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
2. Ins. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 2 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
3. Certain words o mitted by Act 42 of 1983 ,s. 2 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
4. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “any contractor” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
5. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for clause ( n) (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
6. Added by Act 62 of 1959, s. 2 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
7. Ins. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 2 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
8. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for clauses ( q) and ( r) (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 8]
8 
 1[(2) A person working or employed in or in connection with a mine is said to be working or 
employed — 
(a) “below ground” if he is working or employed — 
 (i) in a shaft which has been  or is in the course of being sunk ; or 
(ii) in any excavation which e xtends below superjacent ground ; and  
(b) “above ground” if he is working in an open cast working or in any other manner not 
specified in clause ( a).] 
2[3. Act not to apply in certain cases .—(1) The provisions of this Act, except those contained in 
3[sections 7,8,9,40,45 and 46] shall not apply to — 
(a) any mine or part thereof in which excavation is being made for prospecting purposes only 
and not for the purpose of obtaining minerals for use or sale:  
Provided that — 
 (i) not more than twenty persons are employed on any one day in connection with any 
such excavation;  
(ii) the depth of the excavation measured from its highest to its lowest point nowhere 
exceeds six metres or, in the case of an excavation for coal, fifteen metres; and  
(iii)no part of suc h excavation ext ends below superjacent ground ; or 
(b) any mine engaged in the extraction of kankar, murrum, laterite, boulder, gravel, shingle, 
ordinary sand (excluding moulding sand, glass sand and other mineral sands), ordinary clay 
(excluding kaolin, china clay, white clay or fire clay), building stone, 4[slate], road metal, earth, 
fullers earth, 4[, marl, chalk]  and lime stone:  
Provided that — 
(i) the workings do not extend below superjacent ground ; or 
(ii) where it is an open cast working — 
(a) the depth of the excavation measured from its highest to its lowest point nowhere 
exceeds six metres;  
(b) the number of persons employed on any one  day does not exceed fifty; and  
(c) explosives are not used in connection with the excavation.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Central Government may, if it is 
satisfied that, having regard to the circumstances obtaining in relation to a mine or pa
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 8]
, if it is 
satisfied that, having regard to the circumstances obtaining in relation to a mine or part thereof or 
group or class of mines, it is necessary or desirable so to do, by noti fication in the Official Gazette, 
declare t hat any of the provisions of this Act, not set out in sub -section ( 1), shall apply to any such 
mine or part thereof or group or class of mines or any class of persons employed therein.  
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 2), if at any time any of the 
conditions specified in the proviso to clause ( a) or clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) is not fulfilled in 
relation to any mine referred to in that sub -section, the provisions of this Act notset out in  
sub-section ( 1), shall become i mmediately applicable, and it shall be the duty of the owner, agent or 
manager of the mine to inform the prescribed authority in the prescribed manner and within the 
prescribed time about the non -fulfilment.]  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 2 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for s. 3 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960 ). 
3. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 3, for “sections 7, 8, 9, 44, 45 and 46” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
4. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 9]
9 
 4. References to time of day .—In this Act, refe rences to time of day are references to Indian 
standard time, being five and a half hours ahead of Greenwich mean time:  
Provided that, for any area in which Indian standard time is not ordinarily observed, the Central 
Government may make rules — 
(a) specify ing the area ; 
(b) defining the local mean time ordinarily observed therein; and  
(c) permitting such time to be observed in all or any of the mines situated in the area.  
CHAPTER II  
INSPECTORS AND CERTIFYING SURGEONS  
5. Chief Inspector and Inspectors .—(1)The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint such a person as possesses the prescribed qualifications to be Chief Inspector 
of Mines for all the territories to which this Act extends and such persons as possess the prescribe d 
qualifications to be Inspectors of Mines subordinate to the Chief Inspector.  
(2) No person shall be appointed to be Chief Inspector or an Inspector, or having been appointed 
shall continue to hold such office, who is or becomes directly or indirectly int erested in any mine or 
mining rights in India.  
(3) The district magistrate may exercise the powers and perform the duties of an Inspector subject 
to the general or special orders of the Central Government:  
 Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall b e deemed to em power a district magistrate to 
exercise any of the powers conf erred by 1[section  22 or section 22A] or section 61.  
(4)The Chief Inspector and all Inspectors shall be deemed to be public servants within the 
meaning of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
2[6. Functions of Inspectors .—(1)The Chief Inspector may, with the approval of the Central 
Government and subject to such restrictions or conditions as he may think fit to impose, by order in 
writing, authorise any Inspector named or any cla ss of Inspectors specified in the order to exercise 
such of the powers of the Chief Inspector under this Act (oth
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 9]
rs specified in the order to exercise 
such of the powers of the Chief Inspector under this Act (other than those relating to appeals) as he 
may specify.  
(2)The Chief Inspector may, by order in writing, prohibit or restrict the exercise by any  Inspector 
named or any class of Inspectors specified in the order of any power conferred on Inspectors under 
this Act.  
(3)Subject to the other provisions contained in this section, the Chief Inspector shall declare the 
local area or areas within which or the group or class of mines with respect to which Inspectors shall 
exercise their respective powers.]  
7. Powers of Inspectors of Mines .—(1)The Chief Inspector and any Inspector may — 
(a) make such examination and inquiry as he thinks fit in order to ascerta in whether the 
provisions of this Act and of the regulations, rules and bye -laws and of any orders made 
thereunder are observed in the case of any mine;  
(b) with such assistants, if any, as he thinks fit, enter, inspect and examine any mine or any 
part the reof at any time by day or night:  
Provided that the power conferred by this clause shall not be exercised in such a manner as 
unreasonably to impede or obstruct the working of any mine;  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 4, for “section 22” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
2. Subs. by Act 62 of 1959. s. 4, for s. 6 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 10]
10 
 (c) examine into, and make inquiry respecting, the state and condition  of any mine or any part 
thereof, the ventilation of the mine, the sufficiency of the bye -laws for the time being in force 
relating to the mine, and all matters and things connected with or relating to the health, safety and 
welfare of the persons employed  in the mine, and take whether on the precincts of the mine or 
elsewhere, statements of a ny person which he may consider necessary for carrying out the 
purposes of this Act;  
 (d) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed by regulations made by the Central 
Government in' this behalf : 
Provided that no person shall be compelled under this sub -section to answer any question or 
make any statement tending to incriminate himself.  
(2) The Chief Inspector and any Inspector may, if he has reason to believe, a s a result of any 
inspection, examination or inquiry under this section, that an offence under this Act has been or is 
being committed, search any place and take possession 1[of any material or any plan, section, register 
or other record] appertaining to t he mine, and the provisions of the 2[Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973  (2 of 1974)]  shall so far as may be applicable, apply to any search or seizure under this Act as 
they apply to any search or seizure made under the authority of a warrant issued under 3[section 94]  of 
that Code.  
8.Powers of special officer to enter,measure, etc. —Any person in the service of the 
Government duly authorised in this behalf by a specia l order in writing of the Chief  Inspector or of an 
Inspector may, for the p urpose of surveyin g, leveling  or measuring any mine 4[or any output 
therefrom] , after giving not less than three days ’ notice to the manager of such mine, enter the mine 
and may survey, level or me asure the mine or any part thereof 4[or any output therefrom] at any time 
by day or night:  
Provided that, where in the opinion of the Chief Inspector or of an Inspec
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 10]
 time 
by day or night:  
Provided that, where in the opinion of the Chief Inspector or of an Inspector an emergency exists, 
he may, by order in writing, authorise any such person to enter the mine for any of the aforesaid 
purposes without giving any such notice.  
9. Facilities to be afforded to Inspectors .—Every owner, agent and manager of a mine shall 
afford the Chief Inspector and every Inspector and every person authorised under section 8 all 
reasonable facilities for making any entry, inspection, survey, measuremen t, examination or inquiry 
under this Act.  
5[9A. Facilities to be provided for occupational health survey .—(1) The Chief Inspector or an 
Inspector or other officer authorised by him in wr iting in this be half may, at any time during the 
normal working hours of the mine or at any time by day or night as may be necessary, undertake 
safety and occupational health survey in a mine after giving notice in writing to the manager of the 
mine; and the owner, agent or manager of the mine shall afford all necessary faci lities (including 
facilities for the examination and testing of plant and machinery, for the collection of samples and 
other data pertaining to the survey and for the transport and examination of any person employed in 
the mine chosen for the survey) to su ch Inspector or officer.  
(2) Every person employed in a mine who is chosen for examination in any safety and 
occupational health survey under sub -section ( 1) shall present himself for such examination and at 
such place as may be necessary and shall furnish  all information regarding his work and health in 
connection with the said survey.  
(3) The time spent by any person employed in a mine who is chosen for examination in the safety 
and occupational health survey, shall be counted towards his working time, so  however that any 
overtime shall be paid at the ordinary rate of wages.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 10]
e of wages.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 5, for “of any register or other record ” (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
2. Subs by Act 42 of 1983, s. 5, for “Code of Criminal Proc edure, 1898 (5 of 1898)” (w.e.f. 31-5-1984).  
3. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “section 98” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
4. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
5. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 11]
11 
 Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, “ordinary rate of wages ” means the basic 
wages plus any dearness allowance and underground allowance and compensation in cash includ ing 
such compensation, if any, accruing  through the free issue of food grains and edible oils as persons 
employed in a mine may, for the time being, be entitled to, but does not include a bonus (other than a 
bonus given as incentive for production) or any c ompensation accruing through the provision of 
amenities  such as free housing, free supp ly of coal, medical and educational facilities, sickness 
allowance, supply of kerosene oil, baskets, tools and uniforms.  
(4) Any person who, on examination under sub -section ( 2), is found medically unfit to discharge 
the duty which he was discharging in a mine immediately before such presentation shall be entitled to 
undergo medical treatment at the cost of the owner, agent and manager with full wages during the 
period of  such treatment.  
(5) If, after the medical treatment, the person referred to in sub -section ( 4) is declared medically 
unfit to discharge the duty which he was discharging in a mine immediately before presenting himself 
for the said examination and such unf itness is directly ascribable to his employment in the mine 
before such presentation, the owner, agent and manager shall provide such person with an alternative 
employment in the mine for which he is medically fit:  
Provided that where no such alternative e mployment is immediately available, such person shall 
be paid by the owner, agent and manager disability allowance determined in accordance with the rates 
prescribed in this behalf:  
Provided further that where such person  decides to leave his employment in  the mine, he shall be 
paid by the owner, agent and manager a lump sum amount by way of disability compensation 
determined in accordance with the rates prescribed in this behalf.  
(6) The rates under the provisos to sub -section ( 5
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 11]
nce with the rates prescribed in this behalf.  
(6) The rates under the provisos to sub -section ( 5) shall be determined havin g regard to the 
monthly wages of the employees, the nature of disabil ities and other related factors .] 
10. Secrecy of information obtained .—(1) All copies of, and extracts from, registers or other 
records appertaining to any mine and all other information acquired by the Chief Inspector or an 
Inspector or by any one assisting him , in the course of the inspection 1[or survey] of any mine under 
this Act or acquired by any person au thorised under section 8 1[or section 9A] in the exercise of his 
duties thereun der, shall be regarded as co nfidential and shall not be dis closed to any person or 
authority unless the Chief Inspector or the Inspector considers disclosure necessary to ensure the 
health , safety or welfare of any person employed in the mine or in any oth er mine adjacent thereto.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall apply to the disclosure of any such information (if so 
required) to — 
(a) any Court;  
2[(b) a Committee or court of inquiry constituted or appointed under section 12 or section 24 
as the case may be;]  
(c) an official superior or the owner, agent or manager of the mine concerned;  
(d) a Commissioner for workmen ’s compensation appointed under the Workmen's 
Compensation Act , 1923  (8 of 1923) ;  
3[(e)the Controller, Indian Bureau of Mines;  
(f)any registered or recognised trade union;  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 8 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
2. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
3. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for clause ( e) (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 12]
12 
 (g)such other officer, authority or organisation as may be specified in this be half by the 
Central Government.]  
 (3) If the Chief Inspector, or  an Inspector or any other person referred to in sub -section ( 1) 
discloses, contrary to the provisions of this section, any such information as aforesaid without the 
consent of the Central Government, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term whi ch may 
extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.  
(4) No court shall proceed to the trial of any offence under this section except with the previous 
sanction of the Central Government.  
11. Certifying surgeons .—(1) The Central Government may appoint qu alified medical 
practitioners to be certifying surgeons for the purposes of this Act within such local limits or for such 
mine or  class or description of mines as it may assign to them respectively.  
(2) Subject to such conditions as the Central Government may think fit to impose, a certifying 
surgeon may, with the approval of the Central Government, authorise any qualified medical 
pract itioner to exercise all or any of his powers under this Act for such period as the certifying 
surgeon may specify, and refe rences to a certifying surgeon shall be deemed to include references to 
any qualified medical practitioner when so authorised.  
(3) No person shall be appointed to be, or authorised to exercise the powers of, a certifying 
surgeon, or, having been so appoint ed or authorised, continue to exercise such powers, who is or 
becomes the owner, agent or manager of a mine, or is or becomes directly or indirectly interested 
therein, or in any process or business carried on therein or in any patent or machinery connecte d 
therewith, or is otherwise in the employment of the mine.  
(4) The certifying surgeon shall carry out such duties as may be prescribed in connection with — 
1*   *   *   *   * 
 (b) the examination of persons engaged in a mine in such dangerous occupatio ns or processes as 
m
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 12]

 (b) the examination of persons engaged in a mine in such dangerous occupatio ns or processes as 
may be pres cribed ;  
(c) the exercise of such medical supervision as may be prescribed for any mine or clas s or 
description of mines where — 
 (i) cases of illness have occurred which it is reasonable to believe are due to the nature of any 
process carried on or other conditions  of work prevailing in the mine ; 
1*   *   *   *   * 
CHAPTER III  
2[COMMITTEES ] 
12. Committees .—(1)The Central Government shall, with effect from such date as that 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, constitute for the 
purposes of this Act, a Committee consisting of — 
(a) a person in the service of the Government, not being the Chief Inspector or an Inspector, 
appointed by the Central Government to act as Chairman;  
(b) the Chief Inspector of Mines;  
(c) two persons to represent the interests of miners appointed by the Central Government;  
(d) two persons to represent the interests of owners of mines appointed by the Central 
Government;  
                                                      
1. Omitted by Act 42 of 1983, s. 9 (w.e.f . 31-5-1984).  
2. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for the heading  “MINING BOARDS AND COMMITTEES” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 13]
13 
 (e) two qualified mining engineers not directly  employed in the mining industry, appointed by 
the Central Government:  
Provided that one at least of the persons appointed under clause ( c) shall be for representing the 
interests of workers in coal mines and one at least of the persons appointed under cla use ( d) shall be 
for represent ing the interests of owners of coal mines.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub -section ( 1), the Central Government may constitute 
one or more Committees to deal with specific matters relating to any part of the terr itories to which 
this Act extends or to a mine or a group of mines and may appoint members thereof and the 
provisions of sub -section ( 1) (except the proviso thereto) shall apply for the constitution of any 
Committee under this sub -section as they apply for  the constitution of a Committee under that  
sub-section.  
(3) No act or proceeding of a Committee shall be invalid by reason only of the existence of any 
vacancy among its members or any defect in the constitution thereof.  
13. Functions of the committee .—(1)The Committee constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 
12 shall — 
(a) consider proposals, for making rules and regulations under this Act and make appropriate 
recommendations to the Central Government;  
(b) enquire into such accidents or other matters as may be referred to it by the Central 
Government from time to time and make reports thereon; and  
(c) subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), hear and decide such appeals or objections 
against notices or orders under this Act or the regulations, rul es or bye -laws thereunder, as are 
required to be referred to it by this Act or as maybe prescribed.  
(2) The Chief Inspector shall not take part in the proceedings of the Committee with respect to 
any appeal or objection against an order or notice made or i ssued by him or act in relation to any 
matter pertaining to such appeal o r objection as a member of the
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 13]
 by him or act in relation to any 
matter pertaining to such appeal o r objection as a member of the Committee.  
14. Powers , etc., of the committee s.—(1)A Committee constitute d under section 12 may exercise  
such of the powers of an Inspector under this A ct as it thinks necessary or expedient to exercise for 
the purposes of discharging its functions under this Act.  
(2) A Committee constituted under section 12 shall, for the purposes of discharging its functions, 
have the same powers as are vested in a court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908)  
when trying a suit in respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) discovery and inspection;  
(b) enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(c) compelling the production of documents; and  
(d) such othe r matters as may be prescribed.]  
15. Recovery of expenses .—The Central Government may direct that the expens es of any inquiry 
conducted by 1[a Committee constituted under sec tion12] shall be borne in whole or in part by the 
owner or agent of the mine concerned, and the amount so directed to be paid may, on application by 
the Chief Inspector or an Inspector to a magistrate having jurisdiction at the place where the mine is 
situated or where such owner or agen t is for the time being resident, be recovered by the distress and 
sale of any movable property within the limits of the magistrate's jurisdiction belonging to such owner 
or agent : 
Provided that the owner or his agent has not paid the amount within six wee ks from the date of 
receiving the notice from the Central Government or the Chief Inspector of Mines.  
                                                      
1.  Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 11, for certain words (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 14]
14 
 CHAPTER IV  
MINING OPERATIONS AND MANAGEMENT OF MINES  
16. Notice to be given of mining operations .—(1) The owner, agent or manager of a mine shall, 
before the commencement of any mining operation, give to the Chief Inspector, the 1[Controller] , 
Indian Bureau of Mines and the district magistrate of the distri ct in which the mine is situate, notice in 
writing in such form and containing such particulars relati ng to the mine as may be prescribed.  
(2) Any notice given under sub -section ( 1) shall be so given as to reach the persons concerned at 
least one month before the com mencement of any mining operation.  
2[17.Managers .—(1) Save as may be otherwise prescribed,  every mine shall be under a sole 
manager who shall have the prescribed qualification and the owner or agent of every mine shall 
appoint a person having such qualification to be the manager:  
Provided that the owner or agent may appoint himself as manager i f he possesses the prescribed 
qualifications.  
(2) Subject to any instructions given to him by or on behalf of the owner or agent of the mine, the 
manager shall be responsible for the overall management, control, supervision and direction of the 
mine and al l such instructions when given by the owner or agent shall be confirmed in writing 
forthwith.  
(3)Except in case of an emergency, the owner or agent of  a mine or anyone on his behalf shall not 
give, otherwise than through the manager, in structions affecting  the fulfil ment of his statutory duties, 
to a person, employed in a mine, who is responsible to the manager.  
18. Duties and responsibilities of owners, agents and managers .—(1) The owner and agent of 
every mine shall each be responsible for making financia l and other provisions and for taking such 
other steps as may be necessary for compliance with the provisions of this Act and the regulations, 
rules, bye -laws and orders made thereunder.  
(2)The responsibility in respect of matters provided for in the rule
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 14]
s and orders made thereunder.  
(2)The responsibility in respect of matters provided for in the rules  made under clauses ( d), (e) 
and ( p) of section 58 shall be exclusively carried out by the owner and agent of the mine and by such 
person (other than the manager) whom the owner or agent may appoint for securing compliance with 
the aforesaid provisions.  
(3) If the carrying out of an y instructions given under sub -section ( 2) or given otherwise than  
through the manager under sub -section ( 3) of section 17, results in the contravention of the provisions 
of this Act or of the regulations, rules, bye -laws or orde rs made thereunder, every person giving such 
instructions shall also be liable for the contravention of the provisions concerned.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 1), (2) and ( 3), the owner, agent and manager of 
every mine shall each be responsible to see that all operations carried on in connection with the mine 
are conducted in accordance with the provisions of this Act and of the regulations, rules, bye -laws and 
orders made thereunder.  
(5) In the event of any contravention by any perso n whosoever of any of the provisions of this Act 
or of the regulations, rules, bye -laws or orders made thereunder except those which specifically 
require any person to do any act or thing or prohib it any person from doing an act or thing, besides the 
perso n who contravenes, each of the following persons shall also be deemed to be guilty of such 
contravention unless he proves that he had used due diligence to secure compliance with the 
provisions and had taken reasonable means to prevent such contravention: — 
(i)the official or officials appointed to perform duties of supervision in respect of the 
provisions contravened;  
                                                      
1. Subs. by. Act 42 of 1983, s. 12, for “Director” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
2. Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for sub -sections 17 and 18 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 14]
e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
2. Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for sub -sections 17 and 18 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 15]
15 
 (ii)the manager of the mine;  
(iii)the owner and agent of the mine;  
(iv) the person appointed, if any, to carry out the responsibility under sub-section ( 2): 
Provided that any of the persons aforesaid may not be proceeded against if it appears on inquiry 
and investigation,that he is not prima facie  liable.  
(6) It shall not be a defence in any proceedings brought against the owner or agent of a mine 
under this section that the manager and other officials have been appointed in accordance with the 
provision s of this Act or that a person to carry the responsibility under sub -section ( 2) has been 
appointed. ] 
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS AS TO HEALTH AND SAF ETY  
19. Drinking Water .—1[(1)In every mine effect ive arrangements shall be made to provide and 
maintain at suitable points conveniently situated a sufficient supply of cool and wholesome drinking 
water for all persons employed therein:  
Provided that in the  case of persons employed below ground the Chief Inspector may, in lieu of 
drinking water being provided and maintained at suitable points, permit any other effective 
arrangements to be made for such supply.]  
(2) All such points shall be legibly marked `DR INKING WATER' in a language understood by a 
majority of the persons employed in the mine and no such point  shall be situated within 2[six mete rs] 
of any washing place urinal or latrine unless a shorter distance is approved in writing by the Chief 
Inspector . 
(3) In respect of all mines or any class or description of mines, the Central Government may make 
rules for securing compliance with the provisions of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) and for the examination 
by prescribed authorities of the supply and distributi on of drinking water.  
20. Conservancy .—(1)There shall be provided, separately for males and females in every mine, a 
sufficient number of latrines and urinals of prescribed types so situated as to be convenient and 
accessible to persons employed in the mine at all t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 15]
ribed types so situated as to be convenient and 
accessible to persons employed in the mine at all times.  
(2)All latrines and urinals provided under sub -section ( 1) shall be adequately lighted, ventilated 
and at all times maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.  
(3)The Central Government may specify the number of latrines and urinals t o be provided in any 
mine, in proportion to the number of males and females employed in the mine and provide for such 
other matters in respect of sanitation in mines (including the obligations in this regard of persons 
employed in the mine) as it may consi der necessary in the interests of the health of the persons so 
employed.  
3[21. Medical appliances .—(1)In every mine there shall be provided and maintained so as to be 
readily accessible during all working hours such number of first -aid boxes or cupboards e quipped 
with such contents as may be prescribed.  
(2)Nothing except the prescribed contents shall be kept in a first -aid box or cupboard or room.  
(3)Every first -aid box or cupboard shall be kept in the charge of a responsible person who is 
trained in such first-aid treatment as may be prescribed and who shall always be readily available 
during the working hours of the mine.  
                                                      
1.  Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 10, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
2. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 14, for “twenty feet” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
3. Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 11,  for sections 21 and 22 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 16]
16 
 (4)In every mine there shall be made so as to be readily available such arrangements as may be 
prescribed for the conveyance to hospitals or dispensaries of persons who, while employed in the 
mine, suffer bodily injury or become ill.  
(5)In every mine wherein more than one hundred and fifty persons are employed, there shall be 
provided and maintained a first -aid room of such size wi th such equipment and in the charge of such 
medical and nursing staff as may be prescribed.  
22. Powers of Inspectors when causes of danger not expressly provided against exist or when 
employment of persons is dangerous. —(1)  If, in respect of any matter fo r which no express 
provision is made by or under this Act, it appears to the Chief Inspector or an Inspector that any mine 
or part thereof or any matter, thing or practice in or connected with the mine, or with the control, 
supervision, management or direc tion thereof, is dangerous to human life or safety or defective so as 
to threaten, or tend to, the bodily injury of any person, he may give notice in writing thereof to the 
owner, agent or manager of the mine and shall state in the notice the particulars i n respect of which he 
considers the mine or part thereof or the matter, thing or practice to be dangerous or defective and 
require the same to be remedied within such time and in such manner as he may specify in the notice.  
(lA) Where the owner, agent or m anager of mine fails to comply with the terms of a notice given 
under sub -section ( 1) within the period specified therein, the Chief Inspector or the Inspector, as the 
case may be, may, by order in writing, prohibit the employment in or about the mine or a ny part 
thereof of any person whose employment is not in his opinion reasonably necessary for securing 
compliance with the terms of the notice.  
(2)Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), the Chief Inspector or the 
Inspector, as th e case may be, may, by order in writi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 16]
ub -section ( 1), the Chief Inspector or the 
Inspector, as th e case may be, may, by order in writing addressed to the owne r, agent or manager of a 
mine, p rohibit the extraction or reduction of pillars or blocks of minerals in any mine or part thereof, 
if, in his opinion, such operation is likely to cause the crushin g of pillars or blocks of minerals or the 
premature collapse of any part of the workings or otherwise endanger the mine or the life or safety of 
persons employed therein or if, in his opinion, adequate provision against the outbreak of fire or 
flooding has  not been made by providing for the sealing off and isolation of the part of the mine in 
which such operation is contemplated and for restricting the area that might be affected by fire or 
flooding.  
(3)If the Chief Inspector, or an Inspector authorised in this behalf by general or special order in 
writing by the Chief Inspector, is of opinion that there is urgent and immediate danger to the life or 
safety of any person employed in any mine or part thereof, he may, by order in writing containing a 
statement of the grounds of his opinion, prohibit, 1[until he is satisfied that the danger  is removed], the 
employment in or about the mine or any part thereof of any person whose employment is not in his 
opinion reasonably necessary for the purpose of removing the danger.  
2[(3A) Every person whose employment is prohibited under’ sub -section ( lA) or sub -section ( 3) 
shall be entitled to payment of full wages for the period for which he would have been, but for the 
prohibition in employment and the owner, agent or mana ger shall be liable for payment of such full 
wages of that person:  
Provided that the owner, agent or manager may instead of paying such full wages provide such 
person with an alternative employment at the same wages which such person was receiving in the 
employment which was prohibited.]  
(4)Where a notice has been given under sub -section ( 1) or an order made und
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 16]
ich was prohibited.]  
(4)Where a notice has been given under sub -section ( 1) or an order made under sub -section ( lA), 
sub-section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) by an Inspector, the owner, agent or manager of the mine may, 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 15, for “until the danger is removed” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984) . 
2. Ins. by s. 15, ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 17]
17 
 within ten days after the rec eipt of the notice or order, as the case may be, appeal against the same to 
the Chief Inspector who may confirm, modify or cancel the notice or order.  
(5)The Chief Inspector or the Inspector sending a notice under sub -section ( 1) or making an order 
under s ub-section ( lA), sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) and the Chief Inspector making an order  
(other than an order of cancellation in appeal) under sub -section ( 4) shall forthwith report the same to 
the Central Government.  
(6)If the owner, agent or manager o f the mine objects to a notice sent under sub -section ( 1) by the 
Chief Inspector or to an order made by the Chief Inspector under sub -section ( lA) or sub -section ( 2) or 
sub-section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4), he may, within twenty days after the receipt of the  notice 
containing the requisition or of the order or after the date of the decision on appeal, as the case may 
be, send his objection in writing stating the grounds the reof to the Central Government 1[which shall , 
ordinarily within a period of two months from the date of receipt of the objection, refer ] the same to a 
Committee.  
(7)Every notice under sub -section ( 1), or order under sub -section ( lA), sub -section ( 2),  
sub-section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4), to which objection is made under sub -section ( 6), shall  be complied 
with, pending the receipt at the mine of the decision of the Committee:  
Provided that the Committee may, on the application of the owner, agent or manag er, suspend the 
operation of a 2[notice] under sub -section ( 1), pending its decision on the  objection.  
(8)Nothing in this section shall affect the powers of a magistrate under section 144 of the 3[Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898) .] 
4[22A. Power to prohibit employment in certain cases .—(1)Where in respect of any matter 
relating to saf ety for which express provision is made by or under this Act, the owner, agent or 
manager of a mine f
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 17]
y for which express provision is made by or under this Act, the owner, agent or 
manager of a mine fails to comply with such provisions, the Chief Inspector may give notice in 
writing requiring the same to be complied with within such time as he may speci fy in the notice or 
within such extended period of time as he may, from time to time, specify thereafter.  
(2) Where the owner, agent or manager fails to comply with the terms of a notice given under sub -
section ( 1) within the period specified in such notic e or, as the case may be, within the extended 
period of time specified under that sub -section, the Chief Inspector may, by order in writing, prohibit 
the employment in or about the mine or any part thereof of any person whose employment is not, in 
his opin ion, reasonably necessary for securing compliance with the terms of the notice.  
(3) Every person whose employment is prohibited under sub -section ( 2), shall be entitled to 
payment of full wages for the period for which he would have been, but for the prohi bition, in 
employment, and the owner, agent or manager shall be liable for payment of such full wages of that 
person:  
Provided that the owner, agent or manager may, instead of paying such full wages, provide such 
person with an alternative employment at th e same wages which such person was receiving in the 
employment which was prohibited under sub -section ( 2). 
(4) The provisions of sub -sections ( 5), (6) and ( 7) of section 22 shall apply in relation to a notice 
issued under sub -section ( 1) or an order made u nder sub -section ( 2) of this section as they apply in 
relation to a notice under sub -section ( 1) or an order under sub -section ( lA) of that section .] 
  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 15, for “which shall refer” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
2. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for “requisition” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
3. See now the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 17]
 “requisition” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
3. See now the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
4. Ins. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 16 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 18]
18 
 23. Notice to be given of accidents .—1[(1)Whenever there occurs in or about a mine — 
(a) an accident causing loss of life or serious bodily injury, or  
(b) an explosion, ignition, spontaneous heating, outbreak of fire or irruption or inrush of water 
or other liquid matter, or  
(c) an influx of inflammable or noxious gases, or  
(d) a breakage of ropes, chains  or other gear by which persons or materials are lowered or 
raised in a shaft or an incline, or  
(e) an overwinding of cages or other means of conveyance in any shaft while persons or 
materials are being lowered or raised, or  
(f) a premature coll apse of any  part of the working , or 
(g) any other accident which may be prescribed,  
the owner, agent or manager of the mine shall give notice of the occurrence to such authority in  such 
form and within such time as may be prescribed, and he shall simultaneously post one copy of the 
notice on a special notice board in the prescribed manner at a place where it may be inspected by trade 
union officials, and shall ensure that the notice is kept on the board for not less than fourteen days 
from the date of such posting. ] 
2[(lA) Whenever there occurs in or about a mine an accident causing reportable injury to any 
person, the owner agent or manager of the mine shall enter in a register such occurrence in the 
prescribed form and copies of such entries shall be furnished to the  Chief Inspector once in a quarter.]  
(2) Where a notice given under sub -section ( 1) relates to an accident causing loss of life, the 
authority shall make an inquire into the occurrence within two months of the receipt of the notice and, 
if the authority is  not the Inspector, he shall cause the Inspector to make an inquiry within the said 
period.  
3[(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that accidents 
other than those specified in sub -sections ( 1) and (lA) which caus e bodily injury re sulting in the 
enforced absence from 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 18]
 in sub -sections ( 1) and (lA) which caus e bodily injury re sulting in the 
enforced absence from work of the person injured for a period exceeding twenty -four hours shall be 
entered in a register in the prescribed form or shall be subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 1) or 
sub-section ( lA), as the case may be. ] 
(4) A copy of the entries in t he register referred to in sub -section ( 3) shall be sent by the owner, 
agent, or manager of the mine, 4[on or before the 20th day of January in the year following that to 
which the entries relate], to the C hief Inspector.  
2[(5) Whenever there occurs in or about a mine an accident causing loss of life or serious bodily 
injury to any person, the place of accident shall not be disturbed or altered before the arrival or 
without the consent of the Chief Inspector  or the Inspector to whom notice of the accident is required 
to be given under sub -section ( 1) of section 23, unless such disturbance or alteration is necessary to 
prevent any further accident, to remove bodies of the deceased, or to rescue any person from  danger, 
or unless discontinuance of work at the place of accident would seriously impede the working of the 
mine:  
Provided that where the Chief Inspector or the said Inspector fails to inspec t the place of accident 
within seventy -two hours of the time of the accident, work may be resume d at the place of the 
accident. ] 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 12, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
2. Ins. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 17 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
3. Subs. by s. 17 , ibid., for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
4.  Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 12, for certain words  (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 19]
19 
 24. Power of Government to appoint Court of inquiry in cases of accidents .—1[(1)When any 
accident of the nature referred to in any of the clauses of sub -section ( 1) of section 23 occurs in or  
about a mine, the Central Government may, if it is of opinion that a formal inquiry into the causes of 
and circumstances attending the accident ought to be held, appoint a competent person to hold such 
inquiry and may also appoint one or more persons poss essing legal o r special know ledge to act as 
assessor or assessors in holding the inquiry.]  
(2) The person appointed to hold any such inquiry shall have all the powers of a civil court under 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , for the purpose of enforcing the atten dance of 
witnesses and compell ing the production of documents and material objects 2* * *.  
(3) Any person holding an inquiry under this section may exercise such of the powers of an 
Inspector under this Act as he may think it necessary o r expedient to exercise for the purposes of the 
inquiry.  
(4) The person holding an inquir y under this section shall make a report to the Central 
Government stating the causes of the accident and its circumstances, and adding any observations 
which he or any of the assessors may think fit to make.  
25. Notice of certain diseases .—(1)Where any person employed in mine contracts any 
diseasenotified by the Central Government in the Official Gazette as a disease connected with mining 
operations, the owner, agent  or manager of the mine, as the case may be, shall send notice thereof to 
the Chief Inspector and to such other authorities, in such form and within such time as may be 
prescribed.  
 (2) If any medical practitioner attends on a person who is or has been emp loyed in a mine and 
who is or is believed by the medical practitioner to be suffering from any disease notified under  
sub-section ( 1), the medical practitioner shall without delay send a report in writing to the Chief 
Inspec
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 19]
ion ( 1), the medical practitioner shall without delay send a report in writing to the Chief 
Inspector stating — 
(a) the name and a ddress of the patient,  
(b) the disease from which the patient is or is believed to be suffering, and  
(c) the name and address of the mine in w hich the patient is or was last employed.  
 (3) Where the report under sub -section ( 2) is confirmed to the satisfaction of the Chief Inspector 
by the certificate of a certifying surgeon or otherwise that the person is suffering from a disease 
notified under sub -section ( 1), the Chief Inspector shall pay to the medical practitioner such fee as 
may be prescribed,  and the fee so paid shall be recoverable as an arrear of land revenue from the 
owner, agent or manager of the mine in which the person contacted the disease.  
 (4) If any medical practitioner fails to comply with the provisions of sub -section ( 2), he shall  be 
punishable with fine which may extend to fifty rupees.  
26. Power to direct investigation of causes of disease .—(1)The Central Government may, if it 
considers it expedient to do so, appoint a competent person to inquire into and report to it on any case  
where a disease notified under sub -section ( 1) of section 25 has been or is suspected to have been 
contacted in a mine, and may also appoint one or more persons possessing legal or special knowledge 
to act as assessors in such inquiry.  
(2) The provisions of sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3) of section 24 shall apply to an inquiry under this 
section in the same manner as they apply to any inquiry under that section  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 13, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 16-1-1960).    
2. Certain words omitted by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 20]
20 
 27. Publication of reports .—The Central Government may cause any report submitte d by a 
Committee under  1[section 12] or any report of extracts from any report submitted to it under section 
26, and shall cause every report submitted by a Court of inquiry under section 24 to be published at 
such time and in such manner as it may think fit.  
CHAPTER VI  
HOURS A ND LIMITATION OF EMPLOYMENT  
28.Weekly day of rest .—No person shall be allowed to work in a mine on more than six days in 
any one week.  
29.Compensatory days of rest .—(1) Where in pursuance of action under section 38 or as a result 
of exempting any mine or t he persons employed therein from the provisions of section 28, any person 
employed therein is deprived of any of the weekly days of rest for which provision is made in section 
28, he shall be allowed, within the month in wh ich such days of rest were due to him or within the two 
months immediately following that month, compensatory days of rest equal in number to the days of 
rest of which he has been deprived.  
(2) The Central Government may prescribe the manner in which the days of rest for which 
provision i s made in sub -section ( 1) shall be allowed.  
30. Hours of work above ground .—(1) No adult employed above ground in a mine shall be 
required or allowed to work for more than forty -eight hours in any week or for more than nine hours 
in any day:  
2[Provided that, subject to the previous approval of the Chief Inspector, the daily maximum hours 
specified in this sub -section may be exceeded in order to facilitate the change of shifts.]  
(2) The periods of work of any such adult shall be so arranged that, along with his interval for 
rest, they shall not in any day spread over more than twelve hours, and that he shall not work for more 
than five hours continuously before he has had an interva l for rest of at least half an hour:  
3[Provided that the Chief Inspector may, for reasons to be recorded in writing and subject to 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 20]
ur:  
3[Provided that the Chief Inspector may, for reasons to be recorded in writing and subject to such 
conditions as he may deem fit to impose, permit the spread -over to extend over a period not exceeding 
fourteen hours in any day.]  
4[(3) Persons belonging to two or more shifts shall not be allowed to do work of the same kind 
above ground at the same time:  
Provided that, for the purposes of this sub -section, persons shall not be deemed to belong to 
separate shifts by reason only of the fact that they receive their intervals for rest at different times.]  
5[31. H ours of work below ground .—(1)No adult employed below ground in a mine shall be 
allowed to work for more than forty -eight hours in any week or for more than eight hours  in any day:  
Provided that, subject to the previous approval of the Chief Inspector, the daily maximum hours 
specified in this sub -section may be exceeded in order to facilitate the change of shifts.  
(2)No work shall be carried on below ground in any mine  except by a system of shifts so arranged 
that the period of work for each shift is not sp read-over more than the daily maximum hours stipulated 
in sub -section ( 1). 
(3)No person employed in a mine shall be allowed to be present in any part of a mine below 
ground except during the periods of work shown in respect of him in the register maintained under 
sub-section ( 4) of section 48.]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 18, for “section 13” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).   
2. The p roviso added by Act 62 of 1959, s. 14 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
3. Subs. by s. 14, ibid.,  for the proviso (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
4. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
5. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for section 31 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 21]
21 
 1[32.Night shift .—Where a person employed in a mine works on a shift which extends beyond 
midnight — 
(a) for the purposes of se ctions 28 and 29, a weekly day of rest shall mean in his cas e a period 
of twenty -four consecutive hours beginning when his shift ends;  
(b) the following day for him shall be deemed to be the period of twenty -four hours beginning 
when such shift ends, and the hours he has worked after midnight shall be counted in the previous 
day.]  
33. Extra wages for overtime .—2[(1)Where in a mine a person works above ground for more 
than nine hours in any day, or works below ground for more than eight hours in any day or works for 
more than forty -eight hours in any week whether above ground or below ground, he shall in respect of 
such overtime work be entitled to wages at the rate of twice his ordinary rate of wages, the period of 
overtime work being calculated on a daily basis or weekly basis, whic hever is more favourable to 
him; and ]  
3[(2) Where any person empl oyed in a mine is paid on piece -rate basis, the time -rate shall be 
taken as equivalent to the daily average of his full -time earnings for the days on which he actu ally 
worked during the week immediately preceding the week in which overtime work has been done, 
exclusive of any overtime, and such time -rate shall be deemed to be the ordinary rate of wages of such 
person:  
Provided that if such person has not worked in t he preceding week on the same or identical job, 
the time -rate shall be based on the average for the days he has worked in the same week excluding the 
overtime or on the daily average of his earnings in any preceding week, whichever is higher.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “ordinary rate of wages ” shall have the same 
meaning as in the Explanation  to sub - section ( 3) of section 9A.]  
(4) The Central Government may prescribe the registers to be maintained in a mine for the 
purpose of securing compliance with the provisi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 21]
be the registers to be maintained in a mine for the 
purpose of securing compliance with the provisions of this section.  
4[34.Prohibition of employment of certain persons .—No person shall be required or allowed to 
work in a mine if he has already been working in any other mine within the preceding twelve hours.]  
5[35.Limitation  of daily hours of work including overtime work .—Save in respect of cases 
falling within clause ( a) and -clause ( e) of section 39, no person employed in a mine shall be required 
or allowed to work in the mine for more than ten hours in any day inclusive of overtime.]  
36.Notices rega rding hours of work .—(1)The manager of every mine shall cause to be posted 
outside the office of the mine a notice in the prescribed form stating the time of the commencement 
and of the end of work at the mine and, if it is proposedto work by a system of relays, the time of the 
commencement and of the end of work for each relay.  
(2) In the case of a mine at which mining operations commence after the commencement of this 
Act, the notice referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be posted not less than seven days before the com - 
mencement of work.  
(3) The notice referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall also state the time of the commencement and of 
the intervals for rest for persons employed above ground and a copy thereof shall be sent to the Chief 
Inspector, if he so requires.  
                                                      
1.  Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 16, for section 32 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).    
2. Subs. by s. 17 , ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
3. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 19, for “sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3)” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).     
4. Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 18, for section 34 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).    
5. Subs. by s. 19, ibid., for section 35 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 22]
22 
 (4) Where it is proposed to make any alteration in the time fixed for the commencement or for the 
end of work in the mine generally or for any relay or in the rest intervals fixed for persons employed 
above ground , an amended notice in the prescribed form shall be posted outside the office of the mine 
not less than seven days before the change is made, and a copy of such notice shall be sent to the 
Chief Inspector not less than seven days before such change.  
(5) No  person shall be allowed to work in a mine otherwise than in accordance with the notice 
required by sub -section ( 1). 
37.Supervising staff .—Nothing in section 28, section  30, section 31, section 34 or 1[sub-section 
(5) of section 36], shall apply to persons  who may by rules be defined to be, persons, holding 
positions of supervision or management or employed in a confidential capacity.  
38. Exemption from provisions regarding employment .—(1)In case of an emergency involving 
serious risk to the safety of the mine or of persons e mployed therein, or in case of an accident, 
whether actual or apprehended, or in case of any act of God or in case of any urgent work to be done 
to machinery, plant or equipment of the mine as the result of break -down of such machinery,  plant or 
equipment, the manager may, subject to the provisions of section 22 2[and section 22 A] and in 
accordance with the rules under section 39, permit persons to be employed in contravention of section 
28, section 30, section 31, section  34 or 1[sub-section ( 5) of section 36], on such work as may be 
necessary to protect the safety of the mine or of the persons employed therein:  
Provided that, in case of any urgent work to be done to machinery, plant o r equipment under this 
section the manager may take t he action permitted by this section, although the production of 
3[mineral] would thereby be incidentally affected, but any action so taken shall not exceed the limits 
necessary for the purpose of avoid ing s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 22]
ected, but any action so taken shall not exceed the limits 
necessary for the purpose of avoid ing serious interference with the ordinary working of t he mine.  
(2) Every case in which action has been taken by the manager under sub -section ( 1), shall be 
recorded together with the circum stances relating thereto and a report thereof shall also be made to the 
Chief Inspector or the Inspector.  
4[39.Power to m ake exempting rules .—5[The central government]  may make rules providing for 
for the exemption to such extent, in such circumstances and subject to such conditions as may be 
specified, from the provisions of sections 28, 30, 31, 34 or sub -section ( 5) of section  36— 
(a) of all or any of the persons employed in a mine, where an emergency involving serious 
risk to the safety of the mine or of the persons employed therein is apprehended;  
(b) of all or any of the persons so employed, in case of an accident, actual or  apprehended;  
(c) of all or any of the persons engaged in work of a preparatory or complementary nature, 
which must necessarily be carried on for the pur pose of avoiding serious inter ference with the 
ordinary worki ng of the mine ; 
(d) of all or any of the persons engaged in urgent repairs ; and 
(e) of all or any of the persons employed in any work which for technical reasons must be 
carried on continuously.]  
6[40. Employment of persons below eighteen years of age .—(1)After the commencement of the 
the Mines (Amen dment) Act, 1983  (42 of 1983) , no person below eighteen ye ars of age shall be 
allowed to work in any mine or part thereof.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 42 of 1953, s. 4 and the Third Schedule, for “ sub-section ( 4) of section 36” . 
2.  Ins. by Act 42 of 1983, s.20 (w.e.f.31 -5-1984).  
3.  Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 20, for “coal” (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
4.  Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for section 39 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
5. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 21, for certain word
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 22]
21, ibid., for section 39 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
5. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 21, for certain words (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).     
6. Subs. bys. 2 2,ibid., for section 40 (w.e.f. 31-5-1984 ). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 23]
23 
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), apprentices and other trainees, not 
below sixteen years of age, may be al lowed to work, under proper supervision, in a mine or part 
thereof by the manager:  
Provided that in the case of trainees, other than apprentices, prior approval of the Chief Inspector 
or an Inspector shall be obtain ed before they are allowed to work.  
Expla nation .—In this section and in section 43, “apprentice ” means an apprentice as defined in 
clause ( a) of section 2 of the Apprentices Act, 1961  (52 of 1961). ] 
41. [Certificate of fitness .] Omitted by the Mines (Amendment) Act  1983 (42 of 1983) , s. 23  
(w.e.f . 31-5-1984).  
42. [Effect of  certificate of fitness granted to adolescents .] Omitted by s. 23, ibid. 
(w.e.f . 31-5-1984).  
1[43. Power to require medical examination .—(1)Where an Inspector is of opinion that any 
person employed in a mine otherwise than as an  apprentice or other trainee is not an adult or that any 
person employed in a mine as an apprentice or other trainee is either below sixteen years of age or is 
no longer fit to work, the Inspector may serve on the manager of the mine a notice requiring tha t such 
person shall be examined by a certifying surgeon and such person shall not, if the Inspector so directs, 
be employed or permitted to work in any mine until he has been so examined and has been certified 
that he is an adult or, if such person is an a pprentice or trainee, that he is not below sixteen years of 
age and is fit to work.  
(2)Every certificate granted by a certifyin g surgeon on a reference under sub-section ( 1), shall, for 
the purpose of this Act, be conclusive evidence of the matters referre d therein .] 
44.[Working hours for adolescents notcertified to be fit for work as adults .] Omitted by the Mines 
(Amendment) Act 1983  (42 of 1983) ,s. 25 (w.e.f .31-5-1984).  
2[45. Prohibition of the presence of persons below eighteen years of age in a mine .—Subject 
to t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 23]
 
2[45. Prohibition of the presence of persons below eighteen years of age in a mine .—Subject 
to the  provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 40, after such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, no person below eighteen years of age shall 
be allowed to be present in any part of a mine above ground where any operation connected with or 
incidental to any mining operation is being carried on.]  
3[46. Employment of women .—(1)No woman shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any 
other law, be employed — 
(a) in any part of a mine whi ch is below ground;  
(b) in any mine above ground except between the hours of 6 A.M. and 7 P.M. 
(2) Every woman employed in a mine above ground shall be allowed an interval of not less than 
eleven hours between the termination of employment on any one day a nd the commencement of the 
next period of employment.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Central Government may, by 
notificationin the Official Gazette, vary the hours of employment above ground of women in respect 
of any mine or class or description of mine, so however that no employment of any woman between 
the hours of 10 P.M. and 5 A.M. is permitted thereby.]  
47. [Disputes as to age .] Omitted by the Mines (Amendment) Act , 1959 (62 of 1959), s. 28  
(w.e.f . 16-1-1960).  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 24, for section 43 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
2. Subs. by  s. 26, ibid., for section 45 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
3. Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 27, for section 46 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 24]
24 
 48. Registers of persons employed .—1[(1)For every mine there shall be kept in the prescribed 
form and place a register  of all persons employed in the mine showing in respect of each such 
person — 
(a) the name of the employee  with the name of his father or , of her husband, as the case may 
be, and such other particulars as may be necessary  for purposes of identification ; 
(b) the age and sex of the employee;  
(c) the nature of employment (whether above ground or below ground, and if above ground, 
whether in open cast workings or otherwise) and the date of commencement thereof;  
2*  *   *   *   * 
(e) such other particulars as may be prescribed; and the relevant entries shall be authenticated 
by the signature or the thumb impression of the person concerned.]  
(2) The entries in the register prescribed by sub -section ( 1) shall be such that workers working in 
accordance therewith would not be working in contravention of any of the provisions of this Chapter.  
(3) No person shall be employed in a mine until the particulars required by sub -section ( 1) have 
been recorded in the register in respect of such person and no person shall be employed except during 
the periods of work shown in respect of him in the register.  
3[(4) For every mine other than a mine which, for any special reason to be recorded, is exempted 
by the Centr al Government by general or special order, there shall be kept in the prescribed form and 
place separate registers showing in respect of each person employed in the mine — 
(a) below ground;  
(b) abo ve ground in open cast workings ; and  
(c) above ground in oth er cases — 
(i) the name of the employee ; 
(ii) the class or kind of his employment;  
(iii) where work is carried on by a system of relays, the shift to which he belongs and the 
hours of the shift.]  
(5) The register of persons employed below ground referred to  in sub -section ( 4) shall show at 
any moment the name of every person who is then present below
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 24]
o  in sub -section ( 4) shall show at 
any moment the name of every person who is then present below ground in the mine.  
4[(6) No person shall enter any open cast working or any working below ground unless he has 
been permitted by the manager or is authorised under this Act or any other law to do so.]  
CHAPTER VII  
LEAVE WITH WAGES  
5[49.Application of Chapter .—The provisions of this Chapter shall not operate to the prejudice 
of any right to which a person employed in a mine may be entitled under any other law or under the 
terms of any award, a greement or contract of service:  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 29, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960)  
2. Omitted by Act 42 of 1983, s. 27 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
3. Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 29, for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
4. Ins. by s. 29 , ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
5. Subs by s. 30, ibid., for sections 49 to 56 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 25]
25 
 1[Provided that if such award , agreement or contract of service, provides for a longer annual leave 
with wages than that provided in this Chapter, the quantum of leave, which the person employ ed shall 
be entitled to, shall be in accordance with such award, agreement or contract of service, but leave shall 
be regulated in accordance with the provisions of sections 50 to 56 (both inclusive) with respect to 
matters not provided for in such award, agreement or contract of service.]  
50.Leave defined .—For the purposes of this Chapter, leave shall not include weekly days of rest 
or holidays for festivals or other similar occasions whether occurring during or at either end of the 
period of leave.  
51. Calendar year defined .—For the purposes of this Chapter, a calendar year shall mean the 
period of twelve months beginning with the first day of January in any year.  
52. Annual leave with wages .—(1)Every person employed in a mine who has completed a 
calenda r year ’s service therein shall be allowed, during the subsequent calendar year, leave with 
wages, calculated, — 
(a) in the case of a person employed below ground, at  the rate of one day for every 2[fifteen 
days] of work performed by him, and  
(b) in any other case, at the rate of one day for every twenty days of work performed by him.  
(2) A calendar year ’s service referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to have been 
completed, — 
(a) in the case of a person employed below ground in a mine,if he has d uring the calendar 
year put in not less than one hundred and ninety attendances at the mine; and  
(b) in the case of any other person, if he has during the calendar year put in not less than two 
hundred and forty attendances at the mine.  
Explanation .—For th e purpose of this sub -section — 
(a) any days of lay -off by agreement or contract or as permissible under the st anding order ; 
(b) in the case of a female employee, maternity leave for any number of days not exceeding 
twelv
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 25]
; 
(b) in the case of a female employee, maternity leave for any number of days not exceeding 
twelve weeks; and  
(c) the leave earned in  the year prior to that in which the leave is enjoyed;  
shall be deemed to be the days on which the employee has worked in a mine for the purpose of 
computation of the attendances, but he shall not earn leave for these days.  
(3) A person whose service comm ences otherwise than on the first day of January shall be entitled 
to leave with wages in the subsequent calendar year at the rates specified in sub -section ( 1), if— 
(a) in the case of a person employed below ground in a mine, he has put in attendances for  not 
less than one -half of the total number of days during the remainder of the calendar year; and  
(b) in any other case, he has put in attendances for not less than two -thirds of the total number 
of days during the remainder of the calendar year.  
(4) Any leave not taken by a person to which he is entitled in any one calendar year under  
sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 3) shall be added to the leave to be allowed to him under sub -section 
(1) durin g the succeeding calendar year:  
Provided that the total  number of days of leave which may be accumulated by any such person 
shall not at any one  time exceed thirty days in all :  
Provided further that any such person who has applied for leave with wages but has not been 
given suc h leave in accordance with sub -section ( 6) shall be entitled to carry forward the unavailed 
leave without any limit.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 28, for the proviso (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
2. Subs. by s. 29, ibid., for “sixteen days” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 26]
26 
 (5) Any such person may apply in writing to the manager of the mine not less than fifteen days 
before the day on which he wishes his leave to begin, for all leave or any portion thereof then 
allowable to him unde r sub -sections ( 1), (3) and ( 4): 
Provided that the number of times in which leave may be taken during any one calendar year shall 
not exceed three.  
(6) An application for such lea ve made in accordance with sub -section (5) shall not be refused 
unless the authority empowered to grant the leave is of opinion that owing to the exigencies of the 
situation the leave should be refused.  
(7) If a person employed in a mine wants to avail himself of the leave with wages due to  him to 
cover a period of illness, he shall be granted such leave even if the application for leave is not made 
within the time specifi ed in sub -section ( 5). 
(8) If the employment of a pers on employed in a mine is termi nated by the owner, agent or 
manager of the mine before he has taken the entire leave to which he is entitled up to the day of 
termination of his employment, or if such person having applied for and having not been granted such 
leave, quits his employment before he has taken the leave, the ow ner, agent or manager of the mine 
shall pay him the amount payable under section 53, in respect of the leave not taken, and such 
payment shall be made, where the employment of the person is terminated by the owner, agent or 
manager, before the expiry of th e second working day after such termination, and where a person 
himself quits his employment, on or before the next pay day.  
(9) The unavailed leave of a person employed in a mine shall not be taken into consideration in 
computing the period of any notice required to be given before the termination of his employment.  
1[(10) Where a person employed in a mine is discharged or dismissed from service or quits his 
employment or is superannuated or dies while in service, he or his heirs or his nominee, as 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 26]
ts his 
employment or is superannuated or dies while in service, he or his heirs or his nominee, as the ca se 
may be, shall be entitled to wages in lieu of leave due to him calculated at the rate specified in sub -
section ( 1), if,— 
(a) in the case of a person employed below ground in a mine, he has put in attendance for not 
less than one -half of the total number  of days from the date of his employment to the date of his 
discharge or dismissal or quitting of employment or superannuation or death; and  
(b) in any other case, he has put in attendance for not less than two -thirds of the total number 
of days from the date of his employment to the date of his discharge or dismissal or quitting of 
employment or superannuation or death,  
and payment of such wages shall be made by the owner, agent or manager of the mine at the rate 
specified in section53, where the person i s discharged or dismissed from service or quits employment 
or is superannuated, before the expiry of the second w orking day after such discharge , dismissal, 
quitting of employment or superannuation, as the case may be, and where the person employed dies 
while in service, within a period of two months of his death.]  
Explanation .—For the purposes of 2[sub-section s (1),(3) and ( 10)] any fraction of leave of half a 
day or more shall be treated as one full day and fraction of less than half a day shall be omitte d. 
53. Wages during leave period. —For the leave allowed to a person employed in a mine under 
section 52, he shall be paid at a rate equal to the daily average of his total full -time earnings for the 
days on which he was employed during the month immediatel y preceding his leave, exclusive of any 
over-time wages and bonus but inclusive of any dearness allowance and compensation in cash 
including such compensation, if any, accruing through the free issue of foodgrains and other articles 
as persons employed in the mine may, for the time being, be entitled to:  
           
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 26]
her articles 
as persons employed in the mine may, for the time being, be entitled to:  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 29 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
2. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 29, for “sub -sections ( 1) and ( 3)” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 27]
27 
 Provided that if no such average earnings are available, then the average shall be computed on the 
basis of the daily average of the total full -time earnings of all persons similarly employed for the same 
month.  
54.Payment in advance in certain cases. —Any person employed in a mine who has been 
allowed leave for not less than four days, shall, before his leave begins, be paid the wages due for the 
period of the leave allowed.  
55.Mode of recovery of unpaid wag es.—Any sum required to be paid by the owner, agent or 
manager of a mine under this Chapter but not paid by him shall be recoverable as delayed wages 
under the provisions of the Payment of Wages Act, 1936  (4 of 1936 ). 
56.Power to exempt mines .—Where the Ce ntral Government is satisfied that the leave rules 
applicable to persons employed in any mine provide benefits which in its opinion are not less 
favourable than those provided for in this Chapter, it may, by order in writing and subject to such 
conditions as may be specified therein, exempt the mine from all or any of the provisions of this 
Chapter.]  
CHAPTER VIII  
REGULATIONS, RULES AND BYE -LAWS  
57. Power of Central Government to make regulations .—The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Off icial G azette, make regulations  consistent with this Act for all or any of the 
following purposes, namely: — 
 (a) for prescribing the qualifications required for appointment as  Chief Inspector or 
Inspector;  
(b) for prescribing and regulating the duties and powers of the Chief Inspector and of 
Inspectors in regard to the inspection of mines under this Act;  
(c) for prescribing the duties of owners, agents and managers of mines and of persons acting 
under  them, and for prescribing the 1[qualifications (including age) of agents and managers] of 
mines and of persons acting under them;  
(d) for requiring facilities to be provided for enabling managers of mines and other persons 
acting under them to efficiently discharge 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 27]
ovided for enabling managers of mines and other persons 
acting under them to efficiently discharge their duties ; 
(e) for regulating the manner of ascert aining, by examination or otherwise, the qualifications 
of managers of mines and persons acting under them, and the granting and renewal of certificates 
of competency;  
(f) for fixing the fees, if any, to be paid in respect of such examinations and of the grant and 
renewal of such certificates;  
(g) for determining the circumstances in which and the conditions subject to which it shall be 
lawful for more mines than one to be under a single manager, or for any mine or mines to be under 
a manager not having the  prescribed qualifications ;  
2[(h) for providing for inquiries to be made under this Act, including any inquiry r elating to 
misconduct or incom petence on the part of any person holding a certificate under this Act and for 
the suspension or cancellation of any such certificate and for providing, wherever necessary, that 
the person appointed to hold an inquiry shall have all the powers of a civil court under the Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , for the purpose of enforcing the attendance of witnesse s and 
compelling the production of documents and material objects;]  
(i) for regulating, subject to the provisions of the Indian Explosives Act, 1884  (4 of 1884) , 
and of any rules made thereunder, the storage, conveyance and use of explosives;  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 31, for “qualification s of managers” (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
2. Subs. by s. 31,  ibid., for clause ( h) (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 28]
28 
 1[(j) for pro hibiting, restricting or  regulating the employment of 2*** women in mines or in 
any class of mines or onparticular kinds of labour which are attended by danger to the life, safety 
or health of such persons and for limiting the weight of any single load tha t may be carried by any 
such person;]  
(k) for providing for the safety of the persons employed in a mine, their means of entrance 
thereinto and exit therefrom, the number of shafts or outlets to be furnished, and the fencing of 
shafts, pits, ou tlets, pathw ays and subsidences ; 
(1) for prohibiting the employment in a mine either as manager or in any other specified 
capacity of any person except persons paid by the owner of the mine and directly answerable to 
the owner or manager of the mine ; 
3[(m) for providi ng for the safety of the roads and working places in mines, including the 
siting, maintenance and extraction or reduction of pillars or blocks of minerals and the 
maintenance of sufficient barriers between mine and mine;  
(n) for the inspection of workings and sea led off fire -areas in a mine, and for the restriction of 
workings in the vicinity of the sea or any lake or river or any other body of surface water, whether 
natural or artificial, or of any public road or building, and for requiring due precaution t o be taken 
against the irruption or inrush of water or other liquid matter into, outbreak of fire in or premature 
collapse of, any workings;]  
(o) for providing for the ventilation  of mines and the action to be taken in respect of dust, fire, 
and inflammable and noxious gases, including precautions against spontaneous combustion, 
underground fire and coal dust;  
4[(p) for regulating, subject to the provisions of th e Indian Electricity Act, 1910 (9 of 1910) , 
and ofany rules made thereunder, the gener ation, storag e, transformation, trans mission and use of 
electricity in mines and for providing for the care and the regulation of the use of all electrical
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 28]

electricity in mines and for providing for the care and the regulation of the use of all electrical 
apparatus and electrical cables in mines and of all other machinery and plant therein;]  
(q) 5[for re gulating the use of machinery in mines, for providing for the safety of persons 
employed on or near such machinery and on haulage roads] and for restricting the use of certain 
classes of locomotives underground;  
(r) for providing for proper lighting of min es and regulating the use of safety lamps therein 
and for the search of persons entering a mine in which safety lamps are in use;  
(s) for providing against e xplosions or ignitions 6[of inflammable gas or dust] or irruptions of 
or accumulations of water in mines and against danger arising therefrom and for prohibiting, 
restricting or regulating the extraction of minerals in circumstances likely to result in the  
premature collapse of 6[workings] or to result in or to aggravate the collapse of 6[workings] or 
irruptions of water or ignitions in mines;  
(t) 7[for p rescribing under clause ( g) of sub-section ( 1) of section 23, the types of accidents 
and for prescribing the notices] of accid ents and dangerous occurrences and the notices, reports 
and returns of minera l output, persons employed and other matters provided for by regulations, to 
be furnished by owners, agents and managers of mines,and for prescribing the forms of such 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 31, for clause ( j) (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
2. The words “adolescents and” omitted by Act 42 of 1983, s. 30 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
3.  Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 31, for clause s (m) and ( n) (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
4. Subs. by s. 31, ibid., for clause ( p) (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
5. Subs.by Act 42 of 1983, s. 30, for certain words (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
6. Ins. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 31 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).   
7. Subs. by s. 31, ibid., for “ for prescribing the notices” (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960)
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 28]
.f. 16 -1-1960).   
7. Subs. by s. 31, ibid., for “ for prescribing the notices” (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 29]
29 
 notices, returns and reports, the persons and authorities to whom they are to be furnish ed, the 
particulars to be contained in them, and the time within  which they are to be submitted ;  
1[(u) 2[for requiring owners, agents and managers of mines to have fixed boundaries for the 
mines, for prescribing the plans and sections and field notes conn ected th erewith to be kept by 
them ] and the manner and places in which such plans, sections and field notes are to be kept for 
purposes of record and for the submission of copies  thereof to the Chief Inspector ; and for 
requiring the making of fresh surveys  and plans bythem, and in the event of non -compliance, for 
having the survey made and plans prepared through any other agency and for the recovery of 
expenses thereof in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue;]  
 (v) for regulating the procedure on th e occurrence of accidents or accidental explo sions or 
ignitions in or about mines 3[for dealing effectively with the  situation ]; 
(w) for prescribing the form of, and the particulars to be contained in, the notice to be given 
by the owner, agent or man ager of a mine under section 16 ; 
 (x) for prescribing the notice to be given by the owner, agent or manager of a mine before 
mining operations are commenced at or extended to any point within 4[forty -five metres]  of any 
railway subject to the provisions of the Indian Railways Act, 1890 (9 of 1890) , or of any 5[public 
roads or other works , as the case may be, which are maintained by the Gov ernment or any local 
authority] ; 
 (y) for the protection from injury, in respect of any mine when the workings are discontinu ed, 
of property vested in the Government or any local authority or railway company as defined in the 
Indian Railways Act, 1890 (9 of 1890);  
6[(yy) for requiring protective works to be constructed by the owner, agent or manager of a 
mine before the mine is  closed, and in the event of non -compliance, for getting such works
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 29]
r of a 
mine before the mine is  closed, and in the event of non -compliance, for getting such works 
executed by any other agency and for recovering the expenses thereof from such owner in the 
same manner as an arrear of land revenue;]  
 (z) for requiring the fencing of any mine or part of  a mine or any quarry, incline, shaft, pit or 
outlet, whether the same is being worked or not, or any dangerous or prohibited area, subsidence, 
haulage, tramline or pathway, where such fencing is necessary for the protection of the public ; 
and  
(zz) any ot her matter which has to be or may be prescribed.  
58.Power of Central Government to make rules .—The Central Government may, by 
notification in the  Official Gazette, make rules consistent with this Act for all or any of the following 
purposes, namely: — 
7[(a) for providing the term of office and other conditions of service of, and the manner of filling 
vacancies among, the members of a Committee and for regulating the procedure to be followed by a 
committee for transacting its business;]  
(b) for prescribing t he form of the register referred to i n sub -section ( 3) of section 23 ; 
(c) for providing for the appointment of Courts of inquiry under section 24, for regulating the 
procedure and powers of such Courts, for the payment of travelling allowance to the member s, and for 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 31, for clause ( u) (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).    
2. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 30, for certain words (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
3.  Ins. by s. 30, ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
4.  Subs. by s. 30, ibid., for “fifty yards” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
5. Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 31, for certain words (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).   
6.  Ins. by s. 31, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).    
7. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 31, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 30]
30 
 the recovery of the expenses of such Courts 1[including any other expense s connected with the inquiry 
2[in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue] ] from the manager,owner or agent of the mine 
concerned;  
2[(cc) for providing for inspection of mines to be carried out on behalf of the persons employed 
therein by a technical expert (not less than an overman in status), the facilities therefor, the frequency 
at which and the manner in which such inspections are to be carried out and the manner i n which 
reports of such inspections are to be made: ] 
(d) for requiring the maintenance in mines wherein any women are employed or were employed 
on any day of the preceding twelve months of suitable rooms to be reserved for the use of children 
under the age  of six years belonging to such women, and for prescribing, either generally or with 
particular reference to the number  of women employed in the mine the number and standards of such 
rooms, and the nature and extent of the amenities to be provided and the supervision to be exercised 
therein;  
(e) for requiring the maintenance at or near pit -heads of bathing places equipped with shower 
baths and of locker -rooms for the use of men employed in mines and of similar and separate places 
and rooms for the use of wo men in mines where women are employed, and for prescribing, either 
generally or with particular reference to the numbers of men and women ordinarily employed in a 
mine, the number and standards of such places and rooms;  
(f) for prescribing the standard of sanitation to be maintained and the scale of latrine and urinal 
accommodation to be provided at mines, the provision to be made for the supply of drinking water 
3***; 
1[(ff) for providing for the supply and maintenance of medical appliances and comforts an d for 
prescribing the contents and number of first -aid boxes and cupboards, the training in first -aid work, 
the size and equipment of first -aid rooms and staff in charge there
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 30]
e training in first -aid work, 
the size and equipment of first -aid rooms and staff in charge thereof and the arrangements for 
conveyance of injured perso ns to hospitals or dispens aries ; 
(fff) for requiring the imparting of practical instruction to, or the training of, persons employed or 
to be employed in mines otherwise than in a position of supervision or management and for 
prescribing schemes for such instruction and training;]  
(g) for prohibiting the possession or consumption of intoxicating drinks or drugs in a mine and the 
entry or presence therein of any person in a drunken state;  
(h) for prescribing the forms of notices required under section 36, and for requiring such notic es 
to be posted also in specified languages;  
(i) for defining the persons who shall,  for the purpose of section 37, be deemed to be persons 
holding positions of supervision or management or empl oyed in a confidential capacity ; 
(j) for prohibiting the emplo yment in mines of persons or any class of persons who have not been 
certified by a qualified medical practitioner to have completed their fifteenth year, and for prescribing 
the manner and the circumstances in which such certificates may be granted and rev oked;  
4*   *   *   *   * 
1[(kk) for requiring persons employed or seeking employment at mines to submit themselv es for 
medical examina tion and for prohibiting on medical grounds the employment of any person at a mine 
either absolutely or in a particular  capacity or in particular work ;] 
5[(l) for prescribing the form of registers required by section 48 and the maintenance and form of 
registers for the purposes of Chapter VII;]  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 32 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).   
2. Ins. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 31 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
3. Certain words omitted by Act 62 of 1959, s. 32 (w.e.f. 1 6-1-1960).  
4. Omitted by Act 42 of 1983, s. 31 (w.e.f. 31-5-1984).  
5. Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 30]
 6-1-1960).  
4. Omitted by Act 42 of 1983, s. 31 (w.e.f. 31-5-1984).  
5. Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 32, for clause ( l) (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 31]
31 
 (m) for prescri bing abstracts of this Act and of the regulations and rules and  the language in which 
the abstracts and bye -laws shall be posted as  required by sections 61 and 62 ; 
 (n) for requiring notices, returns  and reports in connection with any matters dealt with by rules to 
be furnished by owners, agents and managers of mines,  and for prescribing the forms of such notices, 
returns and reports, the persons and authorities to whom they are to be furnished, the particulars to be 
contained in them, and the times, within which they are to be submitted;  
(o) for requiring the provisi on and maintenance in  mines, wherein more than 1*** fifty persons 
are ordinarily employed, of adequate and suitable shelters for taking food with provision for drinking 
water;  
(p) for requiring the provision and maintenance in any mine specified in this b ehalf by the Chief 
Inspector or Inspector, wherein more than two hundred and fifty persons are ordinarily employed, of a 
canteen or cante ens for the use of such persons ;  
(q) for requiring the employment in every mine wherein five hundred or more persons a re 
ordinarily employed, of such number of welfare officers as may be specified and for prescribing the 
qualifications and the terms and conditions of,and the duties to be performed by, such welfare 
officers ; 
2[(r) for requiring the establishment of rescue stations for specified mines or groups of specified 
mines or for all mines in a specified area and for prescribing how and by whom such stations shall be 
established;  
 (s) for providing for the management of rescue stations;  
 (sa) for providing for the sta ndards of physical fitness and other qualifications of the persons 
constituting rescue brigades;  
 (sb) prescribing the places of residence of the persons constituting rescue brigades;]  
 (t) for prescribing the position, equipment, control, m aintenance and functions of 3*** rescue 
stations;  
4[(u) for providing for the levy and collect
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 31]
 m aintenance and functions of 3*** rescue 
stations;  
4[(u) for providing for the levy and collection of a duty of excise (at a rate not exceeding  
twenty -five paise per tonne) on coke and coal produced in and despatched from mines specified under  
clause ( r), the creation of a rescue stations fund for such mines, the crediting to such fund of such 
sums of money as the Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in 
this behalf, provide from out of the proceeds of such cess credited to the Consol idated Fund of India, 
the manner in which the money from such fund shall be utilised and the administration of such fund; ] 
 (v) For providing for the formation,training,composition and d uties of rescue brigades 5***; and 
generally for the condu ct of rescue  work in mines; 6*** 
7[(vv)for providing for the constitution of safety Committees for specified mine or groups of 
specified mines or for all mines in a specified area for promoting safety and for laying down the 
composition, manner of formation and functi ons of such safety Committees, and;]  
(w) generally to provide for any matter not provided for by this Act or the regulations, provision 
for which is required in order to give effect to this Act.  
 
                                                      
1.  The words “one hundred and”  omitted by Act 62 of 1959, s. 32 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
2. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 31, for clauses ( r) and ( s) (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
3. The wor d “Central” omitted by s. 31, ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
4. Subs. by s. 31, ibid., for clause ( u) (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
5. Certain words omitted by s. 31, ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
6. The word “and” omitted by s. 31, ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
7. Ins. by s. 31 , ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 32]
32 
 59. Prior publication of regulation and rules .—(1)The power to make regulations and rules 
conferred by sections 57 and 58 is subject to the condition of the regulations and rules being made 
after previous publication.  
(2) The date to be specified in accordance with clause ( 3) of section 23 of the General  Clauses 
Act, 1897 (10 of 1897) , as that after which a draft of regulations or rules proposed to be made will be 
taken under consideration, shall not be less than three months from the date on which the draft of the 
proposed regulations or rules is publish ed for general information.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
2[(4) No regulation or rule shall be made unless the draft thereof has been referred to the 
Committee constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 12 and unless that Committee has had a 
reasonable opportunity of reporting as to the expediency of making the same and as to the suitability 
of its provisions.]  
(5) Regulations and rules shall be published in the Official Gazette and, on such publication, shall 
have effect as if enacted in this Act.  
(6) The provisio ns of sub -sections ( 1), (2) and ( 4) shall not apply to the first occasion on which 
rules referred to in clause ( d) or clause ( e) of section 58 are made.  
3*   *   *   *   * 
60.Power to make regulation s without previous publication .—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in sub -sections ( 1), (2) and 4[(4)] of sect ion 59, regulations under 5*** section 57 may be 
made without previou s publication and without 6*** reference to 7[the Committee constituted under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 12] , if the Central Government is satisfied that for the prevention of 
apprehended danger or the speedy remedy of conditions likely to cause danger it is necess ary in 
making such regulations to dispense with the delay that would result from  such publication and 
reference:  
Provided that any regulations so made 8[shall be sent to the sai d Committee for information and ] 
shall not  rem
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 32]
any regulations so made 8[shall be sent to the sai d Committee for information and ] 
shall not  remain in force for more than 9[one year] from the making thereof.  
61. Bye -laws .—(1)The owner, agent or manager of a mine may, and shall, if called upo n to do so 
by the Chief Inspector or Inspector, frame and submit to the Chief Inspector or Inspector a draft of 
such bylaws, not being inconsistent with this Act or any regulations or rules for the time being in 
force, 10[governing the use of any particular  machinery or the adoption of a particular method of 
working in the mine] as such owner, agent or manager may deem necessary to prevent accidents and 
provide for the safety, convenience and discipline of the persons employed in the mine.  
(2) If any such ow ner, agent or manager — 
(a) fails to submit within two months a draft of bye -laws after being called upon to do so by 
the Chief Inspector or Inspector, or  
                                                      
1. Omitted by Act 62 of 1959, s. 33 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
2. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s . 32, for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f.31 -5-1984).  
3. Omitted by s.32, ibid. (w.e.f.31 -5-1984).  
4.  Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 34, for “( 3)” (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).   
5. The words, brackets and letters “clause ( i) and clauses ( k) to ( s) excluding clause ( 1) of” omitted by s. 34, ibid.  
(w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
6. The word “previous ” omitted by s. 34, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
7. Subs. by Act 42 of 19 83, s. 33, for “Mining Boards” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
8. Ins. by s. 33, ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
9. Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 34, for “two years” (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).   
10. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 34, for certain words (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 33]
33 
 (b) submits a draft of bye -laws which is not in the opinion of the Chief Inspector or Inspector 
suffic ient,  
the Chief Inspector or Inspector may — 
 (i) propose a draft of such bye -laws as appear to him to be sufficient, or  
(ii) propose such amendments in any draft submitted to him by the owner, agent or manager 
as will, in his opinion, render it sufficient , and shall send such draft bye -laws or draft amendments 
to the owner, agent or manager as the case may be, for consideration.  
(3) If within a period of two months from the date on which any draft bye -laws or draft 
amendments are sent by the Chief Inspecto r or Inspector to the owner, agent or manag er under the 
provisions of sub -section ( 2), the Chief Inspector or Inspector and the owner, agent or manager are 
unable to agree as to the terms of the bye -laws to be made under sub -section ( 1), the Chief Inspector 
or Inspector shall refer the draft bye-laws for settlement to the 1[Committee constituted unde r sub -
section ( 1) of section 12 ]. 
(4) (a) When such draft bye -laws have been agreed to by the owner, agent or manager and the 
Chief Inspect or or Inspector, or, when they are unable to agr ee, have been settled by the 1[Committee 
constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 12] a copy of the draft bye -laws shall be sent by the Chief 
Inspector or Inspector to the Central Government for approval.  
(b) The Central Government may make such modification of the draft bye -laws as it thinks fit.  
(c)Before the Central Government approves the draft bye -laws, whether with or without 
modifications, there shall be published, in such manner as the Central Gov ernment may think best 
adapted for informing the persons affected, notice of the proposal to make the bye -laws and of the 
place where copies of the draft bye -laws may be obtained, and of the time (which shall not be less 
than thirty days) within which any objections with reference to the draft by -laws, made by or on 
beha
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 33]
n thirty days) within which any objections with reference to the draft by -laws, made by or on 
behalf of persons affected should be sent to the Central Government.  
(d) Every objection shall be in writing and shall state — 
(i) the specific grounds of objections, and  
(ii) the omissions, additions or modifications asked for.  
(e) The Central  Government shall consider any objection made within the required time by or on 
behalf of persons appearing to it to be affected, and may approve the bye -laws either in the form in 
whic h they were published or after making such amendments thereto as it thinks fit.  
(5) The bye -laws, when so approved by the Central Government, shall have effect as if enacted in 
this Act, and the owner, agent or manager of the mine shall cause a copy of the  bye-laws, in English 
and in such other language or languages as may be prescribed, to be posted up in some conspicuous 
place at or near the mine, where the bye -laws may be conveniently read or seen by the persons 
employed; and as often as the same become defaced, obliterated or destroyed, shall cause them to be 
renewed with all reasonable despatch.  
(6) The Central Government may, by order in writing rescind, in whole or in part, any bye -law so 
made, and thereupon such bye -law shall cease to have effect acc ordingly.  
2[61A.La ying regulations, rules and bye -laws before parliament .—Every regulation made 
under section 57, every rule made under section 58 and every bye -law made under section 61 shall be 
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a 
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 34, for certain words (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).   
2. Ins. by s. 35, ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 33]
4).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 34]
34 
 sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive 
sessions afor esaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the regulation, rule or bye -law or 
both Houses agree that the regulation, rule or bye -law should not be made, the regulation, rule or bye -
law shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that regulation, rule  or bye -law, as the case may be. ] 
62.Posting up of abstracts from Act, regulations,etc .—There shall be kept posted up at or near 
every Mine in English and in such other language or languages as may be prescribed, the prescribed 
abstracts of the Act and of the regulations and rules.  
CHAPTER IX  
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE  
63.O bstruction .—(1)Whoever obstructs the Chief Inspector, an Inspector, or any person 
authorised under section 8 in the discharge of his dutiesunder this Act, or refuses or wilfully neglects 
to afford the Chief Inspector, Inspector or such person any reasonabl e facility for making any entry, 
inspection, examination or inquiry authorised by or under this Act in relation to any mine, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may 
extend to five hundred ru pees, or with both.  
(2) Whoever refuses to produce on the dem and of the Chief In spector or Inspector any registers  or 
other documents kept in pur suance of this Act, or prevents or a ttempts to prevent or does any thing 
which he has reason to believe to be li kely to prevent any person from appearing before or being 
examined by an inspecting officer acting in pursuance of his duties under this Act, shall be punishable 
with fine which may extend to three hundred rupees.  
64. Falsification of records, etc .—Whoever — 
(a) counterfeits, or knowingly makes a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 34]
dred rupees.  
64. Falsification of records, etc .—Whoever — 
(a) counterfeits, or knowingly makes a false statement in, any certificate, or any official copy 
of a certificate, granted under this Act, or  
(b) knowingly uses as true any such counterfeit or false certificate, or  
(c) makes or produces or uses any false  declaration, statement or evidence knowing the same 
to be false, for the purpose of obtaining for himself or for any other person a certificate, or the 
renewal of a certificate, under this Act, or any employment in a mine, or  
1[(d) falsifies any plan, sec tion, register or record, the main tenance of which is required by or 
under this Act or produces before any authority such false plan, section, register or record, 
knowing the same to be false, or]  
(e) makes, give s or delivers any plan, return, notice, reco rd or report containing a statement, 
entry or detail which is not to the best of his knowledge or belief true,  
 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or  with fine 
which may extend to 2[one thousand rupees], or with both.  
65.Use of false certificates of fitness .—Whoever knowingly uses or attempts to use as a 
certificate of fitness granted to himself under 3[section 43 ] a certificate granted to another person 
under that section, or, having been granted a certificate of fitness to himself under that section, 
knowingly allows it to be used, or allows an attempt to use it to be made by another person, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which m ay 
extend  to 4[two hundred] rupees, or with both.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 35, for clause ( d) (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
2. Subs. by s. 35, ibid., for “five hundred rupees”  (w.e.f. 16 -1- 1960).  
3. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s.36, for “section 40” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
4. Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 36, for “fifty” (w.e.f. 16
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 34]
6, for “section 40” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
4. Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 36, for “fifty” (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 35]
35 
 66.Om ission to furnish plans, etc .—Any person who, without reasonable excuse the burden of 
proving which shall lie upon him, omits to make or furnish in the prescribed form or manner or at or 
within  the prescribed t ime any plan, 1[section,] return, notice, register, record or report required by or 
under this Act to be made or furnished shall be punishable  with fine which may extend to 2[one 
thousand] rupees.  
67.Contravention of provisions regarding employment of labo ur.—Whoever, save as 
permitted by section 38, contravenes any provision of this Act or of any regulation, rule or bye -law or 
of any order made thereunder prohibiting, restricting or regulating the employment or presence of 
persons in or about a mine shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three months, or  with fine which may extend to 3[one thousa nd] rupees, or with both 4***. 
5[68. Penalty for employment of persons below eighteen years of age .—If a person below 
eighteen years o f age is employed in a mine in contravention of section 40, the owner, agent or 
manager of such mine shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.]  
69.Failure to appoint manager .—Whoever in contravention of the provisions of sectio n 17, fails 
to appoint a manager shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three 
months, or  with fine which may extend to 6[two thousand and five hund red] rupees, or with both 7*** 
7*** 
70. Notice of accidents .—(1)Whoever in contraven tion of the provision of sub -section ( 1)of 
section 23 fails to give notice of any accidental occurrence or to post a copy of the notice on the 
special notice board referre d to in that sub -section and to keep it th erefor the period specified shall be 
punish able with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may 
extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.  
(2)Whoever in contravention of a direction made by the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 35]
tend to five hundred rupees, or with both.  
(2)Whoever in contravention of a direction made by the Central Government under  
sub-section ( 3) of section 23 fails to record in the prescribed register or to give notice of any 
accidental occurrence shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three 
months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred ru pees, or with both.  
71.Owner, etc.,to report  to Chief Inspector in certain cases .— Where the owner, agent or 
manager of a mine, as the case may be, has taken proceedings under this Act against any person 
employed in or about a mine in respect of an offence under this Act, he shall within twenty -one days 
from the date of the judgment or order of the court report the result thereof to the Chief Inspector.  
72.Obligation of persons employed in a mine .—No person employed in a mine shall — 
(a) wilfully interfere with or misuse any appliance, convenience or other thing provided in a 
mine for the purpose of securing the health, safety or welfare of the persons employed therein ; 
(b) wilfully and without reasonable cause do anything likely to endanger himself or others;  
(c) wilfully neglect to make use of any ap pliance or other thing provided in the mine for the 
purpose of securing the health or safety of the persons employed therein.  
8[72A.Special Provision for contravention of certain regulations .—Whoever contravenes any 
provision of any regulation or of any b ye-law or of, any order made thereunder, relating to matters 
specified in clauses ( d), (i), (m), (n), (o), (p), (r), (s) and ( u) of section 57 shall be punishable with 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 37 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
2. Subs. by s. 37, ibid., for “two hundred ” (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
3. Subs. by s. 3 8, ibid., for “five hundred ” (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
4. Certain words omitted by s. 38, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
5. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 37, for se
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 35]
rtain words omitted by s. 38, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
5. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 37, for section 68 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
6. Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 39, for “five hundred” (w.e.f. 1 6-1-1960).  
7. Certain words omitted by s. 39, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960].  
8. Subs. by s. 40, ibid., for sections 73 and 74 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 36]
36 
 imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to  two 
thousand rupees, or with both.  
72B. Special provision for contravention of orders under section 22 .—Whoever continues to 
work a mine in contravention of any order issued under sub -section ( lA), sub -section ( 2) or sub -
section ( 3)of section 22 1[or und er section ( 2) of section 22A ] shall be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend two years, and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to five 
thousand rupees:  
1[Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the co ntrary to be recorded in 
writing in the judgment of the court such fine shall not be less than two thousand rupees. ] 
72C. Special provision for contravention of law with dangerous results .—(1)Whoever 
contravenes any provision of this Act or of any regulation, rule or bye -law or of any order made 
thereunder [other than an order made under sub -section ( lA) or sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) of 
section 22 2[or under sub -section ( 2)of section 22A] ], shall be punishable — 
(a) if such contravention resu lts in loss of life, with imprisonment which may extend to two 
years, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both; or  
(b) if such contravention results in serious bodily injury, with imprisonment which may 
extend to one year, or wi th fine which may extend to thre e thousand rupees, or with both ; or  
(c) if such contravention otherwise causes injury or danger to persons employed in the mine 
or other persons in or about the mine, with imprisonment which may extend to three months, or 
with fine which may extend to one  thousand rupees, or with both : 
2[Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the contrary to be recorded in 
writing in the judgment of the court, such fine in the case of a contravention referred to in clause ( a) 
shall not be less than three thousand rupees. ] 
(2) Where 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 36]
ontravention referred to in clause ( a) 
shall not be less than three thousand rupees. ] 
(2) Where a person having been convicted under this section is again convicted thereunder, he 
shall be punishable with double the punishment provided by sub -section ( 1). 
(3) Any court imposing or co nfirming in appeal, revision or otherwise a sentence of fine passed 
under this section may, when passing judgment, order the whole or any part of the fine recovered to 
be paid as compensation to the person injured or, in the case of his death, to his legal  representative:  
Provided that at if the fine is imposed in a case which is subject to appeal, no such payment shall 
be made before the period allowed for presenting the appeal has elapsed, or, if an appeal has been 
presented, before the decision of the a ppeal.  
73.General provision for disobedience of orders .—Whoever contravenes any provision of this 
Act or of any regulation, rule or bye -law or of any order made thereunder for the contravention of 
which no penalty is hereinbefore provided, shall be punisha ble with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both . 
74. Enhanced penalty after previous conviction .—If any person who has been convicted for an 
offence punishable under any of the foregoing provisions (other than sections 72B and 72C) is again 
convicted for an offence committed within two years of the previous conviction and involving a 
contravention of the same provision, he shall be punishable for each subsequent conviction  with 
double the punishment to which he would have been liable for the first contravention of such 
provision.]  
75. Prosecution of owner, agent or manager .—No prosecution shall be instituted against any 
owner, agent or manager for any offence under this Act  except at the instance of the Chief Inspector 
or of the district magistrate or of an Inspector authorised in this behalf by general or speci
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 36]
ctor 
or of the district magistrate or of an Inspector authorised in this behalf by general or special order in  
writing by the Chief Inspector : 
                                                      
1.Ins. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 38 (w.e.f.31 -5-1984).  
2. Ins. by s.39, ibid. (w.e.f.31 -5-1984).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 37]
37 
 1[Provided that the Chief Inspector or the district magistrate or the I nspector as so authorised 
shall , before instituting such prosecution , satisfy himself that the owner , agent or manager had failed 
to exercise all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.]  
2[Provided further that] in respect of an offence co mmitted in the course of the technical direction 
and management of a mine, the district magistrate shall not institute any prosecution against an owner, 
agent or manager without the previous approval of the Chief Inspector.  
3[76.Determination of owner in c ertain cases .—Where the owner of a mine is a firm or other 
association of individuals, all, or any of the partners or members thereof or where the owner of a mine 
is a company, all or any of the directors thereof or where the owner of a mine is a Governmen t or any 
local authority, all or any of the officers or persons authorised by such Government or local authority, 
as the case may be, to manage the affairs of the mine, may be prosecuted and punished under this Act 
for any offence for which the owner of a mine is punishable:  
4[Provided that where a firm, association or company has given notice in writing to the Chief 
Inspector that it has nominated ,— 
 (a) in the case of a firm, any of its partners or managers;  
 (b) in the case of an association, any of its members or managers;  
 (c) in the case of a company, any of its directors or managers,  
who is resident, in each case in any place to which this Act extends and who is in each case either in 
fact in charge of the management of, or holds the largest number o f shares in such firm, association or 
company, to assume the responsibility of the owner of the mine for the purposes of this Act, such 
partner, member, director or manager, as the case may be, shall, so long as he continues to so reside 
and be in charge o r hold the largest number of shares as aforesaid, be deemed to be the owner of the 
mine for th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 37]
ge o r hold the largest number of shares as aforesaid, be deemed to be the owner of the 
mine for the purposes of this Act unless a notice in writing cancelling his nomination or stating that he 
has ceased to be a partner, member, director or manager, as the may  be, is received by the Chief 
Inspector.  
Explanation .—Where a firm, association or company has different establishments or branches or 
different units in any establishment or branch, different persons may be nominated under this proviso 
in relation to diff erent establishments or branches or units and the person so nominated shall, with 
respect only to the establishment, branch or unit in relation to which he has been nominated, be 
deemed to be the owner of the mine. ]] 
77.Exemption of owner,agent or manager  from liability in certain cases .—Where the owner, 
agent or manager of a mine, accused of an offence under this Act, alleges that another person is the 
actual offender, he shall be entitled, upon compla int made by him in this behalf 5[and on his 
furnishing  the known address of the actual offender] and on giving to the prosecutor not less than 
three clear days notice in writing of his intention so to do, to have that other person brought before the 
court on the date appointed for the hearing of th e case ; and  if, after the commission of the offence has 
been proved, the owner, agent or manager of the mine, as the case may be, proves to the satisfaction 
of the Court — 
(a) that he has used due diligence to enforce the exec ution of the relevant provision of this 
Act, and  
(b) that the other person committed the offence in question without his knowledge, consent or 
connivance,  
                                                      
1.  Ins. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 40 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
2. Subs. by s. 40, ibid., for “Provided that” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
3. Subs. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 41, for section 76 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
4. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 41, for the proviso (w.e.
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 37]
. 41, for section 76 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
4. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 41, for the proviso (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
5. Ins. by Act 62  of 1959, s. 42 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 38]
38 
 the said other person shall be convicted of the offence and shall be liable to the like punishment as if 
he were the owner, agent or manager of  the mine, and the owner, agent or manager, as the case may 
be, shall be acquitted;  
Provided that — 
(a) the owner, agent or manager of the mine, as the case may be, may be examined on oath 
and his evidence and that of any witness whom he calls in support shall be subject to cross -
examination by or on behalf of the person he alleges as the actual  offender and by the prosecutor ; 
(b) if in spite of due diligence the person alleged as the actual offender cannot be brought 
before the court on the date appointed  for the hearing of the case, the court shall adjourn the 
hearing thereof from time to time so however that the total period of such adjournments does not 
exceed three months, and if by the end of the said period the person alleged as the actual offender 
cannot be brought before the court, the court shall proceed to hear the case against the owner, 
agent or manager, as the case may be.  
78. Power of Court to make orders .—(1) Where the owner, agent or manager of a mine is 
convicted of an offence punishable un der this Act, the court may, in addition to awarding him any 
punishment, by order in writing, require him within a period specified in the order (which may be 
extended by the court from time to time on application made in this behalf) to take such measures  as 
may be so specified for remedying the matters in respect of which the offence was committed.  
(2)Where an order is made under sub -section ( 1), the owner, agent or manager of the mine, as the 
case may be, shall not be liable under this Act in respect of  the continuance of the offence during the 
period or extended period, if any, but if on the expiry of such period or extended period the order of 
the court has not been fully complied with, the owner, agent or manager, as the case may be, shall be 
deemed t o have committed a furthe
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 38]
 with, the owner, agent or manager, as the case may be, shall be 
deemed t o have committed a further offence and shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees for every day 
after such expiry on which the order has not been complied with, or wi th both.  
79.Limitation of prosecutions .—No Court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act, 
unless complaint thereof has been made — 
(i) within six months of the date on which the offence is alleged to have been committed, or  
(ii) within six mont hs of the date on which the alleged commission of the offence came to the 
knowledge of the Inspector,or  
1[(iia) in any case in which the accused is or was a public servant and previous sanction of the 
Central Government or of the State Government or of an y other authority is necessary for taking 
cognizance of the offence under any law for the time being in force, within three months of the 
date on which such sanction is rece ived by the Chief Inspector, or ]  
(iii) in any case where a Court of inquiry has be en appointed by the Central Government 
under secti on 24, within 2[one year] after the date of the publication of the report referred to in 
sub-section ( 4) of that section,  
whichever is later.  
3[Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) in the c ase of a continuing offence, the period of limitation shall be computed with 
reference to every point of time during which the offence continues;  
(b) where for the performance of any act time has been extended under this Act, the period of 
limitation shall  be computed from the expiry of the extended period.]  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 42 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
2. Subs. by s. 42, ibid., for “six months” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
3. The Explanation  added by Act 62 of 1959, s. 43 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 38]
added by Act 62 of 1959, s. 43 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 39]
39 
 80.Cognizance of offences .—No Court inferior to that of a 1[Metropolitan Magistrate or J udicial 
Magistrate of the first class] shall try any offence under this Act which is alleged to have been 
committed by any owner, agent or manager of a mine or any offence which is by this Act made 
punishable with imprisonment.  
80A.[Special provision regarding fine. ]Omitted by the Mines (Amendment) Act, 1983 (42  of 
1983) , s. 44 (w.e.f. 31-5-1984) . 
81.Reference  to Mining Board or Committee in lieu of prosecution in certain cases .—(1) If 
the Court trying any case instituted at the instance of the Chief Inspector or of the district magistrate 
or of an Inspector under this Act is of opinion that the case is one whi ch should, in lieu of a 
prosecution, be referred to 2*** a Committee it may stay the criminal proceedings and report the 
matter to the Central Government with a view to such reference being made.  
(2) On receipt of a report under sub -section ( 1), the Centra l Gover nment may refer the case to 
2*** a Committee, or may direct the Court to proceed with the trial.  
CHAPTER X  
MISCELLANEOUS  
82.Decision of question whether a mine is under this Act .—If any question arises as to whet her 
any excavation or working 3[or premises in or adjacent to and belonging to a mine, on which any 
process ancillary to the getting, dressing or preparation for sale of minerals or of coke is being carried 
on] is a mine within the meaning of this Act, the Central Government may decide the question, and a 
certificate signed by a Secretary to the Central Government shall be conclusive on the point.  
83. Power to exempt from operation of Act .—4[(1)]The Central Government may, by 
notification  in the Official Gazette, exempt eith er absolutely or subject to any specified conditions any 
local area or any mine or group or class of mines or any part of a mine or any class of  persons from 
the operation of  5[all or any of the provisions of this Act or the regulation
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 39]
ass of  persons from 
the operation of  5[all or any of the provisions of this Act or the regulations, rules or bye -laws.]  
Provided that no local area or mine or group or class of mines shall be e xempted from the 
provisions of 6[sections 40 and 45] unless it is also exempted from the operation of all the other 
provisions of this Act.  
7[(2) The Central Government may, by ge neral or special order and subject to such restrictions as 
it may think fit to impose, authorise the Chief Inspector or any other authority to exempt, subject to 
any specified conditions, any mine or part thereof from the operation o f any of the provisions  of the 
8[regulations rules or bye -laws] if the Chief Inspector or such authority is of opinion that the 
conditions in any mine or part thereof are such as to render compliance with such provision 
unnecessary or impracticable.]  
84.Power to alter or rescind  orders .—9[(1)] The Central Government may reverse or modify 
any order passed under this Act.  
  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 43,  for “presidency magistrate or magistrate of the first class” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
2. The words “a Mining Board or” omitted by s. 45, ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).   
3. Ins. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 45 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
4. Section 83 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by s. 46, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
5. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 46, for “all or any of the provisions of this Act” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
6. Subs. by s. 46, ibid., for “section 45” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).   
7.  Ins. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 46 (w.e.f. 16-1-1960).  
8. Subs. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 46, for “regulations or rules under this Act” (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
9. Section 84 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by s. 47, ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 40]
40 
 1[(2)The Chief Inspector may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, reverse or modify any order 
passed by him under the Act or under any regulation, rule or b ye-law. 
(3) No order prejudicial to the owner, agent or manager of a mine shall be made under this section 
unless such owner, agent or manager has been given a reasonable opportunity of making 
representation.]  
85.Application of Act to mines belonging to Go vernment .—This Act shall 2[also] apply to 
mines belonging to the Government.  
3[85A.Persons required to give notice, etc., legally bound to do so .— Every person required to 
give any notice or to furnish any information to any authority under this Act shall be legally bound to 
do so within the meaning of section 176 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).]  
4[85B.S igning of returns, notices, etc. —All returns and notices required to be furnished or given 
given or communications sent by or on behalf of the owner of a mine in connection with the 
provisions of this Act or any regulation, rule, bye -law or any order made thereunder to whom power 
in this behalf has been delegated by the owner by a power of attorney.  
85C.No fee or charge to be realised for facilities and con veniences .—No fee or charge shall be 
realised from any person employed in a mine in respect of any protective arrangements or facilities to 
be provided, or any equipment or appliances to be supplied under the provisions of this Act.]  
86.Application of cert ain provisions of Act 63 of 1948 to mines .—The Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that the provisions of Chapters III and IV of the 
Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948) shall, subje ct to such exceptions and restr ictions as may be specified 
in the notification, apply to all mines and the precincts thereof.  
87.Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
whatever shall lie against any person for anything which is in good faith don
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINES ACT, 1952.pdf - page 40]
ther legal proceeding 
whatever shall lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done o r intended to be done 
under this Act.  
88. [Repeal of Act  4 of 1923 .] Rep. by the Repealing and AmendingAct , 1957 (36 of 1957), s. 2 
and the First Schedule . 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 47 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
2.  Ins. by Act 62 of 1959, s. 47 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
3. Ins. by s. 48, ibid. (w.e.f. 16 -1-1960).  
4.  Ins. by Act 42 of 1983, s. 48 (w.e.f. 31 -5-1984).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and extent.  
2. Interpretation.  
3. Fixing of minimum rates of wages.  
4. Minimum rate of wages.  
5. Procedure for fixing and revising minimum wages.  
6. [Omitted .]. 
7. Advisory Board . 
8. Central Advisory Board.  
9. Composition of committees, etc.  
10. Correction of errors.  
11. Wages in kind.  
12. Payment of minimum rates of wages.  
13. Fixing hours for a normal working day, etc.  
14. Overtime.  
15. Wages of worker who works for less than normal working day.  
16. Wages for two or more classes of work.  
17. Minimum time rate wages for piece work.  
18. Maintenance of registers and records.  
19. Inspectors . 
20. Claims.  
21. Single application in respect of a number of employees.  
22. Penalties for certain offences.  
22A. General provision for punishment  of other offences.  
22B. Cognizance of offences.  
22C. Offences by companies.  
22D. Payment of undisbursed amounts due to employees.  
22E. Protection against attachment of assets of employer with Government.  
22F. Application of Payment of Wages Act, 1936, to scheduled employments.  
23. Exemption of employer from liability in certain cases.  
24. Bar of suits . 
25. Contracting out.  
26. Exemptions and exceptions . 
27. Power of State Government to add to Schedule.  
28. Power of Central Government to give directions  
29. Power of the Central Govern ment to make rules.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 2]
2 
 SECTIONS  
30. Power of appropriate Government to make rules.  
30A. Rules made by Central Government to be laid before Parliament.  
31. Validation of fixation of certain minimum rates of wages.  
THE SCHEDULE.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 3]
3 
 THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948  
ACT NO. 11 OF 19481 
[15th March , 1948.]  
An Act to provide for fixing minimum rates of wages in certain employments.  
WHEREAS  it is expedient to provide for fixing minimum rates of wages in certain employments;  
It is hereby enacted as follows: — 
1. Short title and extent .—(1) This Act may be call ed the Minimum Wages Act, 1948.  
(2) It exte nds to the whole of India 2***. 
2. Interpretation .—In this Act, unless there is anything repu gnant in the subject  or context, — 
3[(a) “adolescent ” means a person who has completed his fourteenth year of age but has not  
completed his eighteenth year;  
(aa) “adult ” means a person who has complet ed his eighteenth year of age;]  
(b) “appropriate Government ” means, — 
(i) in relation to any scheduled employment carried on by or under the authority of the 
4[Central Government or a railway administration], or in relation to a mine, oilfield or major port, 
or any corporation established by 5[a Central Ac t], the Central Gover nment, and  
(ii) in relation to any other scheduled employment, the State Government;  
6[(bb) “child ” means a person who has not complet ed his fourteenth year of age;]  
(c) “competent authority ” means the authority appointed by the appropriate Government by 
notification in its Official Gazette to ascertain from time to time the cost of living index number 
applicable to the employees employed in the scheduled employments specified in such notification;  
(d) “cost of living index number ”, in relation to employee s in any scheduled employment in 
respect of which minimum rates of wages have been fixed, means the index number ascertained and 
declared by the competent authority by notification in the Official Gazette to be the cost of living 
index number applicable to  employees in such  employment;  
(e) “employer ” means any person who employs, whether directly or through another person, or 
whether on behalf of himself or any other person, one or m
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 3]
r directly or through another person, or 
whether on behalf of himself or any other person, one or more employees in any scheduled 
employment in respect of which minimum rates  of wages have been fixed under this Act, and 
includes, except in s ub-section ( 3) of section 26, — 
(i) in a factory where there is carried on any scheduled employment in respect of which 
minimum rates of wages have been fixed under this Act, any person named under 7[clause  (f) of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 7 of the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 194 8)], as ma nager of the factory;  
                                                           
1. This Act has been extended to Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and the First Schedule; Pondicherry by Reg. 7  
of 1973, s. 3 and First Schedule; Lakshadweep by Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 and the Schedule; and Union territory of Goa, Daman 
and Diu by Notification No. G.S.R. 436, dated 16 -4-1873, Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3( i). 
 This Act has been amended in Uttar Pradesh by U.P. Act 20 of 1960 (w.e.f. 1 -1-1960), Bihar by Bihar Act 3 of 1961, 
Maharashtra by Maharashtra Act 10 of 1961, Andhra Pra desh by Andhra Pradesh Act 19 of 1961, Gujarat by Gujarat Act 22 of 
1961, Madhya Pradesh by Madhya Pradesh Act 11 of 1959, Kerala by Kerala Act 18 of 1960, Rajasthan by Rajasthan Act 4 of 
1969, Madhya Pradesh by Madhya Pradesh Act 36 of 1976 and Maharashtr a by Maharashtra Act 25 of 1976.  
2. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 51 of 1970, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 1 -9-1971).  
3. Subs. by Act 61 of 1986, s. 23, for clause ( a). 
4. Subs. by Act 30 of 1957, s. 2, for “Central Government, by a railway administration” . 
5. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “an Act of the Central Legislature”  
6. Ins. by Act 61 of 1986, s. 23.  
7. Subs. by Act 26 of 1954, s. 2 , for “clause ( e) of sub -section  (1) of section 9 of the Factories Act, 1934 (25 of 1934)” . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 3]
9 of the Factories Act, 1934 (25 of 1934)” . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 4]
4 
 (ii) in any scheduled employment under the control of any Government in India in respect of 
which minimum rates of wages have been fixed under this Act, the person or authority appointed 
by such Government for the supervision and control of employees or where no person or 
authority is so appoint ed, the head of the department;  
(iii) in any scheduled employment under any local authority in respect of which minimum 
rates of wages have been fixed under this Act, the person appointed by  such authority for the 
supervision and control of employees or where no person is so appointed, the chief executive 
officer of the local authority;  
(iv) in any other case where there is carried on any scheduled employment in respect of which 
minimum rate s of wages have been fixed under this Act, any person responsible to the owner for 
the supervision and control of the employe es or for the payment of wages;  
(f) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(g) “scheduled employment ” means an  employment specified in the Schedule, or any process or 
branch of work f orming part of such employment;  
(h) “wages ” means all remuneration, capable of being expressed in terms of money, which would, 
if the terms of the contract of employment, express or i mplied, were fulfilled, be payable to a person 
employed in respect of his employment or of work done in such employment, 1[and includes house 
rent al lowance], but does not include — 
(i) the value of — 
(a) any house -accommodation, supply of light,  water, medical attendance, or  
(b) any other amenity or any service excluded by general or special order  of the 
appropriate Government;  
(ii) any contribution paid by the employer to any Pension Fund or Provident Fund or under 
any scheme of social insurance ; 
(iii) any travelling allowance or the valu e of any travelling concession;  
(iv) any sum paid to the person employed to defray special expenses entailed on him by t he 
nature of his employme
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 4]
id to the person employed to defray special expenses entailed on him by t he 
nature of his employment; or  
(v) any  gratuity payable on discharge;  
(i)“employee ” means a ny person who is employed for hire or reward to do any work, skilled or 
unskilled, manual or clerical, in a scheduled employment in respect of which minimum rates of wages 
have been fixed; and includes an out -worker to whom any articles or materials are gi ven out by another 
person to be made up, cleaned, washed, altered, ornamented, finished, repaired, adapted or otherwise 
processed for sale for the purposes of the trade or business of that other person where the process is to be 
carried out either in the h ome of the out -worker or in some other premises not being premises under the 
control and management of that other person; and also includes an employee declared to be an employee 
by the appropriate Government; but does not include any member of the Armed F orces of the 2[Union].  
3. Fixing of minimum rates of wages .—3[(1) The appropriate Government shall, in th e manner 
hereinafter provided, — 
4[(a) fix the minimum rates of wages payable to employees employed in an employment specified 
in Part I or Part II of the Schedule and in an employment added to either Part by  notification under               
section 27:  
Provided that the appropriate Government may, in respect of employees employed in an 
employment specified in Part II of the Schedule, instead of fixing m inimum rates of wages under this 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act  30 of 1957, s. 2.  
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “Crown”.  
3. Subs. by Act 26 of 1954, s. 3, for sub -section ( 1). 
4. Subs. by Act 3 1 of 19 61, s. 2, for clause ( a). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 5]
5 
 clause for  the whole State, fix such rates for a part of the State or for any specified class or classes of 
such employment in th e whole State or part thereof;]  
(b) review at such intervals as it may think fit, such interva ls not exceeding five years, the 
minimum rates of wages so fixed and revise the m inimum rates, if necessary:  
1[Provided that where for any reason the appropriate Government has not reviewed the minimum 
rates of wages fixed by it in respect of any scheduled employment within any interval of five years, 
nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to prevent it from reviewing the minimum rates after 
the expiry of the said period of five years and revising them, if necessary, and until they are so revised 
the minimum rates in force immediately before the expiry of the said period of five years shall 
continue in fo rce.] 
(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the appropriate Government may refrain 
from fixing minimum rates of wages in respect of any scheduled employment in which there are in the 
whole State less than one thousand employees engage d in such employment, but if at any time, 2*** the 
appropriate Government comes to a finding after such inquiry as it may make or cause to be made in this 
behalf that the number of employees in any scheduled employment in respect of which it has refrained 
from fixing minimum rates of wages has risen to one thousand or more, it shall fix minimum rates of 
wages payable to employees in such employment 3[as soon as may be after such finding].]  
(2) The appropriate Government may fi x,— 
(a) a minimum rate of wages  for time work (hereinafter referre d to as “a minimum time rate ”); 
(b) a minimum rate of wages for piece work (hereinafter referred to as “a minimum piece rate”); 
(c) a minimum rate of remuneration to apply in the case of employees employed on piece work 
for the purpose of securing to such employees a minimum rate of wages on a time work basis 

<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 5]
e work 
for the purpose of securing to such employees a minimum rate of wages on a time work basis 
(hereinafter referred t o as “a guaranteed time rate ”); 
(d) a minimum rate (whether a time rate or a piece rate) to apply in substitution for the minimum 
rate which wo uld otherwise be applicable, in respect of overtime work done by employees 
(hereinafter referred to as “overtime rate ”).  
4[(2A) Where in respect of an industrial dispute relating to the rates of wages payable to any of the 
employees employed in a scheduled employment, any proceeding is pending before a Tribunal or 
National Tribunal under the Industrial  Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947 ) or before any like authority under 
any other law for the time being in force, or an award made by any Tribunal, Nati onal Tribunal or such 
authority is in operation, and a notification fixing or revising the minimum rates of wages in respect of the 
scheduled employment is issued during the pendency of such proceeding or the operation of the award, 
then, notwithstanding a nything contained in this Act, the minimum rates of wages so fixed or so revised 
shall not apply to those employees during the period in which the proceeding is pending and the award 
made therein is in operation or, as the case may be, where the notificati on is issued during the period of 
operation of an award, during that period; and where such proceeding or award relates to the rates of 
wages payable to all the employees in the scheduled employment, no minimum rates of wages shall be 
fixed or revised in r espect of that empl oyment during the said period.]  
(3) In fixing or revising minimum rate s of wages under this section, — 
(a) different minimum rates of wages may  be fixed for — 
(i) different scheduled employments;  
(ii) different classes of work in the same  scheduled employment;  
(iii) adults, adolescents, children and apprent ices; 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 30 o f 1957, s.
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 5]
nt ices; 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 30 o f 1957, s. 3 . 
2. Certain words, brackets and figure omitted by Act 31 of 1961, s. 2 . 
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for certain words . 
4. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 6]
6 
 (iv) different  localities;  
1[(b) minimum rates of wages may be fixed by any on e or more of the following wage -periods, 
namely: — 
(i) by the hour,  
(ii) by the day,  
(iii) by the month, or  
(iv) by such other larger wa ge-period as may be prescribed;  
and where such rates are fixed by the day or by the month, the manner of calculating wages for a month 
or for a day, as the case may be, may be indicated:]  
Provided that where any wage -periods have been fixed under section 4 of the Payment of Wages Act, 
1936 (4 of 1936), minimum wages shall be fixed in accordance therewith.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Kerala  
Amendment of Section 3. —(1) Section 3 of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 (Central Act 11 of 
1948), in its application to the fixation of minimum rates of wages in respect of employments specified in 
Part I and Part II of the Schedule to the Act, in relation to which the appropriate Government is the State 
Government, shall have effect in the Stat e of Kerala subject to the amendments specified in sub -section 
(2). 
(2) In sub -section (1) of section 3 of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 (Central Act 11 of 1948), — 
(i) in the opening words, for the words “The appropriate Government”, the words “The State 
Government” shall be substituted;  
(ii) in clause (a), — 
(a) in sub -clauses (i) and (ii), for the figures, letters and words “31st day of December, 1959”, the 
figures, letters and words “ 31st day of December, 1959”, the figures, letters and words “31st day of 
March, 1961, or such other date, not being later than the 31st day of March, 1962, as the State 
Government may, from time to time, fix by notification in the Gazette” shall be substituted;  
(b) after the existing proviso, the following further proviso, the f ollowing further proviso shall be 
inserted, namely: — 
“Provided further that where, in fixing the minimum rates of wages of any employment under 
sub-clause (1) or sub -clause (ii), any class of employees is left out, the State Governme
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 6]
nt under 
sub-clause (1) or sub -clause (ii), any class of employees is left out, the State Government may, at 
any time, fix the minimum rates of wages payable to such class of employees.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this proviso, the expression “employees left out” with 
reference to an employment shall include — 
(i) employees employed in a particular locality  in the employment, the minimum rates of 
wages payable to whom have not been fixed;  
(ii) employees employed in any process or branch of work which was not in existence in the 
employment at the time when the minimum rates of wages were fixed;  
[Vide Kerala  Act 18 of 1960 , sec. 2 (w.e.f. 22-9-1960 )]. 
4. Minimum rate of wage s.—(1) Any minimum rate of wages fixed or revised by the appropriate 
Government in respect of scheduled employments under section 3 may consist of — 
(i) a basic rate of wages and a special al lowance at a rate to be adjusted, at such intervals and in 
such manner as the appropriate Government may direct, to accord as nearly as practicable with the 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 30 of 1957, s. 3 for clause ( b). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 7]
7 
 variation in the cost of living index number applicable to such workers (hereinafter referred to as  the 
“cost of living allowance ”); or 
(ii) a basic rate of wages with or without the cost of living allowance, and the cash value of the 
concessions in respect of supplies of essential commodities at concession rates, where so authori sed; 
or  
(iii) an all-inclusive rate allowing for the basic rate, the cost of living allowance and the cash 
value of the concession s, if any.  
(2) The cost of living allowance and the cash value of the concessions in respect of supplies of 
essential commodities at concession  rates shall be computed by the competent authority at such intervals 
and in accordance with such directions as may be specified or given by the appropriate Government.  
1[5. Procedure for fixing and revising minimum wages .—(1) In fixing minimum rates of w ages in 
respect of any scheduled employment for the first time under this Act or in revising minimum rates of 
wages so fixed, the appro priate Government shall either — 
(a) appoint as many committees and sub -committees as it considers necessary to hold enqui ries 
and advise it in respect of such fixation or revision,  as the case may be, or  
(b) by notification in the Official Gazette, publish its proposals for the information of persons 
likely to be affected thereby and specify a date, not less than two months from the date of the 
notification, on which the proposals wi ll be taken into consideration.  
(2) After considering the advice of the committee or committees appointed under clause ( a) of sub -
section ( 1), or as the case may be, all representations received by it before the date specified in the 
notification under clause ( b) of that sub -section, the appropriate Government shall, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, fix, or, as the case may be, revise the minimum rates of wages in respect of each 
scheduled  employment, and unless such notification otherwise  provides, it s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 7]
es in respect of each 
scheduled  employment, and unless such notification otherwise  provides, it shall come into force on the 
expiry of three mon ths from the date of its issue:  
Provided that where the appropriate Government proposes to revise the minimum rates of wages by 
the mode speci fied in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1), the appropriate Government shall consult the Advisory 
Board also.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Assam  
In Section 5 of the said Act, at the end of Clause (a) of Sub -section (1), for the comma and the word “or” 
after the word “be”, a colon shall be substituted and the following proviso shall be added, namely: — 
“Provided the committees and sub -committee as so  appointed may advise the appropriate 
Government in respect of fixation of wages on interim  measure after ho lding such preliminary  enquir ies 
as the committee or the sub -committee,  as the case may be, considers necessary in this behalf and the 
appropriate Government after considering such advice may fix the wages pending the fixation of the 
minimum rate of wages as required under sub -section (2) or”.  
[Vide Assam Act 19 of 1964, s. 2  (w.e.f. 11 -8-1964)].  
6. [Advisory  committees and sub -committees .] Omitted  by the Minimum Wages  (Amendment ) Act, 
1957 (30 of 1957), s. 5.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 30 of 1957 , s. 4, for section 5 . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 8]
8 
 7. Advisory Board .—For the purpose of co -ordinating the work of 1[committees and sub -committees 
appointed under section 5] and advising the appropriate Government generally in the matter of fixing and 
revising minimum rates of wages, the appropriate Government shall appoint an Advisory Board.  
8. Central Advisory Board .—(1) For the purpose of advising the Central and State Governments in 
the matters of the fixation and revision of minimum rates of wages and other matters under this Act and 
for co -ordinating the work of the Advisory Boards, the Central Government shall ap point a Central 
Advisory Board.  
(2) The Central Advisory Board shall consist of persons to be nominated by the Central Government 
representing employers and employees in the scheduled employments, who shall be equal in number, and 
independent persons not e xceeding one -third of its total number of members; one of such independent 
persons shall be appointed the Chairman of the Board by the Central Government.  
9. Composition of committees, etc. —Each of the committees, sub -committees 2*** and the 
Advisory Boar d shall consist of persons to be nominated by the appropriate Government representing 
employers and employees in the scheduled employments, who shall be equal in number, and independent 
persons not exceeding one -third of its total number of members; one of  such independent persons shall be 
appointed the Chairman by the appropriate Government.  
3[10. Correction of errors .—(1) The appropriate Government may, at any time, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, correct clerical or arithmetical  mistakes in an y order fixing or revising minimum rates 
of wages under this Act, or errors arising therein from a ny accidental slip or omission.  
(2) Every such notification shall, as soon as may be after it is issued, be placed before the Advisory 
Board for information.]  
11. Wages in kind .—(1) Minimum wages payable under this Act shall be paid in cash.  
(2) Where it
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 8]
 
11. Wages in kind .—(1) Minimum wages payable under this Act shall be paid in cash.  
(2) Where it has been the custom to pay wages w holly or partly in kind, the appropriate Government 
being of the opinion that it is necessary in the circumstances of the case may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, authori se the payment of minimum wages e ither wholly or partly in kind.  
(3) If the appropriate Government is of the opinion that provision should be made for the supply of 
essential commodities at concession rates, the appropriate Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, authori se the provision of suc h supplies at concess ion rates.  
(4) The cash value of wages in kind and of concessions in respect of supplies of essential 
commodities at concession rates authori sed under sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3) shall be estimated in the 
prescribed manner.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
In section 11 of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 for sub -section (1), the following sub -section shall be 
substituted, namely  :- 
"(1) Every employer/owner of Industrial or other establishment shall make payment of wages to his 
employee through cheques or N.E.F.T, E.C.S or other banking solutions:  
Provided that if the work of employed person is of temporary, casual or fixed term then on his written 
consent and on submission of a copy of his self -attested aadhar card, the employer can make cash 
payment of wages not m ore than rupees five thousand once in three months".  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 11 of 2018, s. 2]  
12. Payment of minimum rates of wages .—(1) Where in respect of any scheduled employment a 
notification under section 5 4*** is in force, the employer shall pay to every employee engaged in a 
scheduled employment under him wages at a rate not less than the minimum rate of wages fixed by such 
notification for that class of employees in that employment without any deductions e xcept as may be 
authori sed within such time and subject to such c o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 8]
yment without any deductions e xcept as may be 
authori sed within such time and subject to such c onditions as may be prescribed.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 30 of 1957, s. 6, for “committees, sub -committees, advisory committees and the advisory sub -committees 
appointed under section s 5 and 6”  
2. The words “advisory committee, advisory sub -committees” omitted by s. 7, ibid.  
3.  Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for section 10 . 
4.  The words and figures “or section 10” omitted by s. 9 , ibid. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 9]
9 
 (2) Nothing contained in this section shall affect the provisions of the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 (4 
of 1936).  
13. Fixing  hours for a normal working day, et c.—1[(1)] In regard to any scheduled employment 
minimum rates of wages in respect of which have been fixed under this Act, the appropriate Government 
may — 
(a) fix the number of hours of work which shall constitute a normal working day, inclusive of o ne 
or more specified intervals;  
(b) provide for a day of rest in every period of seven days which shall be allowed to all 
employees or to any specified class of employees and for the payment of remuneration in respect of 
such days of rest;  
(c) provide for paymen t for work on a day of rest at a rate not less than the overtime rate.  
2[(2) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall, in relation to the following classes of employees, apply 
only to such extent and subject to such cond itions as may be prescribed: — 
(a) employees engaged on urgent work, or in any emergency which could not h ave been foreseen 
or prevented;  
(b) employees engaged in work in the nature of preparatory or complementary work which must 
necessarily be carried on outside the limits laid down for the general worki ng in the employment 
concerned;  
(c) employees whose employme nt is essentially intermittent;  
(d) employees engaged in any work which for technical reasons has to be com pleted before the 
duty is over;  
(e) employees engaged in a work which could not be carried on except at times dependent on the 
irregular action of natural forces.  
(3) For the purposes of clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2), employment of an employee is essentially 
intermittent when it is declared to be so by the appropriate Government o n the ground that the daily hours 
of duty of the employee, or if there be no daily hours of duty as such for the employee, the hours of duty, 
normally include periods of inaction during which the employee may be on duty but is not called upon to 
disp
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 9]
include periods of inaction during which the employee may be on duty but is not called upon to 
display ei ther physical ac tivity or sustained attention.]  
14. Overtime. —(1) Where an employee, whose minimum rate of wages is fixed under this Act by the 
hour, by the day or by such a longer wage -period as may be prescribed, works on any day in excess of the 
number of hours constituting a normal working day, the employer shall pay him for every hour or for part 
of an hour so worked in excess at the overtime rate fixed under this Act or under any law of the 
appropriate Government for the time being  in force, whichever  is higher.  
(2) Nothing in this Act shall prejudice the operation of the provisions of 3[section 59 of the F actories 
Act, 1948 ( 63 of 1948) ] in any case where t hose provisions are applicable.  
15. Wages of worker who works for less than normal working day .—If an employee whose 
minimum rate of wages has been fixed under this Act by the day works on any day on which he was 
employed for a period less than the requisite number of hours constituting a normal working day, he shall, 
save as otherwise hereinafter pr ovided, be entitled to receive wages in respect of work done by him on 
that day as if he had worked  for a full normal working day:  
Provided, however, that he shall not be entitled to receive wages for a full n ormal working day — 
(i) in any case where his fa ilure to work is caused by his unwillingness to work and not by the 
omission of the employe r to provide him with work, and  
                                                           
1. Section 13 re -numbered as sub -section ( 1) of thereof by Act 30 of 1957, s. 10 . 
2. Ins. by Act 30 of 1957, s. 10 .  
3. Subs. by Act 26 of 1954, s. 4 for “section 47 of the Factories Act, 1934 (25 of 1934)”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 10]
10 
 (ii) in such other cases and circumstances as may be prescribed.  
16. Wages  for two or more classes of work .—Where an employee does t wo or more classes of work 
to each of which a different minimum rate of wages is applicable, the employer shall pay to such 
employee in respect of the time respectively occupied in each such class of work, wages at not less than 
the minimum rate in force i n respect of each such class.  
17. Minimum time rate wages for piece work. —Where an employee is employed on piece work for 
which minimum time rate and not a minimum piece rate has been fixed under this Act, the employer shall 
pay to such employee wages at n ot less than the minimum time rate.  
18. Maintenance of registers and records. —(1) Every employer shall maintain such registers and 
records giving such particulars of employees employed by him, the work performed by them, the wages 
paid to them, the receipts given by them and such other particulars and in such form as may be prescribed .  
(2) Every employer shall keep exhibited, in such manner as may be prescribed, in the factory, 
workshop or place where the employees in the scheduled employment may be e mployed, or in the case of 
out-workers, in such factory, workshop or place as may be used for giving out -work to them, notices in 
the prescribed form containing prescribed particulars.  
(3) The appropriate Government may, by rules made under this Act, provide for the issue of wage 
books or wage slips to employees employed in any scheduled employment in respect of which minimum 
rates of wages have been fixed and prescribe the manner in which entries shall be made and authenticated 
in such wage books or wage slips by the employer or his agent.  
19. Inspectors .—(1) The appropriate Government m ay, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
appoint such persons as it thinks fit to be Inspectors for the purposes of this Act, and define the local 
limits within which they shall exercise their functions.  
(
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 10]
oses of this Act, and define the local 
limits within which they shall exercise their functions.  
(2) Subject to any rules made in this behalf, an  Inspector may, within the local lim its for which he is 
appointed — 
(a) enter, at all reasonable hours, with such assistants (if any), being persons in the service of the 
Government or any local or other public authority, as he thinks fit, any premises or p lace where 
employees are employed or work is given out to out -workers in any scheduled employment in respect 
of which minimum rates of wages have been fixed under this Act, for the purpose of examining any 
register, record of wages or notices required to b e kept or exhibited by or under this Act or rules made 
thereunder, and require the pro duction thereof for inspection;  
(b) examine any person whom he finds in any such premises or place and who, he has reasonable 
cause to believe, is an employee employed th erein or an employee to whom work is given out therein;  
(c) require any person giving out -work and any out -workers, to give any information, which is in 
his power to give, with respect to the names and addresses of the persons to, for and from whom the 
work is given out or received, and with respect to the paymen ts to be made for the work;  
1[(d) seize or take copies of such register, record of wages or notices or portions thereof as he 
may consider relevant in respect of an offence under this Act which he has reason to believe has been 
committed by an employer; and]  
(e) exercise such other  powe rs as may be prescribed.  
(3) Every Inspector shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of the Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 1860).  
2[(4) Any person required to produce any document or thing or to give any information by an 
Inspector under sub -section ( 2) shall be deemed to be legally bound to do so within the meaning of 
section 175 and section 176 of the Indi an Penal Code (45 of 1860).]  
                                      
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 10]
75 and section 176 of the Indi an Penal Code (45 of 1860).]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 30 of 1857, s. 11, for clause ( d). 
2.  Ins. by s. 11, ibid. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 11]
11 
 20. Claims .—(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint 
1[any Commiss ioner for Workmen's Compensation or any officer of the Central Government exercising 
functions as a Labour Commissioner for any region, or any officer of the State Government not below the 
rank of Labour Commissioner or any] other officer with experience a s a Judge of a Civil Court or as a 
stipendiary Magistrate to be the Authority to hear and decide for any specified area all claims arising out 
of payment of less than the minimum rates of wages 2[or in respect of the payment of remuneration for 
days of rest or for work done on such days under clause ( b) or clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 13 
or of wages at the overtime rate under section 14,] to employees  employed or paid in that area.  
(2) 3[Where an employee has any claim of the nature referred to in sub -section ( 1)], the employee 
himself, or any legal practitioner or any official of a registered trade union authori sed in writing to act on 
his behalf, or any Inspector, or any person acting with the permission of the Authority appointed under 
sub-section ( 1), may apply to such Authority for a d irection under sub -section ( 3): 
Provided that every such application shall be presented within six months from the date on which the 
minimum wages 2[or other amount] became payable:  
Provided further that any application may be admitted after the said period of six months when the 
applicant satisfies the Authority that he had sufficient cause for not making the application within such 
period.  
4[(3) When any application under sub -section ( 2) is entertained, the Authority shall hear the applicant 
and the employer, or give them an opportunity of being heard, and after such further inquiry, if any, as it 
may consider necessary, may, without prejudice to any other penalty to which the employer m ay be liable 
under this Act, direct — 
(i) in the case of a claim arising out
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 11]
 which the employer m ay be liable 
under this Act, direct — 
(i) in the case of a claim arising out of payment of less than the minimum rates of wages, the 
payment to the employee of the amount by which the minimum wages payable to him exceed the 
amount actually paid, together wi th the payment of such compensation as the Authority may think fit, 
not exceeding ten t imes the amount of such excess;  
(ii) in any other case, the payment of the amount due to the employee, together with the payment 
of such compensation as the Authority ma y think fit, not exceeding ten rupees,  
and the Authority may direct payment of such compensation in cases where the excess or the amount due 
is paid by the employer to the employee before th e disposal of the application.]  
(4) If the Authority hearing any application under this section is satisfied that it was either malicious 
or vexatious, it may direct that a penalty not exceeding fifty rupees be paid to the employer by the per son 
presenting the application.  
(5) Any amount directed to be paid under this s ection may be recovered — 
(a) if the Authority is a Magistrate, by the Authority as if it were a fine imposed by th e Authority 
as a Magistrate, or  
(b) if the Authority is not a Magistrate, by any Magistrate to whom the Authority makes 
application in this be half, as if it were a f ine imposed by such Magistrate.  
(6) Every direction of the Authority und er this section shall be final.  
(7) Every Authority appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall have all the powers of a Civil Court under 
the Code of Civil Procedure,  1908 (5 of 1908), for the purpose of taking evidence and of enforcing the 
attendance of witnesses and compelling the production of documents, and every such Authority shall be 
deemed to be a Civil Court for all the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXXV  of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898).  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 30 of 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 11]
(5 of 1898).  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 30 of 1957, s. 12, for “any Commissioner for Workmen’s Compensation or” . 
2.  Ins. by s. 12, ibid.  
3. Subs. by s. 12, ibid., for certain words.  
4. Subs. by s. 12, ibid., for sub -section ( 3) . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 12]
12 
 STATE AMENDMENTS  
Kerala  
Amendment of Section 20 .—In section 20 of the Minimum wages Act, 1948 (Central Act 11 of 
1948) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), — 
(a) in s ub-section (1), for the words “or any officer of the State Government not below the rank of a 
Labour Commissioner”, the words “or any officer of the State Government not below the rank of a 
Deputy L abour Commissioner” shall be substituted;  
(b) in sub -section (4), for the words “fifty rupees”, the words “one hundred rupees” shall be 
substituted;  
(c) in sub -section (5), for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, namely: — 
“(b) if the Authority is not a Magistrate, by the Authority, as if it wer e arrears of revenue due on land, without 
prejudice to any other mode of recovery.”.  
[Vide Kerala  Act 23 of 2017, sec. 2].  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 20 .—In section 20 of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 (Central Act XI of 1948), 
(herein after referred to as the Principal Act, — 
(i) in sub -section (1), for the words “not below the rank of Labour Commissioner”, the words “not 
below the rank of Assistant Labour Commissioner” shall be substituted.  
(ii) in sub -section (4), for the words “fifty rupees” the words “one thousand rupees” shall be 
substituted.  
[Vide Karnataka Act 40 of 2017, sec. 2].  
Karnataka  
 In sub -section (1) of section 20, for the words “ stipendiary  Magistrate” the words “Judicial 
Magistrate ” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Karnataka Act 13 of 1965, s. 67 and Schedule]  
Rajasthan  
Amendment of sections 20,   Central Act   11 of 1948. - In the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 (Central Act 
11 of 1948), in its application to the State of Rajasthan, in section 20, in sub -section (1), after the 
expression "Labour Commissioner", the expression "or a Vikas Adhikari  appointed under the 
Rajasthan Panchayat Samitis And Zila Parishads Act, 1959 (Rajasthan Act 37 of 1959)" shall be inserted.  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 11 of 1976, s. 3]  
21. Singl
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 12]
9 (Rajasthan Act 37 of 1959)" shall be inserted.  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 11 of 1976, s. 3]  
21. Single  applicati on in respect of a number of employees .—(1) 1[Subject to such rules as may be 
prescribed, a single application] may be presented under section 20 on behalf or in respect  of any number 
of employees employed in the scheduled employment in respect of which minimum rates of wages have 
been fixed and in such cases the maximum compensation which may be awarded under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 20 shall not exceed ten times the aggregate amount of such excess 2[or ten rupees  per head, as the 
case may be].  
(2) The  Authority may deal with any number of separate pending applications presented under section 
20 in respect of employees in the scheduled employments in respect of which minimum rates of wages 
have been fixed, as a single application presented under sub -section ( 1) of this section and the provisions 
of that sub -section shall apply accordingly.  
3[22. Penalties for certain offences .—Any employer who — 
(a) pays to any employee less than the minimum rates of wages fixed for that employee's class of 
work, or less than the amount due to him under  the provisions of this Act, or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 30 of 1957, s.  13, for “A single application”.  
2. Ins. by s. 13, ibid. 
3. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for section 22 . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 13]
13 
 (b) contravenes any rule or order made under section 13,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which 
may extend to fiv e hundred rupees,  or with both:  
Provided that in imposing any fine for an offence under this section, the Court shall take into 
consideration the amount of any compensation already awarded against the accused in any proc eedings 
taken under section 20.  
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Kerala  
Amendment of Section 22 .—In section 22 of the principal Act, for the words “five hundred rupees” the words 
“one lakh rupees” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Kerala Act 23 of 2017, sec. 3].  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 22 .—In section 22 of the Principal Act for the words “which may extend to 
five hundred rupees” the words “which shall not be less than five thousand rupees but which may extend 
to ten thousand rupees” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Karnataka  Act 40 of 2017, sec. 3].  
22A. General provision for punishment of other offences .—Any employer who contravenes any 
provision of this Act or of any rule or order made thereunder shall, if no other penalty is provided for such 
contravention by this Act, be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred  rupees.  
Kerala  
Substitution of Section 22A .—For section 22A of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely: — 
“22A. General Provision for punishment of other offences .—(1) Whoever contravenes the provisions 
of this Act or the rules made thereunder shall be pu nishable with fine which may extend to two lakh 
rupees and in  the case of a continuing contravention, with an additional fine which may extend to two 
thousand rupees for every day during whi ch such contravention continues:  
Provided that the total amount of fine shall not exceed two thousand rupees per worker employed.  
(2) If any person who has been convicted of any offence punishable under sub -section (1) is again 
guilty of an offence i
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 13]
has been convicted of any offence punishable under sub -section (1) is again 
guilty of an offence involving a contravention or failure of compliance of the same provision, he shall be 
punishable on a subsequent conviction with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which 
may extend to five lakh rupees.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (2) of section 29 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (Central Act 2 of 1974), it shall be lawful for the Magistrate to impose a fine for an 
amount exceeding ten thousand rupees. ”. 
[Vide Kerala Act 23 of 2017, sec. 4]. 
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 22A .—In section 22A of the Principal Act, for the words “five hundred 
rupees” the words “ten thousand rupees” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Karnataka  Act 40 of 2017, sec. 4]. 
22B. Cognizance of offences. —(1) No Court shall take cognizance of a complaint agai nst any person 
for an offence — 
(a) under clause ( a) of section 22 unless an application in respect of the facts constituting such 
offence has been presented under section 20 and has been granted wholly or in part, and the 
appropriate Government or an officer authorised by it in  this behalf has sanctioned the making of the 
complaint;  
(b) under clause ( b) of section 22 or under section 22A except on a complaint made by, or with  
the sanction of, an Inspector.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 14]
14 
 (2) No Court shall take cognizance of an offence — 
(a) under clause ( a) or clause ( b) of section 22, unless complaint thereof is made within one 
month of the grant of sanction under this section;  
(b) under section 22A, unless complaint thereof is made within six months of the date on which 
the offence is alleged to have been com mitted.  
22C. Offences by companies .—(1) If the person committing any offence under this Act is a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed, was incharge  of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company as well as the company shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained  in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwiths tanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any dir ector, manager, secretary or other 
officer of  the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company shall also be 
deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanatio n.—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals, 
and  
(b) “director ” in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.  
Uttar Pradesh  
Insertion of new section 22 -CC, in Act (11 of 1948). —In the minimum Wages Act, after section   
22-C, the following sect ion shall be inserted, namely: — 
“22-CC. Compounding of offence .—An Officer sp
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 14]
 the following sect ion shall be inserted, namely: — 
“22-CC. Compounding of offence .—An Officer specially empowered by the State Government 
in this behalf by notification may, subject to any general or special order of the State Government in 
this behalf, compound any offence punishable under this Act with fine only committed for the first 
time, either before or after the institution of the prosecution, on realization of such amount of 
composi tion fee as he thinks fit, not exceeding the maximum amount of fine fixed for the offence; 
and where the offence is so compounded — 
(i) before the institution of the prosecution, the offender shall not be liable to prosecution for 
such offence and shall, if  in custody, be set at liberty;  
(ii) before the institution of the prosecution, the composition shall amount to acquittal of the 
offender.’’  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 35 of 1979, s. 3]  
22D. Payment of undisbursed amounts due to employees .—All amounts payable  by an employer 
to an employee as the amount of minimum wages of the employee under this Act or otherwise due to the 
employee under this Act or any rule or order made thereunder shall, if such amounts could not or cannot 
be paid to the  employee on account of his death before payment or on account of his whereabouts not 
being known, be deposited with the prescribed authority who shall deal with the money so deposited in 
such manner as may be prescribed.  
22E. Protection against attachment of assets of employer with Government .—Any amount 
deposited with the appropriate Government by an employer to secure the due performance of a contract 
with that Government and any other amount due to such employer from that Government in respect of 
such contract shall not be liable to attachment under any decree or order of any Court in respect of any 
debt or liability incurred by the employer other than any debt or liability incurred by the employer 
towards any employee employed in connection with the contra
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 14]
t or liability incurred by the employer 
towards any employee employed in connection with the contract aforesai d.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 15]
15 
 22F. Application of Payment of Wages Act, 1936, to scheduled employments .—(1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 (4 of 1936). the appropriate 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that, subjec t to the provisions of sub -
section ( 2), all or any of the provisions of the said Act shall with such modifications, if any, as may be 
specified in the notification, apply to wages payable to employees in such scheduled employments as may 
be specified in th e notification.  
(2) Where all or any of the provisions of the said Act are applied to wages payable to employees in 
any scheduled employment under sub -section ( 1), the Inspector appointed under this Act shall , be deemed 
to be the Inspector for the purpose of enforcement of the provisions so applied within the local limits of 
his jurisdiction.]  
Manipur  
Insertion of section 22CC. —In the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 (No. 21 of 1948) below section 22C, the 
following section shall be inserted, namely: — 
“22CC.Compounding of offences .—An officer specially empowered by the State Government in this behalf 
by notification in the official gazette may, subject to any general or special order of the State Government in this 
behalf, compound any offence punishable  under this Act with fine only committed for the first time either before or 
after the institution of the prosecution , on realization of such amount of c omposition fee as he thinks fit, not 
exceeding the maximum amount of fine fixed for the offence, and wh ere the offence is so compounded — 
(i) before the institution of the prosecution, the offender shall not be liable to prosecution for such offence  
and shall, if in custody, be set at liberty;  
(ii) after the institution of the prosecution, the composition shall amount to acquittal of the offender.”.  
[Vide Manipur Act 7 of 1992, s. 2]  
23. Exemption of employer f rom liability in certain cases. —Where an employer is charged with an
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 15]
  
23. Exemption of employer f rom liability in certain cases. —Where an employer is charged with an 
offence against this Act, he shall be entitled, upon complaint duly made by him, to have any other person 
whom he charges as the actual offender, brought before the Court at the time appointed for hearing the 
charge; an d if, after the commission of the offence has been proved, the employer proves to the 
satisfaction of the Court — 
(a) that he has used due diligence to enforce the execution of this Act, and  
(b) that the said other person committed the offence in question w ithout his knowledge, consent 
or connivance,  
that other person shall be convicted of the offence and shall be liable to the like punishment as if he were 
the employer and th e employer shall be discharged:  
Provided that in seeking to prove, as aforesaid, t he employer may be examined on oath, and the evidence of the 
employer or his witness, if any, shall be subject to cross -examination by or on behalf  of the person whom the 
employer charges as the actual offender and by the prosecution.  
24. Bar of suits .—No Court shall entertain any suit for the recovery of wages i n so far as the sum so claimed — 
 (a) forms the subject of an application under section 20 which has been presented by or on behalf of the 
plaintiff, or  
(b) has formed the subject of a direction un der that section in favour of the plaintiff, or  
(c) has been adjudged in any proceeding under that section not  to be due to the plaintiff, or  
(d) could  have been recovered by an application under that section.  
25. Contracting out .—Any contract or agreement, whether made before or after the commencement of this 
Act, whereby an employee either relinquishes or reduces his right to a minimum rate of wages or any privilege or 
concession accruing to him under this Act shall be null and vo id in so far as it purports to reduce the minimum rate 
of wages fixed under this Act.  
26. Exemptions and exceptions .—(1) The
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 15]
to reduce the minimum rate 
of wages fixed under this Act.  
26. Exemptions and exceptions .—(1) The appropriate Government may, subject to such conditions if any as it 
may think fit to impose, direct that the provisions of this Ac t shall not apply in relation to the wages  payable to 
disabled employees.  
(2) The appropriate Government may, if for special reasons it thinks so fit, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, direct that 1[subject to such conditions and] for such period as  it may specify the provisions of this Act or 
any of them shall not apply to all or any class of employees employed in any scheduled employment or to any 
locality where there is carried on a scheduled employment.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 30 of 1957, s. 15 . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 16]
16 
 1[(2A) The appropriate Government may, if i t is of opinion that, having regard to the terms and conditions of 
service applicable to any class of employees in a scheduled employment generally or in a scheduled employment in 
a local area 1[or to any establishment or a part of any establishment in a s cheduled employment], it is not necessary 
to fix minimum wages in respect of  such employees of that class 1[or in respect of employees in such establishment 
or such part of any establishment] as are in receipt of wages exceeding such limit as may be prescr ibed in this 
behalf, direct, by notification in the Official Gazette and subject to such conditions, if any, as it may think fit to 
impose, that the provisions of this Act or any of them shall not apply in relation to such employees.]  
(3) Nothing in this A ct shall apply to the wages payable by an employer to a member of his family who is living 
with him and is dependent on him.  
Explanation. —In this sub -section a member of the employer's family shall be deemed to include his or her 
spouse or child or parent  or brother or sister.  
27. Power of State Government to add to Schedule .—The appropriate Government, after giving by 
notification in the Official Gazette not less than three months' notice of its intention so to do, may, by like 
notification, add to either Part of the Schedule any employment in respect of which it is of opinion that minimum 
rates of wages should be fixed under this Act, and thereupon the Schedule shall in its application to the State be 
deemed to be amended accordingly.  
28. Power of Central Government to give directions .—The Central Government may give directions to a 
State Government as to the carrying into execution of this Act in the State.  
29. Power of the Central Government to make rules .—The Central Government may, subject to t he 
condition of previous publication, by notification in th e Official Gazette, make rules  prescribing the term of office of 
the me
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 16]
ion, by notification in th e Official Gazette, make rules  prescribing the term of office of 
the members, the procedure to be followed in the conduct of business, the method of voting, the manner of filling up 
casual vacancie s in membership and the quorum necessary for the transaction of business of the Central Advisory 
Board.  
30. Power of appropriate Government to make rules .—(1) The appropriate Government may, subject to the 
condition of previous publication, by notificatio n in the Official Gazette, make rules for carryin g out the purposes of 
this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the f oregoing power, such rules may — 
(a) prescribe the term of office of the members, the procedure to be followed in the conduct of  business, the 
method of voting, the manner of filling up casual vacancies in membership and the quorum necessary for the 
transaction of b usiness of the committees, sub -committee s, 2*** and the Advisory Board;  
(b) prescribe  the method of summoning witnesses, production of documents relevant to the subject -matter 
of the enquiry before the committees, sub -committee s, 1*** and the Advisory Board;  
(c) prescribe the mode of computation of the cash value of wages in kind and of concessions in 
respect of s upplies of essential commodities a t concession rates;  
(d) prescribe the time and conditions of payment of, and the dedu ctions permissible from, wages;  
(e) provide for giving adequate publicity to the minimum rates  of wages fixed under this Act;  
(f) provide  for a day of rest in every period of seven days and for the payment of remun eration in 
respect of such day;  
(g) prescribe the number of hours of work which shall c onstitute a normal working day;  
(h) prescribe the cases and circumstances in which an employ ee employed for a period of less than 
the requisite number of hours constituting a normal working day shall not be entitled to receive wages  for 
a full normal working day;  
(i) prescribe the fo
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 16]
g day shall not be entitled to receive wages  for 
a full normal working day;  
(i) prescribe the form of registers and records to be maintained and the particulars  to be entered in 
such registers a nd records;  
(j) provide for the issue of wage books and wage slips and prescribe the manner of making and 
authenticating entrie s in wage books and wage slips;  
(k) prescribe the powers of Inspe ctors for purposes of this Act ; 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 26 of 1954, s. 5.  
2. The words “advisory committees, advisory sub -committees” omitted by Act 30 of 1957, s. 16 . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 17]
17 
 (l) regulate the scale of costs that may be allowed i n proceedings under section 20;  
(m) prescribe the amount of court -fees payable in respect of pr oceedings under section 20; and  
(n) provide for any other matter which  is to be or may be prescribed.  
1[30A. Rules made by Central Government to be laid befor e Parliament. —2[(1)] Every rule made 
by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the 
session immediately following, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses 
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be;  so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything pr eviously done under that rule.]  
3[(2) every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be la id, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before the State Legislature.]  
4[31. Validation of fixation of certain minimum rates of wages .—Where during the period — 
(a) commencing on the 1st day of April, 1952, and ending with the date of the commencement of 
the Minimum Wages (Amendment) Act, 1 954 (26 of 1954); or  
(b) commencing on the 31st day of December, 1954, and ending with the date of the 
commencement of  the Minimum Wages (Amendm ent) Act, 1957 (30 of 1957); or  
(c) commencing on the 31st day of December, 1959, and ending with the date of the 
commencement of the Minimum Wages (Amendment) Act, 1961 (31 of 1961),  
minimum rates of wages have been fixed by an appropriate Government as being payable to employees 
employed in any employment specified in the Schedule in the belief or purported belief that such rates 
were bei
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 17]
any employment specified in the Schedule in the belief or purported belief that such rates 
were being fixed under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 3, as in force immediately before th e 
commencement of the Minimum Wages (Amendment) Act, 1954 (26 of 1954), or the Minimum Wages 
(Amendment)  Act, 1957 (30 of 1957) , or the Minimum Wages (Amendment) Act, 1961(31 of 1961) , as 
the case may be, such rates shall be deemed to have been fixed in ac cordance with law and shall not be 
called in question in any court on the ground merely that the relevant date specified for the purpose in that 
clause had expired at  the time the rates were fixed:  
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall exte nd, or be construed to extend, to affect any 
person with any punishment or penalty whatsoever by reason of the payment by him by way of wages to 
any of his employees during any period specified in this section of an amount which is less than the 
minimum ra tes of wages referred to in this section or by reason of non -compliance during the period 
aforesaid with any order or rule issued under section 13.]  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 31 of 1961, s. 3 . 
2. Section 30A re -numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 4 of 2005, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 11 -1-2005).  
3. Ins. by  Act 4 of 2005 , s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 11 -1-2005).  
4. Subs. by Act 31 of 1961, s. 4, for section 31.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 18]
18 
  SCHEDULE  
[See sections 2( g) and 27]  
PART 1 
1. Employment in a ny wollen carpet making or shawl  weaving establishment.  
2. Employment in any rice mill, flour mill or dal mill. 
3. Employment in any tobacco (including bidi making) manufactory.  
4. Employment in any plantation, that is to say, any estate which is maintained for the purpose of growing 
cinchona, rubber, tea or coffee.  
5. Employment in any oil mill.  
6. Employment under any local authority  
1[7. Employment on the construction or maintenance of roads or in building operations.]  
8. Employment in stone breaking or stone crushing.  
9. Employment  in any lac manufactory.  
10. Employment in any mica works.  
11. Employment in public motor transport.  
12. Employment in tanneries and leather manufactory.  
2[Employment in gypsum mines.  
Employment in barytes mines.  
Employment in bauxite mines. ] 
3[Employment in manganese mines. ] 
4[Employment in the maintenance of buildings and employment in the construction and maintenance 
of runways. ] 
5[Employment in China Clay mines.  
Employment in Kyanite mines. ] 
6[Employment in Copper mines. ] 
7[Employment in clay mines covered under the Mines Act, 1952 (35 of 1952). ] 
8[Employment in magnesite mines covered under the Mines Act, 1952 (35 of 1952). ] 
9[Employment in white clay mines. ] 
10[Employment in stone mines. ] 
11[Employment in steatile (including the mines producing Seaps tone and Tale).]  
12[Employment in Ochre Mines.]  
13[Employment in Asbestos mines.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 30 of 1957, s. 18, for item No. 7.  
2. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 3760, dated 4th December, 1962.  
3. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 3760, dated 30 th October, 1962.  
4. Ins. by notification No. S.O . 1987, dated 30th May, 1968.  
5. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 586, dated 5th February, 1970.  
6. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 795, da ted 13th February, 1970.  
7. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 18]
. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 795, da ted 13th February, 1970.  
7. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 796, dated 18th February, 1970.  
8. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 2357, dated 1st July, 1970.  
9. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 3896, dated the 3rd September, 1971.  
10. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 3 898, dated 15th September, 1971.  
11. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 2972, dated 1st July, 1972.  
12. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 297 3, dated 1st July, 197 2. 
13. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 2974, dated 6th July, 1972.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948.pdf - page 19]
19 
 1[Employment  in Fire Clay mines.]  
2[Employment in Chromite mines.]  
3[Employment in quartizite mines.  
Employment in quartz mines.  
Employment in silica mines.]  
4[Employment in graphic mines.]  
5[Employment in feldspar mines.]  
6[Employment in laterite mines.]  
7[Employment in dolomite mines.]  
8[Employment in redoxide mines.]  
9[Employment in wolfram mines.]  
10[Employment in iron ore mines.]  
11[Employment in granite mines.]  
PART II 
1. Employment in agriculture, that is to say, in any form of farming, including the cultivation and 
tillage of the soil, dairy farming, the production, cultivation, growing and harvesting of any agricultural or 
horticultural commodity, the raising of live -stock, bees or poultry, and any practice performed by a farmer 
or on a farm as incidental to or in conjunction with farm operations (including any forestry or tim bering 
operations and the preparation for market and delivery to storage or to market or to carriage for 
transportation to market of farm produce).  
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 1587 , dated 24th May, 1973.  
2. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 2311, dated 3rd July, 1975.  
3. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 4030 , dated 4th February, 1976.  
4. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 558, dated 29th January, 1977.  
5. Ins. by notifica tion No. S.O. 1823, dated 14th June, 1978.  
6. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 2945, dated 22nd September, 1978.  
7. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 2950, dated 25th September, 1978.  
8. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 3248, dated 26th October, 1978.  
9.  Ins. by notification No. S.O. 3671, dated 7th December, 1978.  
10. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 1757, dated 16th June, 1980.  
11. Ins. by notification No. S.O. 2473, dated 3rd September, 1980.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOORSHEDABAD ACT, 1891.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE MOORSHEDABAD ACT, 1891 
__________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
__________ 
 
 
SECTIONS  
 
1. Title and commencement. 
 
2. Confirmation of indenture of March, 1891. 
 
3. Additions to schedule to indenture. 
 
4. Limitation for claims to scheduled immoveable pr operty. 
 
5. Perpetual descent of property. 
 
6. Relief from stamp and registration laws. 
  
THE SCHEDULE.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*Subject to Verification and confirmation by Admini strative ministry. 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOORSHEDABAD ACT, 1891.pdf - page 2]
2 
 THE MOORSHEDABAD ACT, 1891 
ACT  NO. 15 OF  1891 
   
[21 st March 1891.] 
 
An Act to confirm and give effect to an Indenture b etween the Secretary of State and the Nawab 
Bahadoor of Moorshedabad, Amir-ul-Omrah. 
 
Preamble . —  WHEREAS  it is expedient to confirm and give effect to the indenture which is set 
forth in the schedule to this Act and which was mad e the twelfth day of March, 1891, between the 
Secretary of State for India in Council of the one part and Ihtisham-ul-Mulk Rais-ud Dowlah Amir-ul-
Omrah Nawab Sir Syud Hussan Ali Khan Bahadoor Mohab at Jung, G.C.I.E., Nawab Bahadoor of 
Moorshedabd, eldest son of His late Highness Moonta zin-ul-Mulk Mohsenud Dowlah Fureedoon Jah 
Syud Mansoor Ali Khan Bahadoor Nusrat Jung, late Na wab Nazim of Bengal, Behar and Orissa, of 
the other part; It is hereby enacted as follows :— 
1. Title and commencement. — (1) This Act may be called the Moorshedabad Act, 1891 ; and  
(2) It shall come into force at once. 
2. Confirmation of indenture of March, 1891. — The said indenture is hereby 
confirmed.  
3. Additions to schedule to indenture. —(1) The Governor General in Council, by 
notification in the Gazette of India, may in his di scretion, on the written request of the Nawab 
Bahadoor of Moorshedabad for the time being, add, i n such form as the Governor General in Council 
may think fit, to the schedules of immoveable prope rty which are annexed to the said indenture any 
additional immoveable property which may be acquire d from time to time for the maintenance of the 
position and dignity of the Nawab Bahadoor of Moors hedabad for the time being. 
(2)  No such notification as is referred to in sub-se ction ( 1) shall be made without such previous 
publication as would be necessary under section 6 o f the General Clauses Act, 1887, in the case of a 
rule to be made under an enactment to which that se ction applies. 
 (3) The publication in the Gazette of India of such a  notification, as having been made by t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOORSHEDABAD ACT, 1891.pdf - page 2]
ies. 
 (3) The publication in the Gazette of India of such a  notification, as having been made by the 
Governor General in Council, shall, subject to any further order of the Governor General in Council, 
be conclusive proof with respect to the subject-mat ter of the notification. 
4. Limitation for claims to scheduled immoveable pr operty. —No right to any 
immoveable property mentioned in any of the schedul es to the said indenture, or in any addition 
which under the last foregoing section may from tim e to time be made to those schedules or any of 
them, shall, if the right has not accrued before th e passing of this Act, be acquired by any person by  
adverse possession or assertion of title unless suc h adverse possession or assertion of title is found  to 
have existed for sixty years. 
5. Perpetual descent of property. —All property, moveable and immoveable, mentioned i n the 
said indenture, or in any of the schedules thereto or in any addition which under section 3 may from 
time to time be made to those schedules or any of t hem, shall descend and, subject to the provisions o f 
the said indenture, be enjoyed for ever by the Nawa b Bahadoor of Moorshedabad for the time being. 
6. Relief from stamp and registration Laws. —The said indenture shall for all the purposes 
of all enactments for the time being in force be ad missible in evidence and have in all other respects  
the same effect as if it had been duly stamped and registered in such manner as those enactments, or 
any of them, or any rule or order under any of them , may require. 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOORSHEDABAD ACT, 1891.pdf - page 3]
3 
  
THE SCHEDULE.  
(See preamble and following sections .)  
HER  MAJESTY’S  SECRETARY  OF  STATE  FOR  INDIA  IN  COUNCI L,  
to  
NAWAB  SIR  SY UD  HUSSAN  ALI  BAHADOOR . 
THIS INDENTURE made the twelfth day of March 1891 b etween the Secretary of State for               
India in Council (hereinafter called “the Secretary  of State”) of the one part and Ihtisham-ul-Mulk 
Rais-ud Dowlah Amir-ul-Omrah Nawab Sir Syud Hussan Ali Khan Bahadoor Mohabat                         
Jung, G.C.I.E.,   Nawab Bahadoor of Moorshedabad (h ereinafter called “the said Nawab Bahadoor”) 
eldest son of His late Highness Moontazim-ul-Mulk M ohsen-ud Dowlah Fureedoon Jah                            
Syud Monsoor Ali Khan Bahadoor Nusrut Jung late Naw ab Nazim of Bengal, Behar and Orissa                    
(who is hereinafter referred to as “the said Nawab Nazim”) of the other part. Whereas  the said           
Nawab Nazim in the year 1838 being then a minor of about the age of ten years succeeded                          
by hereditary descent to the honours and dignities of the Nizamut and Subahdary of Bengal, Behar           
and Orissa and was thereupon declared in and by a p roclamation issued and published by and under 
the authority of the Governor General of India in C ouncil for the time being to be the Nawab                  
Nazim and Subahdar of the Provinces of Bengal, Beha r and Orissa and to have assumed                          
and to exercise the authority dignities and privile ges of the said office and dignity under the style                 
and the title of Moontazim-ul-Mulk Mohsen-ud Dowlah  Fureedoon Jah Syud Monsoor Ali                       
Khan Bahadoor Nusrut Jung. And whereas  the Nawabs Nazim of Bengal, Behar and                                
Orissa and their families have under and by virtue of certain treaties and engagements with                          
the British Government received out of the revenues  of the Provinces of Bengal, Behar and   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOORSHEDABAD ACT, 1891.pdf - page 3]
      
the British Government received out of the revenues  of the Provinces of Bengal, Behar and                  
Orissa certain allowances and stipends including th e personal stipend of the Nawab Nazim     
hereinafter mentioned. And whereas  under various arrangements and in course of the                    
administration of the allowances and stipends secur ed as aforesaid to the said Nawabs Nazim                    
and their families certain funds known as “Nizamut Deposit Fund” the “Munnee Begum Fund”                  
and the “Moorshedabad Agency Fund” were created and  formed the accumulations of                             
which applicable to the support of the title and di gnity of the said Nawabs Nazim and                                
their families aggregated at the date of the Indent ure of the 1st day of November                                       
1880 hereinafter mentioned about the sum of one cro re of rupees. And whereas  certain questions                   
and differences arose between the said Nawab Nazim and the Government of India upon                         
several matters concerning the position and affairs  of himself and the members and dependents                 
of his family known as the Nizamut family. And whereas  with a view to the settlement of                 
such questions and differences the said Nawab Nazim  in the year 1869 with the sanction                        
of the Viceroy and Governor General of India in Cou ncil left Moorshedabad the usual place                          
of residence of the said Nawab Nazim and proceeded to England where lie remained and resided                      
until the period hereinafter mentioned and where he  preferred in person to Her                                   
Majesty’s Government several complaints and claims arising out of the said questions and 
differences. And whereas  in the year 1873 the Government of India passed an  Act (namely Act             
No. XVII of 187
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOORSHEDABAD ACT, 1891.pdf - page 3]
as  in the year 1873 the Government of India passed an  Act (namely Act             
No. XVII of 1873) called the “Nawab Nazim’s Debts A ct 1873” whereby after reciting inter alia  that 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOORSHEDABAD ACT, 1891.pdf - page 4]
4 
 with respect to certain jewels and immoveable prope rty it was disputed whether they belonged 
absolutely to the said Nawab Nazim or were held by the Government of India for the purpose of 
upholding the dignity of the Nawab Nazim for the ti me being and that litigation had consequently 
arisen between the creditors of the said Nawab Nazi m and the Government of India and reciting that 
the Government of India was desirous of settling th e said dispute as to the said jewels and 
immoveable property it was enacted ( inter alia ) that the Commissioners thereby directed to be 
appointed should ascertain what jewels and immoveab le property were held by the Government of 
India for the purpose of upholding the dignity of t he Nawab Nazim for the time and should certify the 
particulars of such jewels and property and that th eir finding thereon should be binding and 
conclusive on all persons whomsoever. And whereas  by the said Act the said Commissioners were 
also directed to ascertain and certify the amount d ue and owing in respect of the debts and liabilitie s 
incurred by the said Nawab Nazim in India. And whereas  the Government of India subsequently in 
discharge and in satisfaction of the debts of the s aid Nawab Nazim which were ascertained and 
certified as aforesaid by the Commissioners appoint ed in pursuance of the said Act paid the sum of 
Rs. 16,85,461-7-5½. And whereas  the money required for the purposes of such paymen t was provided 
out of the said Nawab Nazim’s personal stipend. And whereas the said Nawab Nazim preferred 
certain claims against the said Secretary of State in respect of the arrears of his said personal stip end 
and of other pecuniary claims against the Governmen t of India and in respect of certain jewels and 
other moneys and property claimed by the said Nawab  Nazim on various accounts connected with the 
Nizamut and otherwise. And whereas by Indenture dated  the 1st day of November 1880 it  was agreed  
between the said Secre
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOORSHEDABAD ACT, 1891.pdf - page 4]
And whereas by Indenture dated  the 1st day of November 1880 it  was agreed  
between the said Secretary of State and the said Na wab Nazim that the said Nawab Nazim should be 
paid and should accept and he was paid and accepted  the sum of ten lakhs of rupees in full satisfactio n 
and discharge of all his personal claims of what na ture or kind soever against the Government of India  
whether connected with or arising out of the Nizamu t or otherwise the said sum being made up of the 
following particulars namely— 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Rs. 
Out of the balance of personal stipend to 31st Octo ber, 1880           . 7,53,642 
Balance of advance of Rs. 4,00,000 from deposit fun d made in  
     1869 to permit of the said Nawab Nazim proceed ing to Eng-  
      land  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .  1,50,000 
      Value of jewels    .   .    .   .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .     96,358 
                                                                                                      TOTAL     . 10,00,000 
 
And whereas  by the report and certificate of the Commissioners  appointed under the said Nawab 
Nazim’s Debts Act 1873 bearing date the 13th day of  December 1875 the said Commissioners 
certified and declared that the immoveable property  and jewels respectively specified in the schedules  
annexed to their said report and certificate and nu mbered respectively III and V were State property a s 
therein defined and they annexed to such report and  certificate a schedule numbered IV showing the 
rentals payable for the land and buildings included  in the said schedules I and II to 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOORSHEDABAD ACT, 1891.pdf - page 4]
he said schedules I and II to 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOORSHEDABAD ACT, 1891.pdf - page 5]
5 
 their said report and the names of the persons to w hom such rentals were paid. And whereas by and 
with the previous sanction of the Viceroy and Gover nor General of India in Council certain of the 
immoveable properties and jewels specified in sched ules IV and VI of the said report and certificate 
of the said Commissioners have already been sold or  are directed to be sold for the purposes 
hereinafter specified and the remainder of the immo veable properties specified in the said schedules I  
and II to the said report of the said Commissioners  are the properties mentioned and specified in 
schedules Nos. I and II attached to these presents.  And whereas the said Nawab Nazim returned from 
England to India in the month of October 1881 and d ied at Moorshedabad on the 5th day of 
November 1884 leaving the said Nawab Bahadoor his e ldest son surviving him. And whereas it is not 
considered by  the Secretary of State necessary or desirable to ma intain any longer the office title 
position dignities allowances and privileges of Naw ab Nazim of Bengal, Behar and Orissa. And 
whereas by a Sanad of His Excellency the Viceroy and Govern or General of India dated the 17th 
February 1882 the title of Nawab Bahadoor of Moorsh edabad has been granted to the said Nawab 
Bahadoor. And whereas by a notification of the Government of India dated the 20th July 1867 the 
further title of Amir-ul-Omrah has been also grante d by His Excellency the Viceroy and Governor 
General of India to the said Nawab Bahadoor. And whereas the said titles of Nawab Bahadoor of 
Moorshedabad and Amir-ul-Omrah carry with them the precedence rank dignity and privileges of the 
premier noble of the Provinces of Bengal, Behar and  Orissa and are descendible to the lineal heirs 
male of the said Nawab Bahadoor according to the cu stom of primogeniture the eldest male of the 
eldest branch being preferred. And whereas it has been agreed between the Secretary of State a nd the 
said Nawab Bahadoor t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOORSHEDABAD ACT, 1891.pdf - page 5]
erred. And whereas it has been agreed between the Secretary of State a nd the 
said Nawab Bahadoor that such provision shall be ma de for the maintenance and support of the 
Nawab Bahadoor of Moorshedabad and Amir-ul-Omrah fo r the time being and for the maintenance of 
the honour and dignity of his station as is hereina fter contained and that in consideration thereof th e 
said Nawab Bahadoor shall for himself his heirs and  successors in the said station relinquish all clai m 
to the said position and dignity of Nawab Nazim of Bengal, Behar and Orissa in manner hereinafter 
appearing and execute such release in respect of th e stipend pay allowances properties privileges and 
rights thereof or appertaining thereto as is herein after contained. And whereas it has been agreed 
between the Secretary of State and the said Nawab B ahadoor that the provision to be made as 
aforesaid for the support and maintenance of the Na wab Bahadoor of Moorshedabad and                 
Amir-ul-Omrah and for the maintenance of the honour  and dignity of his station shall comprise and 
consist of the following particulars namely : — 
1st— An  annual payment of  Rs. 2,30,000 from the revenues o f the Government of British India 
to be made to the Nawab Bahadoor of Moorshedabad fo r the time being in manner 
hereinafter mentioned.  
2nd —The income of the immoveable properties mentioned and specified in the said 1st and 
2nd Schedules to these presents. 
3rd —The income of the immoveable properties mentioned in the 3rd Schedule to these 
presents as purchased with the sale proceeds of the  jewels mentioned and specified in Schedules V 
and VI to the said report and certificate of the sa id Commissioners and all properties that may in 
future be purchased with the sale proceeds of the s aid jewels. 
 4th —The income of properties purchased with the sale p roceeds of such of the immoveable 
properties mentioned and specified in the 1st, 2nd and 3rd Schedules to these presents as may at 

<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOORSHEDABAD ACT, 1891.pdf - page 5]
 
properties mentioned and specified in the 1st, 2nd and 3rd Schedules to these presents as may at 
any time with the sanction of His Excellency the Go vernor General in Council be disposed of. 
 
And whereas  various members of the family of the said late Naw ab Nazim other than the said 
Nawab Bahadoor are as such in receipt of or entitle d to certain stipends allowances and pay 
respectively payable to them by the Government of I ndia and it is not intended by these presents to 
affect or interfere with such stipends allowances o r pay respectively, NOW THIS INDENTURE 
WITNESSETH that in pursuance of the said agreement between the Secretary of State and the said 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOORSHEDABAD ACT, 1891.pdf - page 6]
6 
 Nawab Bahadoor and in consideration of the premises  and of the conferring of the titles of Nawab 
Bahadoor of Moorshedabad and Amir-ul-Omrah as herei nbefore appears and of the provision 
hereinafter made or expressed and intended so to be  for the support and maintenance of himself and 
his successors in the position and station of Nawab  Bahadoor of Moorshedabad and Amir-ul-Omrah 
and for the maintenance of the honour and dignity o f the said station and saving and without prejudice  
to any of the said provisions the said Nawab Bahado or hath for himself his heirs and successors 
relinquished and released and doth hereby for ever relinquish and release all claims and demands to 
the rank dignity and position of Nawab Nazim and su bahdar of Bengal, Behar and Orissa and to the 
title of Nawab Nazim and the authority dignity stip end pay allowances privileges and rights thereof or  
in any wise thereunto annexed or appertaining or th erewith enjoyed and doth hereby release and 
discharge the Secretary of State his successors and  assigns and the Viceroy and Governor General of 
India in Council and each and every of their servan ts and agents respectively of and from all actions 
claims and demands whatsoever that could be brought  or made by him or his heirs or successors for or 
in respect of the said title position authority dig nity stipend pay allowances privileges and rights a s 
aforesaid and for and in respect of any act deed ma tter or thing whatsoever done or omitted by the 
Secretary of State or the Viceroy and Governor Gene ral of India in Council or any of their servants or  
agents acting officially in relation to or affectin g the interests or claims of the said Nawab Nazim. 
AND THIS INDENTURE FURTHER WITNESSETH that in furth er pursuance of the said agreement 
and for the considerations aforesaid the Secretary of State for himself and his successors doth hereby  
covenant with the said Nawab Bahadoor and each one of his lineal heirs male who sh
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOORSHEDABAD ACT, 1891.pdf - page 6]
ors doth hereby  
covenant with the said Nawab Bahadoor and each one of his lineal heirs male who shall succeed in 
the manner above recited to the title of Nawab Baha door of Moorshedad and Amir-ul-Omrah that the 
Secretary of  State and his successors shall and wi ll for the due maintenance and support of the said 
titles of Nawab Bahadoor of Moorshedabad and Amir-u l-Omrah and the position and station thereto 
attaching and of the honour and dignity thereof pay  or cause to be paid annually for ever from the 
revenues of the Government of India unto the said N awab Bahadoor and his lineal heirs male in 
perpetuity the sum of rupees two lakhs and thirty t housand by equal monthly instalments of rupees 
nineteen thousand one hundred and sixty-six ten ann as and eight pies by monthly instalments on or 
before the 5th day of each and every succeeding mon th from the Treasury of the Government of India 
at Berhampore and it is hereby further agreed and d eclared by and between the Secretary of State and 
the said Nawab Bahadoor that the several immoveable  properties mentioned and specified in the 1st, 
and 2nd Schedules to these presents and also the im moveable property mentioned and specified in the 
3rd Schedule thereto (being the immoveable property  that has been purchased with the sale proceeds 
of certain of the jewels mentioned and specified in  the V and VI Schedules to the said report and 
certificate) and also all other the immoveable prop erties that shall hereafter be purchased with the s ale 
proceeds of any of the said jewels mentioned and sp ecified in the said last mentioned schedules and 
further all the properties purchased with the sale proceeds of such of the immoveable properties 
mentioned and specified in the 1st 2nd and 3rd Sche dules to these presents as may at any time with 
the sanction of His Excellency the Governor General  in Council be disposed of shall henceforth and 
for ever be held and enjoyed by the said Nawab Baha door and such o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOORSHEDABAD ACT, 1891.pdf - page 6]
isposed of shall henceforth and 
for ever be held and enjoyed by the said Nawab Baha door and such one among his lineal heirs male as 
may be successively entitled to hold the said title s in perpetuity with and subject to the incidents 
powers limitations and conditions as to inalienabil ity and otherwise hereinafter contained that is to  
say — 
 
1st —The said Nawab Bahadoor shall not nor shall any of  his successors in the said titles sell 
mortgage devise or alienate the said properties res pectively or any of them otherwise than by lease 
or demise for a term not exceeding 21 years and und er a rent without bonus or salamee. 
 
2nd —It shall be lawful for the Secretary of State and his successors from time to time if any 
default shall be made in payment of the Government revenue or rates or taxes payable to       
Government in respect of any of the said immoveable  properties to empower the officer in charge 
of the Treasury at Berhampore or other proper offic er to deduct from and retain out of the said 
monthly sum of Rs. 19,166-10-8 hereinbefore covenan ted to be paid the amount of any 
Government revenue or rates or taxes aforesaid paya ble in respect of the said immoveable 
properties or any of them. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOORSHEDABAD ACT, 1891.pdf - page 7]
7 
  
 
3rd —The said Nawab Bahadoor and such of his lineal hei rs male as shall in                              
succession be entitled to hold the said titles shal l maintain and keep in good repair and                      
condition (reasonable wear and tear and the effects  of time fire and earthquake and injury                       
done by public enemies or by overwhelming force exc epted) all the messuages                                 
tenements houses and buildings now standing or bein g upon any of the said immoveable                   
properties mentioned and described in the said 1st and 2nd Schedules to these presents   
respectively (save and except the messuages tenemen ts houses and buildings mentioned                
and specified in Schedule 2B hereto which the said Nawab Bahadoor and his heirs male    
successors as aforesaid respectively shall be under  no obligation to maintain or repair)                              
and also all the messuages tenements houses and bui ldings hereafter to be purchased with                       
the sale proceeds of any of the said jewels mention ed and specified in the said V and                                 
VI Schedules to the report and certificate aforesai d and of any of the immoveable                               
properties mentioned and specified in the 1st, 2nd and 3rd Schedules to these presents                              
or that may be erected or built upon any land so to  be purchased but it shall be lawful                              
for the said Nawab Bahadoor and his heirs male afor esaid successors to the said                                    
position and station of Nawab Bahadoor of Moorsheda bad and Amir-ul-Omrah from time                            
to time at his or their will and pleasure and discr etion to pull down and remove all or any                          
of the said messuages tenements houses and building s mentioned and specified in the Schedule       
2B hereto 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOORSHEDABAD ACT, 1891.pdf - page 7]
 messuages tenements houses and building s mentioned and specified in the Schedule       
2B hereto which are no longer required and to sell and dispose of the materials thereof and                             
apply and dispose of the said materials or the sale  proceeds thereof for his or their own use                       
and benefit and in such manlier as he or they shall  think fit. 
In case the said Nawab Bahadoor or any of his linea l heirs male successors to the titles                           
shall at any time in contravention of the terms of these presents attempt to sell mortgage                                     
devise or alienate (otherwise than by such lease or  demise as aforesaid) any of the immoveable 
properties aforesaid or shall by a course of extrav agance or by waste or mismanagement of their                           
said immoveable properties in the opinion of the Se cretary of State for the time being disable                       
himself from duly maintaining the dignity of the sa id position and station then and from time                            
to time whenever and as often as the same shall hap pen it shall be lawful for the Secretary                             
of State for the time being at his discretion to en ter into and upon the said immoveable                                   
properties and to hold and take possession thereof and receive and take the rents issues                                 
and profits thereof and also to take and retain the  said monthly sum of                                                          
Rs. 19,166-10-8 payable from the Government Treasur y at Berhampore as hereinbefore mentioned          
for such period during the lifetime of the Nawab Ba badoor of Moor shedabad and                                      
Amir-ul-Omrah so acting as aforesaid as to the said  Secretary of State shall seem                                   
necessary or expedient and the net rents issues and  profi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOORSHEDABAD ACT, 1891.pdf - page 7]
l seem                                   
necessary or expedient and the net rents issues and  profits of the said immoveable properties                        
and the said monthly sum of Rs, 19,166-10-8 so to b e received and taken by the Secretary of                       
State as aforesaid shall be applied for the benefit  of the said Nawab Bahadoor of Moorshedabad and 
Amir-ul-Omrah for the time being for the maintenanc e of the position and dignity of the said Nawab 
Bahadoor of Moorshedabad and Amir-ul-Omrah for the time being in such manner as the Secretary of 
State in his discretion shall think proper PROVIDED  ALWAYS and it is hereby agreed and declared                                                                    
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOORSHEDABAD ACT, 1891.pdf - page 8]
8 
  
 
 
 
between and by the said parties to these presents t hat nothing herein contained shall apply to or affe ct 
any property moveable or immoveable of the said Naw ab Bahadoor his heirs representatives or 
assigns not being property included in any of the S chedules to these presents or not being property 
purchased with the sale proceeds of the jewels or l ands hereinbefore mentioned or not being property 
mentioned in the next following proviso. Provided f urther that all furniture equipages boats horses 
camels and elephants in or about the Palace and the  Imambara and belonging to the Nawab Bahadoor 
of Moorshedabad and Amir-ul-Omrah for the time bein g at the time of his decease shall be the 
property of and shall be enjoyed by his successor a s such. In witness whereof the said parties to thes e 
presents have hereunto set their hands and seals th e day and year first above written. 
Signed sealed and delivered by 
William John Cuningham Offi-  
ciating -Secretary to the Govern-  
ment of India in the Foreign De- (Sd.)         W. J . CUNINGHAM, 
partment for and on behalf of His              Officiating Secretary to the  
Excellency the Governor General      Government of India.  
of India in Council acting in the 
premises for and on behalf of the 
Secretary of State for India in  
Council in the presence of 
 
(Sd.) G. R. IRWIN, 
Offg. Under Secy. to the Govt. of India. 
 
(Sd.) G. W. F. BUCKLAND,  
Solicitor and Notary Public, Calcutta. 
 
Signed sealed and delivered by                                                                                                      
the abovenamed Ihtisham-ul-Mulk  
Rais-ud Dowlah Amir-ul-Omrah 
Nawab Sir Syud Hussan Ali    (Sd.) HUSSAN ALI MIRZA . 
Khan Bahadoor Mohabat Jung 
G. C. I. E. Nawab Bahadoor of 
Moorshedabad in the presence of 
 
      (Sd.) S. E. J. CLARKE,  
Calcutta.  
 
  (Sd.) G. W. F. BUCKLAND, 
Solicitor and Notary Public, Calcutta.    Seal of           
the Nawab 
Bahadoor 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOORSHEDABAD ACT, 1891.pdf - page 8]
Solicitor and Notary Public, Calcutta.    Seal of           
the Nawab 
Bahadoor 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOORSHEDABAD ACT, 1891.pdf - page 9]
9 
 

<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOORSHEDABAD ACT, 1891.pdf - page 10]
10 
 

<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOORSHEDABAD ACT, 1891.pdf - page 11]
11 
 

<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOORSHEDABAD ACT, 1891.pdf - page 12]
12 
  

<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOORSHEDABAD ACT, 1891.pdf - page 13]
13 
  
 

<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOORSHEDABAD ACT, 1891.pdf - page 14]
14 
 

<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOORSHEDABAD ACT, 1891.pdf - page 15]
15 
 

<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOORSHEDABAD ACT, 1891.pdf - page 16]
16 
 

<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOORSHEDABAD ACT, 1891.pdf - page 17]
17 
 

<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOORSHEDABAD ACT, 1891.pdf - page 18]
18 
 

<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOORSHEDABAD ACT, 1891.pdf - page 19]
19 
 

<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOORSHEDABAD ACT, 1891.pdf - page 20]
20 
 

<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOORSHEDABAD ACT, 1891.pdf - page 21]
21 
 

<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOORSHEDABAD ACT, 1891.pdf - page 22]
22 
  

<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOORSHEDABAD ACT, 1891.pdf - page 23]
23 
 

<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOORSHEDABAD ACT, 1891.pdf - page 24]
24 
  

<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOTOR TRANSPORT WORKERS ACT, 1961.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE MOTOR TRANSPORT WORKERS ACT, 196 1                                                                                                                                        
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                            
________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
REGISTRATION  OF MOTOR TRANSPORT UNDERTAKINGS  
3. Registration of motor transport undertaking.  
CHAPTER III  
INSPECTING STAFF  
4. Chief inspector and inspectors.  
5. Powers of the inspectors.  
6. Facilities to be afforded to inspectors.  
7. Certifying surgeons.  
CHA PTER IV  
WELFARE AND HEALTH  
8. Canteens.  
9. Rest rooms.  
10. Uniforms.  
11. Medical facilities.  
12. First -aid facilities.  
CHAPTER V  
HOURS AND LIMITATIONS OF EMPLOYMENT  
13. Hours of work for adult motor transport workers.  
14. Hours of work for adolescents employed as motor transport workers.  
15. Daily intervals for rest.  
16. Spread -over.  
17. Split duty.  
18. Notice of hours of work.  
19. Weekly rest.  
20. Compensatory day of rest.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOTOR TRANSPORT WORKERS ACT, 1961.pdf - page 2]
2 
 CHAPTER VI  
EMPLOYMENT OF YOUNG PERSONS  
SECTIONS  
21. Prohibition of employment of children.  
22. Adolescents employed motor transport workers to carry tokens.  
23. Certificate of fitness.  
24. Power to require medical examination.  
CHAPTER VII  
WAGES AND LEAVE  
25. Act 4 of 1936 to apply to payment of wages to motor transport workers . 
26. Extra wages for overtime.  
27. Annual leave with wages.  
28. Wages during leave period.  
CHAPTER VIII  
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE  
29. Obstructions.  
30. Use of false certificate of fitness.  
31. Contravention of provisions regarding employment of motor transport wo rkers.  
32. Other offences.  
33. Enhanced penalty after previous conviction.  
34. Offences by companies.  
35. Cognizance of offences.  
36. Limitation of prosecutions.  
CHAPTER IX  
MISCELLANEOUS  
37. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with this Act.  
38. Exe mptions.  
39. Powers to give directions.  
40. Power to make rules.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOTOR TRANSPORT WORKERS ACT, 1961.pdf - page 3]
3 
 THE MOTOR TRANSPORT WORKERS ACT, 1961  
ACT NO. 27 OF 1961  
[20th May, 1961 .] 
An Act to provide for the welfare of motor transport workers and to regulate the conditions of 
their work.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twelfth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application .—(1) This Act may be called the Motor 
Transport Workers Act, 1961.  
(2) It extends to the whole of  India  1* * *.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date2 not being later than the 31st day of March, 1962, as the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be 
appointed for different States.  
3[Provide d that it shall come into force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir * on the commencement of 
the Central Labour Laws (Extension to Jammu and Kashmir) Act, 1970.]  
(4) It applies to every motor transport undertaking employing five or more motor transport workers : 
Provided that the State Government may, after giving not less than two months ’ notice of its intention 
so to do, by notification in the Official Gazette, apply all or any of the provisions of this Act to any motor 
transport undertaking employing l ess than five motor transport workers.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “adolescent ” means a person who has completed his  4[fourteenth] year but has not completed 
his eighteenth year;  
                                                           
1. The words “except the State of Jammu and  Kashmir” omitted by Act 51 of 1970, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f.  1-9-1971 ). 
2. The Act has been brought into force as follows: — 
26th January , 196 2, vide notification No. S.O. 296, dated 2 3th January, 1962, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,      
sec. 3( ii), in Madhya Pradesh.  
1st February , 196 2, vide notification No. S.O. 296, dated 2 3th January , 196 2, see Gazette of India, Extraordina
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOTOR TRANSPORT WORKERS ACT, 1961.pdf - page 3]
96 2, vide notification No. S.O. 296, dated 2 3th January , 196 2, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,      
sec. 3( ii), in Assam , Kerala , Mysore , Orissa , Punjab , Andaman & Nicobar I slands , Delhi  and Himachal Pradesh . 
1st March , 196 2, vide notification No. S.O. 296, dated 23th January , 196 2, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,          
sec. 3( ii), in West Bengal . 
31st March , 196 2, vide notification No. S.O. 296, dated 23th January , 196 2, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,          
sec. 3( ii), in Madras , Maharashtra  and Uttar Pradesh.  
1st February , 196 2, vide notification No. S.O. 310, dated 3 0th January , 196 2, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,          
sec. 3( ii), in Andhra Pradesh.  
1st February , 196 2, vide notification No. S.O. 382, dated 31st  January , 196 2, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,          
sec. 3( ii), in Rajasthan.  
15th February , 196 2, vide notification No. S.O. 468, dated 9th  February , 196 2, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,          
sec. 3( ii), in Tripura.  
1st March , 196 2, vide notification No. S.O. 573, dated 16th February , 196 2, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,          
sec. 3( ii), in Bihar . 
31st March , 196 2, vide notification No. S.O. 781, dated 9 th March , 196 2, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,            
sec. 3( ii), in Gujarat  and Manipur  
this Act has been extended in its application to the Union territory Goa, Daman and Diu by the Act 11 of 1963, s. 3 and the 
Schedule (w .e.f 1 -2-1965).  
3. The proviso added by s. 2 and the Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f.  1-9-1971 ). 
4. Subs. by Act 61 of 1986, s. 25, for “fifteenth” (w.e.f. 23 -12-1986).  
*. Vide notification No. S.O. 3912(E), dated 30th October,  2019, this Act is made applicable to the Union territory of Jammu and 
Kashmir and the Union territory of Ladakh.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOTOR TRANSPORT WORKERS ACT, 1961.pdf - page 3]
on territory of Ladakh.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOTOR TRANSPORT WORKERS ACT, 1961.pdf - page 4]
4 
 (b) “adult ” means a person who has completed his eighteenth year;  
(c) “child ” means a person who has not completed his  1[fourteenth] year;  
(d) “day” means a period of twenty -four hours beginning at midnight:  
Provided that where a motor transport worker ’s duty commences before midnight b ut extends 
beyond midnight, the following day for him shall be deemed to be the period of twenty -four hours 
beginning when such duty ends, and the hours he has worked after midnight shall be counted in the 
previous day;  
(e) “employer ” means, in relation to  any motor transport undertaking, the person who, or the 
authority which, has the ultimate control over the affairs of the motor transport undertaking, and 
where the said affairs are entrusted to any other person whether called a manager, managing director , 
managing agent or by any other name, such other person;  
(f) “hours of work ” means the time during which a motor transport worker is at the disposal of the 
employer or of any other person entitled to claim his services and includes — 
(i) the time spent in work done during the running time of the transport vehicle;  
(ii) the time spent in subsidiary work; and  
(iii) periods of mere attendance at terminals of less than fifteen minutes ; 
Explanation. —For the purposes of this clause — 
(1) “running time ” in relation  to a working day means the time from the moment a transport 
vehicle starts functioning at the beginning of the working day until the moment when the transport 
vehicle ceases to function at the end of the working day, excluding any time during which the ru nning 
of the transport vehicle is interrupted for a period exceeding such duration as may be prescribed 
during which period the persons who drive, or perform any other work in connection with the 
transport vehicle are free to dispose of their time as they please or are engaged in subsidiary work;  
(2) “subsidiary work ” means work in connection with a transport vehicle, its pass
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOTOR TRANSPORT WORKERS ACT, 1961.pdf - page 4]
ubsidiary work;  
(2) “subsidiary work ” means work in connection with a transport vehicle, its passengers or it s 
load which is done outside the running time of the transport vehicle, including in particular — 
(i) work in connection w ith accounts, the paying in of cash, the signing of registers, the 
handing in of service sheets, the checking of tickets and other similar work;  
(ii) the taking over and garaging of the transport vehicle;  
(iii) travelling from the place where a person sign s on to the place where he takes over the 
transport vehicle and from the place where he leaves the transport vehicle to the place where he 
signs off;  
(iv) work in connection with the upkeep and repair of the transport vehicle ; and 
(v) the loading and unloading of the transport vehicle ; 
(3) “period of mere attendance ” means the period during which a person remains at his post 
solely in order to reply to possible calls or to resume action at the time fixed in the duty schedule;  
(g) “motor transport under taking ” means a motor transport undertaking engaged in carrying 
passengers or goods or both by road for hire or reward, and includes a private carrier;  
(h) “motor transport worker ” means a person who is employed in a motor transport undertaking 
directly or  through an agency, whether for wages or not, to work in a professional capacity on a 
transport vehicle or to attend to duties in connection with the arrival, departure, loading or unloading  
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 61 of 1986, s. 25, for “fifteenth” (w.e.f. 23 -12-1986).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOTOR TRANSPORT WORKERS ACT, 1961.pdf - page 5]
5 
 of such transport vehicle and includes a driver, conductor, cleaner, station staff, line checking staff, 
booking clerk, cash clerk, depot clerk, time -keeper, watchman or attendant, but except in section 8 
does not include — 
(i) any such person who is employed in a factory as defined in the Factories                        
Act, 1948  (63 of 1948) ; 
(ii) any such person to whom the provisions of any law for the time being in force regulating 
the conditions of service of persons employed in shops or commercial establishments apply;  
(i) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(j) “qualified medical practitioner ” means a person having a certificate granted by an authority 
specified in the Schedule to the Indian Medical Degrees Act, 1916  (7 of 1916) , or notified            
under sec tion 3 of that Act or specified in the Schedules to the Indian Medical Council                              
Act, 1956  (102 of 1956) , and includes any person having a certificate granted under any Provincial or 
State Medical Council Act;  
(k) “spread -over” means the period between the commencement of duty on any day and the 
termination of duty on that day;  
(l) “wages ” has the meaning assigned to it in clause ( vi) of section 2 of the Payment of Wages 
Act, 1936  (4 of 1936) ; 
(m) “week ” means the period between m idnight on Saturday night and midnight on the 
succeeding Saturday night;  
(n) all other words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the Motor 
Vehicles Act, 1939  (1 of 1939) , shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.  
CHAPTER II  
REGISTRATION  OF MOTOR TRANSPORT UNDERTAKINGS  
3. Registration of motor transport undertaking .—(1) Every employer of a motor transport 
undertaking to which this Act applies shall have the undertaking registered under this Act.  
(2) An application for the registration of a motor transport undertaking shall be made by the employer 
to the prescribed 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOTOR TRANSPORT WORKERS ACT, 1961.pdf - page 5]
 the registration of a motor transport undertaking shall be made by the employer 
to the prescribed authority in such form and within such time as may be prescribed.  
(3) Where a motor transport undertaking is registered under this Act, there shall be issued to the 
employer a certificate of registration containing such particulars as may be prescribed.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 3 of Act no. 27 of 1961. — In section 3 of the Motor Transport Workers Act, 
1961, hereinafter referred to as the principal Act, after sub -section (3), the following sub -section shall be 
inserted, namely: - 
"(4) On submission of application in all respect the registering officer shall grant or refuse to grant 
registration within one day after the dat e of submission of application in such manner as may be 
prescribed by the State Government on expiry of the said period the registration shall be deemed to be 
granted.  
The Applicant may submit his application on departmental web portal along with necessary  
documents and payment of fee. If the application is complete in all respect and the applicant is eligible, 
automatic registration shall be granted by the web portal and registration certificate be sent through e -
mail:  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOTOR TRANSPORT WORKERS ACT, 1961.pdf - page 6]
6 
 Provided that if the registration is obtained by misrepresentation of fact or concealment of fact or on 
the basis of forged document then such registration shall be deemed null and void and may be cancelled 
by the registering officer and legal action shall be taken against applicant."  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 12 of 2018,  s. 2] 
CHAPTER III  
 INSPECTING STAFF   
4. Chief inspector and inspectors .—(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint for the State a duly qualified person to be the chief inspector and as man y duly qualified 
persons to be inspectors subordinate to the chief inspector as it thinks fit.  
(2) The chief inspector may declare the local limits within which inspectors shall exercise their 
powers under this Act, and may himself exercise the powers of a n inspector within such local limits as 
may be assigned to him by the State Government.  
(3) The chief inspector and all inspectors shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of 
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 186 0). 
5. Powers of the inspectors .—(1) Subject to such conditions and restrict ions as the State 
Government may by general or special order impose, the chief inspector or an inspector may — 
(a) make such examination and inquiry as he thinks fit in order to ascertain  whether the 
provisions of this Act or rules made thereunder are being observed in the case of any motor transport 
undertaking, and for that purpose require the driver of a transport vehicle to cause the transport 
vehicle to stop and remain stationary so l ong as may reasonably be necessary ; 
(b) with such assistance, if any, as he thinks fit, enter, inspect and search any premises which he 
has reason to believe is under use or occupation of any motor transport undertaking at any reasonable 
time for the purpose of carrying out the objects of this Act;  
(c) examine any motor transport worker employed in a motor transport undertaking or require the 

<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOTOR TRANSPORT WORKERS ACT, 1961.pdf - page 6]
  
(c) examine any motor transport worker employed in a motor transport undertaking or require the 
production of any register or other document maintained in pursuance of this Act, and take on the 
spot or other wise statements of any person which he may consider necessary for carrying out the 
purposes of this Act;  
(d) seize or take copy of such registers or documents or portions thereof as he may consider 
relevant in respect of an offence under this Act which he has reason to believe has been committed by 
an employer;  
(e) exercise such oth er powers as may be prescribed : 
Provided that no person shall be compelled under this sub -section to answer any question or make 
any statement tending to incriminate himself.  
(2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898) , shall, so far as may be, apply 
to any search or seizure under this section as they apply to any search or seizure made under the authority 
of a warrant issued under section 98 of the said  Code.  
6. Facilities to be afforded to inspectors .—Every employer shall afford the chief inspector and an 
inspector all reasonable facilities for making any entry, inspection, examination or inquiry under this Act.  
7. Certifying surgeons .—(1) The State Government may appoint qualified medical practitioners to 
be certifying surgeons for the purposes of this Act within such local limits or for such motor transport 
undertaking s or class of motor transport undertaking s as it may assign to them respectively.  
(2) The certifying surgeon shall perform such duties as may be prescribed in connection with — 
(a) the examination and certification of motor transport workers;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOTOR TRANSPORT WORKERS ACT, 1961.pdf - page 7]
7 
 (b) the exercise of such medical supervision as may be prescribed where adolescents are, or are to 
be, employed as motor transport workers in any work in any motor transport undertaking which is 
likely to cause injury to their health.  
CHAPTER IV  
WELFARE AND HEALTH  
8. Canteens .—(1) The State Government may make rules requiring that in every place wher ein one 
hundred motor transport workers or more employed in a motor transport undertaking ordinarily call on 
duty during every day, one or more canteens shall be provided and maintained by the employer for the 
use of the motor transport workers.  
(2) Withou t prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for — 
(a) the date by which the canteens shall be provided;  
(b) the number of canteens that shall be provided and the standards in respect of construction, 
accommodation , furniture and other equipment of the canteens;  
(c) the foodstuffs which may be served therein and the charges which may be made therefore;  
(d) the constitution of a managing committee for a canteen and the representation of the motor 
transport workers in the management of the canteen.  
(3) The State Government may, subject to such conditions as it may impose, delegate to the chief 
inspector the power to make rules with reference to clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2). 
9. Rest rooms .—(1) In every place wherein mot or transport workers employed in a motor transport 
undertaking are required to halt at night, there shall be provided and maintained by the employer for the 
use of those motor transport workers such number of rest rooms or such other suitable alternative 
accommodation , as may be prescribed.  
(2) The rest rooms or the alternative accommodation to be provided under sub -section ( 1) shall be 
sufficiently lighted and ventilated and shall be maintained in a clean and comfortable condition.  
(3) The State Government  may prescribe the standard s in respect of construction, accommodatio
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOTOR TRANSPORT WORKERS ACT, 1961.pdf - page 7]
n.  
(3) The State Government  may prescribe the standard s in respect of construction, accommodation, 
furniture and other equipment of rest rooms or the alternative accommoda tion to be provided under this 
section.  
10. Uniforms .—(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Offi cial Gazette, make rules 
requiring an employer of a motor transport undertaking to provide for the drivers, conductors and line  
checking staff employed in that undertaking such number and type of uniforms, raincoats or other like 
amenities for their protection from rain or cold as may be specified in the rules.  
(2) There shall be paid to the drivers, conductors and line  checking staff by the employer an 
allowance for washing of uniforms provided under sub -section ( 1) at such rates as may be prescribed : 
Provided that no such allowance shall be payable by an employer who has made at his own cost 
adequate arrangements for the washing of uniforms.  
11. Medical facilities .—There shall be provided and maintained by the employer so as to be readily 
available s uch medical facilities for the motor transport workers at such operating centers and halting 
stations as may be prescribed by the State Government.  
12. First -aid facilities .—(1) There shall be provided and maintained by the employer so as to be 
readily acc essible during all working hours a first -aid box equipped with the prescribed contents in every 
transport vehicle.  
(2) Nothing except the prescribed contents shall be kept in a first -aid box.  
(3) The first -aid box shall be kept in the charge of the driver or the conductor of the transport vehicle 
who shall be provided facilities for training in the use thereof.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOTOR TRANSPORT WORKERS ACT, 1961.pdf - page 8]
8 
 CHAPTER V  
HOURS AND LIMITATIONS OF EMPLOYMENT  
13. Hours of work  for adult motor transport workers .—No adult motor transport worker shall be 
require d or allowed to work for more than e ight hours in any day and forty -eight hours in any week:  
Provided that where any such motor transport worker is engaged in the running of any motor 
transport service on such long distance routes, or on such festive and o ther occasions as may be notified 
in the prescribed manner by the prescribed authority, the employer may, with the approval of such 
authority, require or allow such motor transport worker to work for more than eight hours in any day or 
forty -eight hours in  any week but in no case for more than ten hours in a day and fifty -four hours in a 
week, as the case may be:  
Provided further that in the case of a breakdown or dislocation of a motor transport service or 
interruption of traffic or act of God, the employe r may, subject to such conditions and limitations as may 
be prescribed, require or allow any such motor transport worker to work for more than eight hours in any 
day or more than forty -eight hours in any week.  
14. Hours of work for adolescents employed as motor transport workers .—No adolescent shall 
be employed or required to work as a motor transport worker in any motor transport undertaking — 
(a) for more than six hours a day including rest interval of half-an-hour;  
(b) between the hours of 10 P.M. and 6 A.M. 
15. Daily intervals for rest .—(1) The hours of work in relation to adult motor transport workers on 
each day shall be so fixed that no period of work shall exceed five hours and that no such motor t ransport 
worker shall work for more than five hours before he has had an interval for rest for at least half -an-hour:  
Provided that the provisions of this sub -section in so far as they relate to interval for rest shall not 
apply to a motor transport worker  who is not required to work for more than six hours on that day
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOTOR TRANSPORT WORKERS ACT, 1961.pdf - page 8]
 
apply to a motor transport worker  who is not required to work for more than six hours on that day.  
(2) The hours of work on each day shall be so fixed that a motor transport worker is, except in any 
case referred to in the second proviso to section 13, allowed a period of rest of at least  nine consecutive 
hours between the termination of duty on any one day and the commencement of duty on the next 
following day.  
16. Spread -over .—(1) The hours of work of an adult motor transport worker shall, except in any case 
referred to in the second pro viso to section 13, be so arranged that inclusive of interval for rest under 
section 15, they shall not spread -over more than twelve hours in any day.  
(2) The hours of work of an adolescent motor transport worker shall be so arranged that inclusive of 
interval for rest under section 14, they shall not spread -over more than nine hours in any day.  
17. Split duty .—Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, the hours of work of a motor 
transport worker shall not be split into more than two spells on  any day.  
18. Notice of hours of work .—(1) There shall be displayed and correctly maintained by every 
employer a notice of hours of work in such form and manner as may be prescribed showing clearly for 
every day the hours during which motor transport workers may be required to work.  
(2) Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, no such motor transport worker shall be 
required or allowed to work otherwise than in accordance with the notice of hours of work so displayed.  
19. Weekly rest .—(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
providing for a day of rest in every period of seven days, which shall be allowed to all motor transport 
workers.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), an e mployer may , in order to prevent any 
allocation of a motor transport service, require a motor transport worker to work on any day of r
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOTOR TRANSPORT WORKERS ACT, 1961.pdf - page 8]
y 
allocation of a motor transport service, require a motor transport worker to work on any day of rest which 
is not a holiday so, however, that the motor transport worker does not work for more than ten days 
consecutively  without a holiday for a whole day intervening.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOTOR TRANSPORT WORKERS ACT, 1961.pdf - page 9]
9 
 (3) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) shall apply to any motor transport worker whose total period 
of employment including any day spent on leave is less than six days.  
20. Compensatory day of rest .—Where,  as a result of any exemption granted to an employer under 
the provisions of this Act from the operation of section 19, a motor transport worker is deprived of any of 
the days of rest to which he is entitled under that section, the motor transport worker s hall be allowed 
within the month in which the days of rest are due to him or within two months immediately following 
that month, compensatory days of rest of equal number to the days of rest so lost.  
CHAPTER VI  
EMPLOYMENT OF YOUNG PERSONS  
21. Prohibition o f employment of children .—No child shall be required or allowed to work in any 
capacity in any motor transport undertaking.  
22. Adolescents employed motor transport workers to carry tokens .—No adolescent shall be 
required or allowed to work as a motor tran sport worker in any motor transport undertaking unless — 
(a) a certificate of fitness granted with reference to him under section 23 is in the custody of the 
employer; and  
(b) such adolescent carries with him while he is at work a token giving a reference to such 
certificate.  
23. Certificate of fitness .—(1) A certifying surgeon shall , on the application of any adolescent or his 
parent or guardian accompanied by a document signed by the employer or any other person on his behalf 
that such person will be employed as a motor transport worker in a motor transport undertaking if 
certified t o be fit for that work, or on the application of the employer or any other person on his behalf 
with reference to any adolescent intending to work, examine such person and ascertain his fitness for 
work as a motor transport worker.  
(2) A certificate of fit ness granted under this section shall be valid for a period of twelve months from 
the date thereof, but may be renewed.  
(3) A
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOTOR TRANSPORT WORKERS ACT, 1961.pdf - page 9]
ion shall be valid for a period of twelve months from 
the date thereof, but may be renewed.  
(3) Any fee payable for a certificate under this section shall be paid by the employer and shall not be 
recoverable from the adolescent,  his parent or guardian.  
24. Power to require medical examination .—Where an inspector is of opinion that a motor 
transport worker working in any motor transport undertaking without a certificate of fitness is an 
adolescent, the inspector may serve on the e mployer a notice requiring that such adolescent motor 
transport worker shall be examined by a certifying surgeon and such adolescent motor transport worker 
shall not, if the inspector so directs, be employed or permitted to work in any motor transport unde rtaking 
until he has been so examined and has been granted a certificate of fitness under section 23.  
CHAPTER VII  
WAGES AND LEAVE  
25. Act 4 of 1936 to apply to payment of wages to motor transport workers .—The Payment of 
Wages Act, 1936  (4 of 1936) , as in force for the time being, shall apply to motor transport workers 
engaged in a motor transport undertaking as it applies to wages payable in an industrial establishment as 
if the said Act had been extended to the payment of wages of such motor transport wor kers by a 
notification of the State Government under sub -section ( 5) of section 1 thereof, and as if a motor transport 
undertaking were an industrial establishment within the meaning of the said Act.  
26. Extra wages for overtime .—(1) Where an adult motor t ransport worker works for more than 
eight hours in any day in any case referred to in the first proviso to section 13 or where he is required to 
work on any day of rest under sub -section ( 2) of section 19, he shall be entitled to wages at the rate of 
twice  his ordinary rate of wages in respect of the overtime work or the work done on the day of rest, as 
the case may be.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOTOR TRANSPORT WORKERS ACT, 1961.pdf - page 9]
, as 
the case may be.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOTOR TRANSPORT WORKERS ACT, 1961.pdf - page 10]
10 
 (2) Where an adult motor transport worker works for more than eight hours in any day in any case 
referred to in the second proviso to secti on 13, he shall be entitled to wages in respect of the overtime 
work at such rates as may be prescribed.  
(3) Where an adolescent motor transport worker is required to work on any day of rest under          
sub-section ( 2) of section 19, he shall be entitle d to wages at the rate of twice his ordinary rate of wages in 
respect of the work done on the day of rest.  
(4) For the purposes of this section, “ordinary rate of wages ” in relation to a motor transport worker 
means his basic wages plus dearness allowance.  
27. Annual leave with wages .—(1) Without prejudice to such holidays as may be prescribed, every 
motor transport worker who has worked for a period of two hundred and forty days or more in a motor 
transport undertaking during a calendar year shall be allow ed during the subsequent calendar year leave 
with wages for a number of days calculated at the rate of — 
(a) if an adult, one day for every twenty days of work performed by him during the previous 
calendar year; and  
(b) if an adolescent, one day for every fifteen days of work performed by him during the previous 
calendar year.  
(2) A motor transport worker whose service commences otherwise than on the first day of January 
shall be entitled to leave with wages at the rate laid down in clause ( a) or, as the ca se may be, clause ( b) 
of sub -section ( 1) if he has worked for two -thirds of the total number of days in the remainder of the 
calendar year.  
(3) If a motor transport worker is discharged or dismissed from service during the course of the year, 
he shall be e ntitled to leave with wages at the rate laid down in sub -section ( 1), even if he has not worked 
for the entire period specified in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) entitling him to earned leave.  
(4) In calculating leave under this section, fraction of le ave of half a 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOTOR TRANSPORT WORKERS ACT, 1961.pdf - page 10]
ng him to earned leave.  
(4) In calculating leave under this section, fraction of le ave of half a day or more shall be treated as 
one full day ’s leave, and fraction of less than half a day shall be omitted.  
(5) If a motor transport worker does not in any one calendar year take the whole of the leave allowed 
to him under sub -section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2), as the case may be, any leave not taken by him shall be 
added to the leave to be allowed to him in the succeeding calendar year:  
Provided that the total number of days of leave that may be carried forward to a succeeding year shall 
not ex ceed thirty in the case of an adult or forty in the case of an adolescent.  
(6) In this section “calendar year ” means the year commencing on the first day of January.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, leave shall not include weekly holidays or holidays 
for festival or other similar occasions whether occurring during or at either end of the period of leave.  
28. Wages during leave period .—(1) For the leave allowed to a motor transport worker under 
section 27, he shall be paid at the rate equal to the daily average of his total full time wages for the days 
on which he worked during the month immediately preceding his leave, exclusive of any overtime 
earnings and bonus, if any, but inclusive of dearness allowance and the cash equivalent of the advant age, 
if any, accruing by the concessional  supply by the employer of food grains for the day on which he 
worked.  
(2) A motor transport worker who has been allowed leave for not less than four days under section 27 
shall , on an application made by him in this  behalf to the employer, be paid in advance, before his leave 
begins, an approximate amount equivalent to the wages payable to him for the period of his leave and any 
amount so paid shall be adjusted against the wages due to him for the aforesaid period of  leave.  
(3) If a motor transport worker is not granted leave to which he is entit
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOTOR TRANSPORT WORKERS ACT, 1961.pdf - page 10]
resaid period of  leave.  
(3) If a motor transport worker is not granted leave to which he is entitled under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 27, he shall be paid wages in lieu thereof at the rates specified in sub -section ( 1). 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOTOR TRANSPORT WORKERS ACT, 1961.pdf - page 11]
11 
 CHAPTER VIII  
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE  
29. Obstructi ons.—(1) Whoever obstructs an inspector in the discharge of his duties under this Act 
or refuses or wilfully neglects to afford the inspector any reasonable facility for making any inspection, 
examination or inquiry authorised by or under this Act in relat ion to any motor transport undertaking shall 
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may 
extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.  
(2) Whoever wilfully refuses to produce on the demand of an inspec tor any register or other 
document kept in pursuance of this Act, or prevents or attempts to prevent or does anything which he has 
reason to believe is likely to prevent any person from appearing before or being examined by an inspector 
acting in pursuance  of his duties under this Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.  
30. Use of false certificate of fitness .—Whoever knowingly uses or attempt s to use as a certificate of 
fitness granted to himself under section 23 a certificate granted to another person under that section, or 
having been granted a certificate of fitness to himself, knowingly allows it to b e used, or an attempt to use 
it to be m ade, by another person, shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to one month, 
or with fine which may extend to fifty rupees, or with both.  
31. Contravention of provisions regarding employment of motor transport workers .—Whoever, 
except as ot herwise permitted by or under this Act, contravenes any provision of this Act or of any rules 
made thereunder, prohibiting, restricting or regulating the employment of persons in a motor transport 
undertaking, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a te rm which may extend to three months, or with 
fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both , and in the
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOTOR TRANSPORT WORKERS ACT, 1961.pdf - page 11]
nd to three months, or with 
fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both , and in the case of a continuing contravention 
with an additional fine which may extend to seventy -five rupees for every day during which such 
contravention continues after conviction for the first such contravention.  
32. Other offences .—Whoever wilfully d isobeys any direction lawfully given by any person or 
authority empowered under this Act to give such direction or contravenes any of the provisions of this 
Act or of any rules made thereunder for which no other penalty is elsewhere provided by or under th is Act 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which 
may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.  
33. Enhanced penalty after previous conviction .—If any person who has been convicted of any 
offenc e punishable under this Act is again guilty of an offence involving a contravention of the same 
provision, he shall be punishable on a subsequent conviction with imprisonment which may extend to six 
months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rup ees, or with b oth: 
Provided that for the purposes of this section no cognizance shall be taken of any conviction made 
more than two years before the commission of the offence which is being punished.  
34. Offences by companies .—(1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a company, 
the company as well as every person in charge of, and responsible to, the company for the conduct of its 
business at the time of the commission of the offence shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall 
be liable to be proceeded against and punished a ccordingly : 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anythin
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOTOR TRANSPORT WORKERS ACT, 1961.pdf - page 11]
xercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
conni vance of, or that the commission of the offence is attributable to any neglect on the part of any 
director, manager, managing agent or any other officer of the company, such director, manager, managing 
agent or such other officer shall also be deemed to be  guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section ,— 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOTOR TRANSPORT WORKERS ACT, 1961.pdf - page 12]
12 
 (a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of     
individuals; and  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh (UTs). — 
After section 34, insert:  — 
“34A. Compounding of offences .—(1) Any offence punishable under sub -section (1) of section 
29, section 31 and se ction 32 may, either before or after the institution of the prosecution, on an 
application by the alleged offender, be compounded by payment of compounding amount not more 
than five thousand rupees, by such officer or authority as the appropriate Governmen t may, by 
notification in the official Gazette, specify in this behalf:  
Provided that the appropriate Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, amend the 
said specified compounding amount:  
Provided further that the offences of the same natur e committed by the same offender for more 
than three occasions shall not be compoundable:  
Provided also that such offences shall be compounded only after the alleged offender has acted to 
the satisfaction of such officer or authority that such offence is n ot continued any further:  
Provided also that when an offence is compounded on an application by the employer, then 
seventy -five per cent of the compounding amount received from him, shall be paid wherever it is 
feasible to the concerned worker or equally a mongst the workers and if any workmen are not 
identifiable then the remaining amount shall be deposited in such manner as may be notified by the 
appropriate Government.  
(2) Where an offence has been compounded under sub -section (1), no further proceedings shall 
be taken against the offender in respect of such offence and the offender, if in custody, shall be 
released or discharged. ”. 
[Vide Union Territory of  Jammu and Kashmir  Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, 
notification No. S.O.  3465(E), dated (5 -10-2020)  and Vide Union Te
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOTOR TRANSPORT WORKERS ACT, 1961.pdf - page 12]
of Central Laws) Order, 2020, 
notification No. S.O.  3465(E), dated (5 -10-2020)  and Vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation 
(Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification No. S.O.  3774(E), dated (23 -10-2020).]  
Uttar Pradesh  
Insertion of section 34 -A.—After section 34 of the principal Act the follo wing section shall be inserted 
namely : — 
“34-A Any offence punishable under this Act with fine only or imprisonment up to three months 
or with both shall be compounded on the application of accused before or after institution of 
prosecution by a competent authority notified by the State Government, after imposing 50% of the 
fine for the offence as compounding fee along with the prescribed fine:  
Provided that remedy for compounding shall be available for the first offence only.  
(2) Every officer referred to in sub -section (1) shall exercise the power to compound an offence, 
subject to direction, control and supervision of the State Government.  
(3) Every application for the compounding of an offence shall be made in such form and in such 
manner as may be presc ribed.  
(4) Where any offence is compounded before the institution of any prosecution, no prosecution 
shall be instituted in relation to such offence, against the offender in relation to whom the offence is 
so compounded.  
(5) Where the composition of any of fence is made after the institution of any prosecution, such 
composition shall be brought by the officer referred to in sub -section (1) in writing to the notice of the 
court in which prosecution is pending and on such notice of the composition of the offen ce being 
given, the person against whom the offence is so compounded shall be discharged.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 12 of 2018, s. 3]  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOTOR TRANSPORT WORKERS ACT, 1961.pdf - page 13]
13 
 35. Cognizance of offences .—No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act except on 
complaint made by, or wit h the previous sanction in writing of, the inspector and no court inferior to that 
of a Presidency magistrate or a magistrate of the first class shall try any offence punishable under this 
Act. 
36. Limitation of prosecutions .—No court shall take cognizance  of an offence punishable under this 
Act, unless the complaint thereof is made within three months from the date on which the alleged 
commission of the offence came to the knowledge of an inspector:  
Provided that where the offence consists of disobeying a written order made by an inspector, 
complaint thereof may be made within six months of the date on which the offence is alleged to have 
been committed.  
CHAPTER IX  
MISCELLANEOUS  
37. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with this Act .—(1) The provisions of this Act shall 
have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law or in the terms of 
any award, agreement or contract of service, whether made before or after the commencement of this Act : 
Provided that whe re under any such award, agreement, contract of service or otherwise a motor 
transport worker is entitled to benefits in respect of any matter which are more favourable to him than 
those to which he would be entitled under this Act, the motor transport wor ker shall continue to be 
entitled to the more favourable benefits in respect of that matter, notwithstanding that he receives benefits 
in respect of other matters under this Act.  
(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed as precluding any motor transport worker from 
entering into an agreement with an employer for granting him rights or privileges in respect of any matter 
which are more favourable to him than those to which he would be entitled under this Act.  
38. Exemptions .—(1) Nothing contained  in this Act shall apply to or in relation to any
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOTOR TRANSPORT WORKERS ACT, 1961.pdf - page 13]
this Act.  
38. Exemptions .—(1) Nothing contained  in this Act shall apply to or in relation to any transport 
vehicle — 
(i) used for the transport of sick or injured persons;  
(ii) used for any purpose connected with the security of India, or the security of a State, or the 
maintenance of public order.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the State Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, direct that subject to such conditions and restrictions, if any, as may be specified 
in the notification, the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder shall not apply to — 
(i) any motor transport workers who, in the opinion of the State Government, hold positions of 
supervision or management in any motor transport undertaking , 
(ii) any part -time motor transport worker , and  
(iii) any class of employers:  
Provided that before issuing any order under this sub -section, the State Government shall send a copy 
thereof to the Central Government.  
39. Powers to give directions .—The Central Government may give directions to the Governmen t of 
any State as to the carrying into execution in the State of the provisions contained in this Act.  
40. Power to make rules .—(1) The State Government may, subject to the condition of previous 
publication 1[, by notification in the Official Gazette,] mak e rules to carry out the purposes of this Act:  
Provided that the date to be specified under clause ( 3) of section 23 of the General Clauses              
Act, 1897  (10 of 1897) , shall not be less than six weeks from the date on which the draft of the propos ed 
rules was published.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOTOR TRANSPORT WORKERS ACT, 1961.pdf - page 14]
14 
 (2) In particular , and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, any such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the form of application for the registration of a motor transport undertaking, the time within 
which and the authority to which such application may be made;  
(b) the grant of a certificate of registration in respect of a motor transport undertaking and the fees 
payable for such registration;  
(c) the qualification s required in respect of the chief inspector and in spector;  
(d) the powers which may be executed by inspectors and the manner in which such powers may 
be exercised;  
(e) the medical supervision which may be exercised by certifying surgeons;  
(f) appeals form any order of the chief inspector or inspector and the form in which, the time 
within which and the authorities to which, such appeals may be preferred;  
(g) the time within which facilities required by this Act to be provided and maintained may be so 
provided;  
(h) the medical facilities that should be prov ided for motor transport workers;   
(i) the type of equipment that should be provided in the first -aid boxes;  
(j) the manner in which long  distance routes, festive and other occasions shall be notified by the 
prescribed authority;  
(k) the conditions and lim itations subject to which any motor transport worker may be required or 
allowed to work for more than eight hours in any day or more than forty -eight hours in any week in 
any case referred to in the second proviso to section 13;  
(l) the form and manner in which notices of period of work shall be displayed and maintained;  
(m) the rates of extra wages in respect of the over -time work done by a motor transport worker in 
any case referred to in the second proviso to section 13;  
(n) the registers which should be  maintained by employers and the returns, whether occasional or 
periodical, as in the opinion of the State Government may be required for the purposes of this Act; 
and 
(o) any othe
<|CHUNK|>
[THE MOTOR TRANSPORT WORKERS ACT, 1961.pdf - page 14]
the opinion of the State Government may be required for the purposes of this Act; 
and 
(o) any other mater which has to be, or may be, prescribed.  
 1[(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act, shall be laid , as soon as it is made , 
before the State Legislature.]  
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL CO-OPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION ACT, 1962.pdf - page 1]
 
1 
 THE NATIONAL CO -OPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION ACT, 1962  
_____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions . 
 2A. Construction of references to any law not in force or any functionary not existence in the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir.  
3. Establishment of the National Co -operative Development Corporation . 
4. Disqualifications for being a member of Corporation . 
5. Term of office of members of Corporation . 
6. Removal from office of member, etc . 
7. Meetings, et c., of Corporation . 
8. Officers and other employees of Corporation . 
9. Functions of Corporation . 
10. Board of Management of the Corporation . 
11. Other committees . 
12. Grants by the Central Government to Corporation . 
12A. Power of Corporation to borrow money.  
12B. Grants, donations, etc.  
13. Corporation to maintain fund . 
14. Returns and reports.  
15. Directions by Central Government.  
16. Submission of programme of activities and financial estimates.  
17. Accounts of Board and audit.  
18. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate acts and proceedings of the Corporation.  
19. Delegation . 
20. Declaration of fidelity and secrecy.  
21. Dissolution of Corporation.  
22. Power to make rules.  
23. Power of Corporation to make regulations . 
24. Repeal and saving.  
THE SCHEDULE . 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL CO-OPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION ACT, 1962.pdf - page 2]
 
2 
 THE NATIONAL CO -OPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION ACT, 1962  
ACT NO. 26 OF 1962  
[31st August , 1962.]  
1[An Act to provide for the incorporation and regulation of a corporation for the purpose of 
planning and promoting programmes  for the production, processing, marketing, storage, 
export and import of agricultural produce, foodstuffs 2[industrial goods, livestock, certain 
other commodities and services on co -operative principles and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental th ereto] .] 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the National Co -operative 
Development Corporation Act, 1962.  
(2) It ext ends to the whole of India 3***. 
(3) It shall  come into force on such date4as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requires, — 
5[(a) “agricultural produce ” includes the following: — 
(i) edible and non -edible oil seeds;  
(ii) cattle feed, including oilcakes and other ingredients;  
(iii) produce of horticulture and animal husbandry;  
(iv) produce of forestry;  
(v) produce of poultry farming;  
(vi) produce of piscicu lture; and  
(vii) produce of other allied activities, whether or not undertaken jointly with agriculture;]  
6[(aa) “bank ” means a nationalised bank an d includes a scheduled bank;  
(ab) “Board ” means the Board of Management of the Corporation  constituted under section 10;]  
7[(aba) “Central financing institution ” means Industrial Development Bank of India established 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964  (18 of 1964)  
or the Industrial Finance Corporation of India Limited, a company formed and registered under the 
Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , or the Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of India 
Limited, a Company formed and regis
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL CO-OPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION ACT, 1962.pdf - page 2]
 , or the Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of India 
Limited, a Company formed and registered under the Indian Compa nies Act, 1913  (7 of 1913) ;] 
8[(b) “Central Warehousing Corporation” means the Central Warehousing Corporation 
established under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962  (58 of 
1962) ;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1974, s. 2, for the long title (w.e.f. 1 -4-1974).  
2. Subs. by Act 45 of 2002, s. 2, for “ and certain other commodities on co -operative principles and for matters connected 
therewith” (w.e.f. 1 6-9-2002).  
3. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 32 of 1973, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1973).  
4. 14th March, 1963, vide notification No. G.S.R. 456, dated 14th March, 1963, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,  
Part II, sec. 3( i). 
5. Subs. by Act 45 of 2002, s. 3, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 1 6-9-2002).  
6. Ins. by Act 3 of 1974, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1974).  
7. Ins. by Act 45 of 2002, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 6-9-2002).  
8. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for  clauses ( b) and ( c) (w.e.f. 1 6-9-2002).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL CO-OPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION ACT, 1962.pdf - page 3]
 
3 
 (c) “co -operative society” means a society registered or deemed to be registered under the  
Co-operative Societies Act, 1912  (2 of 1912)  or under the Multi -State Co -operative Societies Act, 
1984  (51 of 1984)  or under any other law with respect to co operat ive societies for the time being in 
force in any State, which is engaged in any of the activities specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 9 
and includes a Co -operative Land Development Bank, by whatever name called;]  
(d) “Corporation ” means the National C o-operative Development Corporation established under 
1[sub-section ( 1) of section 3];  
2[(da) “foodstuffs ”, include — 
(i) coconuts and areca -nuts;  
(ii) eggs and egg products;  
(iii) fish, whether fre sh, frozen, dried or preserved;  
(iv) fruits, whet her fresh,  dried or dehydrated;  
(v) honey;  
(vi) meat, whether fre sh, frozen, dried or preserved;  
(vii) milk and milk products;  
(viii) vegetables;  
(db) “General Council ” means the General Council of the Corporation constituted under  
sub-section ( 4) of section 3;  
3[(dba) “industrial goods ” means the products of industrial co -operatives or cottage and village 
industries or products of allied industries in the rural area and includes any handicrafts or rural crafts;  
(dbb) “livestock ” includes all animals to be raised fo r milk, meat, fleece, ski n, wool and other by -
products; ] 
(dc) “Managing director ” means the managi ng director of the Corporation;  
4[(dd) “nationalised bank ” means a corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 of the 
Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970  (5 of 1970)  or under 
section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980  (40 of 
1980);]] 
(e) “notified commodity ” means any commodity (ot her than agricultural produce 2[and 
foodstuffs]) which the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be 
a notified commodity for the p
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL CO-OPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION ACT, 1962.pdf - page 3]
vernment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be 
a notified commodity for the purposes of this Act, being a commodity with respect to which 
Parliament has power to make laws by virtue of entry 33 in List III in the Sevent h Schedule to the 
Constitution;  
3[(ea) “notified services ” means any service which the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, declare to be notified services for the purposes of this Act;]  
(f) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(g) “Reserve Bank ” means the Reserve Bank of India constituted under the Reserve Bank of India 
Act, 1934 (2 of 1934);  
2[(ga) “scheduled bank ” means a bank for the time being included in the Second Schedule to the 
Reserve Bank of  India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934 );]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1974, s. 3, for “section 3” (w.e.f. 7-4-1975).  
2. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1974).  
3. Ins. by Act 45 of 2002, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 6-9-2002).  
4. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for clause ( dd) (w.e.f. 1 6-9-2002).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL CO-OPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION ACT, 1962.pdf - page 4]
 
4 
 1[(h) “State Bank ” means the State Bank of India constituted under the State Bank of India Act, 
1955  (23 of 1955) or any of the subsidiary banks of the State Bank of India;  
(ha) “State Co -operative Bank ” has the same meaning as in the National Bank for Agriculture  
and Rural Development Act, 1981 (61 of 1981) ;] 
(i) “year” means the financial year.  
2[2A. [Construction of references to any law not in force or any functionary not existence in the State 
of Jammu and Kashmir *].—Omitted by  the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganiz ation (Adaptation of Central 
Laws) Order , 2020, vide notification No . S.O. 1123(E) dated  (18-3-2020)  and Vide Union Territory of 
Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order , 2020, notification No . S.O.  3774(E), dated 
(23-10-2020).  
3. Establishment of the National Co -operative Development Corporatio n.—(1) The Central 
Government shall, by notif ication in the Official Gazette, establis h with effect from such date as may be 
specified in the notification, a Corporation by the name of the National Co -operative Development 
Corporation which shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession and a common seal with power 
to acquire, hold and dispose of property and to contract, and may, in the said name, sue and be sued.  
(2) The head -office of the Cor poration shall be in New Delhi.  
3[(3) The Corporation shall carry on its functions through th e General Council and the Board . 
 (4) The General Council shall consist of the followi ng members, namely: — 
(i) a President and a Vice -President, both to be nomin ated by the Central Government;  
(ii) eight members, ex officio , to be nominated by the Central Government from such of its 
Ministries dealing with economic matters as it may think fit; 
4[(iii) Chairman of the National Bank of Agriculture and Rural Development constituted under 
the National Bank for Agriculture and Ru ral Development Act, 1981  (61 of 1981) , ex officio ;] 
(iv) Managing Direc
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL CO-OPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION ACT, 1962.pdf - page 4]
 for Agriculture and Ru ral Development Act, 1981  (61 of 1981) , ex officio ;] 
(iv) Managing Director of the State Bank, ex officio ; 
(v) Managing Director of the Food Corporation of India, constituted under the Food Corporations 
Act, 1964, (37 of 19 64) ex officio ; 
(vi) Managing  Director of the Central Warehousing Corporation, constituted under the 
Warehousing Corporations Act,  1962 (59 of 1962), ex officio ; 
5[(vii) one  member to be nominated by the Central Government from amongst the chairmen of 
one of the Central financing institutions, ex officio ;] 
(viii) a member representing banks, to be nomin ated by the Central Government;  
(ix) Chairman of the National Co -operat ive Union of India, ex officio ; 
(x) Chairman of the National Agricultural Co -operative Ma rketing Federation, ex officio ; 
(xi) Chairman of the National Federation of Co -operative Sugar Factories, ex officio ; 
(xii) Chairman of the All India Federation of Co -operative Spinning Mills, ex officio ; 
(xiii) Chairman of the All India State Co -operative Banks ,Federation, ex officio ; 
(xiv) eleven members, other than those nominated under clause ( xv), representing the States  and 
the Union territories, to be nominated by the Central Government, provided that not more than one 
person shall be so nominated from  each State or Union territory;  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 2002, s. 3, for clause ( h) (w.e.f.  16-9-2002).  
2. Ins. by Act 32 of 1973, s. 3 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1973).  
3. Subs. by Act 3 of 1974, s. 4, for sub -sections ( 3), (4) and ( 5) (w.e.f. 7 -4-1975).  
4. Subs. by Act 45 of 2002, s. 4, for clause s (iii) and ( iv) (w.e.f. 1 6-9-2002).  
5. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for clause ( vii) (w.e.f. 1 6-9-2002).  
*. Vide notification No . S.O. 3912(E), dated 30th October, 2019, this Act is made applicable to the Union territory of Jammu and 
Kashmir and the Union territory of Ladakh.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL CO-OPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION ACT, 1962.pdf - page 4]
ritory of Jammu and 
Kashmir and the Union territory of Ladakh.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL CO-OPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION ACT, 1962.pdf - page 5]
 
5 
 (xv) eleven  members to be nominated by the Central Government from among the Chairmen of 
the State level co -operative federations from the States and Union territories, provided that not more 
than one person shall be so nominated from ea ch State or Union territory;  
(xvi) four members representing persons having special knowledge of, or practical experience in, 
agricultural co -operative development, to be nomin ated by the Central Government;  
(xvii) 1[four members ] representing national level organisations engaged or interested in the 
promotion and development of co -operative programmes, to  be nomin ated by the Central 
Government;  
(xviii) the managing director.  
(5) The powers and functions of the Corporation shall be exercised or discharged, as the case may be, 
by the General Council, and references elsewhere in this Act to the Corporation sh all, unless the context 
otherwise requires, be construed as ref erences to the General Council.  
(6) Notwithstanding the expiry of the prescribed term of his office, every member of the General 
Council shall continue to hold office as such, until his success or in such office has  assumed charge of 
such office.  
(7) Members of the General Council, other than the managing director, shall be entitled to receive 
such sitting fees as may be specified by regulations made by the Corporation under this Act, for attending 
any meeting of the General Council, Board or an y committee of the Corporation:  
Provided that no official member shall be entitled to receive any sitting fee.]  
4. Disqualifications for  being a member of Corporation .—A person shall be disqualified for being 
chosen as, and for being , a member of the Corporation — 
(i) if he is, or at any time has been, adjudicated insolvent or has suspended payment of his debts 
or has co mpounded with his creditors; or  
(ii) if he is or has been convicted of any offence involving moral turpitude and sentenced in 
respect thereof to imprisonment
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL CO-OPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION ACT, 1962.pdf - page 5]
convicted of any offence involving moral turpitude and sentenced in 
respect thereof to imprisonment for not less than six months, unless a period of five years has elapsed 
from the dat e of expiry of the sentence; or  
(iii) 2[except  in the case of managing director,] if he is a salaried official of the Corporation . 
5. Term of of fice of members of Corporation .—(1) The term of office of members of the 
Corporation and the manner of filling vacancies among members shal l be such as may be  prescribed.  
(2) Any member of the Corporation other than an ex officio  member may resign his office by giving 
notice in writing to the Central Government and on such resignation being accepted, he shall be deemed 
to have vacated his office.  
6. Remo val from office of member, etc .—The Central Government may, at any time, remove from 
office any member other than an ex officio  member of the Corporation after giving him a reasonable 
opportunity of showing cause against the proposed removal.  
7. Meetings, etc. , of Corporation .—(1) The Corporation 3[shall ordinarily meet twice a year at such 
times] and places and shall, subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3), observe such procedure 
in regard to transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum at meetings) as may be provided 
by regulations made by the Corporation under this Act.  
(2) The 4[Presi dent] or, in his absence, the 5[Vice -President] or, in the absence of both the 4[President] 
and the 5[Vice -President], any member chosen by the members present from amongst themselves, shall 
preside a t a meeting of the Corporation.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 2002, s. 4, for “three members” (w.e.f. 1 6-9-2002).  
2. Ins. by Act 3 of 1974, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1974).  
3. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “shall meet at such times” (w.e.f. 7 -4-1975).  
4. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “Chairman” (w.e.f. 7 -4-1975).  
5. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “V
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL CO-OPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION ACT, 1962.pdf - page 5]
75).  
4. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “Chairman” (w.e.f. 7 -4-1975).  
5. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “Vice -Chairman” (w.e.f. 7 -4-1975).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL CO-OPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION ACT, 1962.pdf - page 6]
 
6 
 (3) All questions at a meeting of the Corporation shall be decided by a majority of votes of the 
members present and voting, and in the case  of an equality of votes, the 1[Presi dent] or, in his absence, the 
2[Vice -President] o r, in the absence of both the 1[President] and the 2[Vice -President], the person 
presiding shall have and exercise a second or casting vote.  
8. Officers and other employees of Corporation .—(1) The Central Government shall, in 
consultation with the Corporation, appoint a person t o be the 3[managing director].  
(2) Subject to such rules as may be made by the Central Government in this behalf, the Corporation 
may appoint such other officers and employees as it considers necessary for the efficient perfo rmance of 
its functions.  
(3) The methods of appointment, the conditions of service and the scales of pay of th e officers and 
other employees of the Corporation shall ,— 
(a) as respects the 4[managing director], be  such as may be prescribed; and  
(b) as respects the other officers and employees, be such as may be determined by regulations 
made by the Corporation under this Act.  
5[(4) The managing director shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as the Board may 
entrust or delegate to him.]  
9. Functions of Corporation .—6[(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the functions of the 
Corporation shall be to 7[plan, promote  and finance] programmes, through co -operative societies , for— 
(a) the production, processing, marketing, storage, export and import of agricultural produce , 
foodstuffs, poultry  feed and notified commodities;  
(b) the collection, processing, marketing, storage and e xport of minor forest produce ;] 
8[(c) development of notified service s.] 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing  provision, the Corporation 
may— 
(a) advance loans or grant subsidies to State Governments for financing co -operative societies 
and for employment of staff for i
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL CO-OPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION ACT, 1962.pdf - page 6]
sidies to State Governments for financing co -operative societies 
and for employment of staff for implementing programmes of co -opera tive development;  
(b) provide funds to Stat e Governments for financing co -operative societies for the purchase o f 
9[agricultural produce, foodstuffs] 10[livestock, poultry feed, industrial goods, notified commodities 
and notified services ] on behalf of the Central Government;  
(c) plan and promote programmes  through co -operative societies for the supply of seeds, 
manures, fertilizers, agricultural implements and other articles  for the development of agricultural 
produce;  
11[(d) provide loans and grants directly to the national level co -operative societies and other co -
operative societies having obje cts extending beyond one State;  
(e) provide loans to co -operative societies on the guarantee of State Governments or in the case of 
co-operative societies in the Union territories, on the g uarantee of Central Governm ent:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1974 , s. 6, for “Chairman” (w.e.f. 7 -4-1975).  
2. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “Vice -Chairman” (w.e.f. 7 -4-1975).  
3. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for “Secretary of the Corporation” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1974).  
4. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for “Secretary” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1974).  
5. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 7 -4-1975).  
6. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -4-1974).  
7. Subs. by Act 45 of 2002, s. 5, for “plan and promote” (w.e.f. 1 6-9-2002).  
8. Ins. by  s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 6-9-2002).  
9. Subs. by  Act 3 of 1974, s. 8, for “agricultural produce” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1974).  
10. Subs. by Act 45 of 2002, s. 5, for “and notified commodities” (w.e.f. 1 6-9-2002).  
11. Ins. by  Act 3 of 1974, s. 8. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1974).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL CO-OPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION ACT, 1962.pdf - page 7]
 
7 
 1[Provided  that no such guarantee shall be required in cases in which security to the  satisfaction 
of the Corporation is furnished by the borrowing co -operative  society;]  
(f) participate  in the share capital of the national level co -operative societies and other  
co-operative societies having objects extending beyond o ne State.]  
(3) The Corporation shall so exercise its functions under this section as not to interfere with the 
activities of the Khadi and Village Industries Commission established under the Khadi and Village 
Industries Commission Act, 1956 (61 of 1956).  
2[10. Board of  Management of the Corporation .—(1) There shall be a Board of Management of the 
Corporation which shall consist of t he following members, namely: — 
(i) the Vice -President of the General Coun cil, who shall be the Chairman;  
(ii) three members of the General Council, to be nominated by the Central Government from 
among the members referred to in clause ( ii) of sub-section ( 4) of section 3;  
(iii) the member of the General Council, referred to in clause ( iii) of sub -section ( 4) of section 3;  
(iv) one member of the General Council, to be nominated by the Central Government from among 
the members referred to in claus es (ix), (x), (xi), (xii) and ( xiii) of sub-section ( 4) of section 3;  
(v) two members of the General Council, to be nominated by the Central Government from 
among the members referred to in clause ( xiv) of sub -section ( 4) of section 3;  
(vi) two  members of the General Council, to be nominated by the Central Government from 
among the members referred to in clause ( xv) of sub -section ( 4) of section 3;  
(vii) one member of the General Council, to be nominated by the Central Government from 
among the members referred to in clauses ( xvi) and ( xvii) of sub -section ( 4) of section 3;  
(viii) the managing director . 
(2) The Vice -Chairman of the Board shall be nomin ated by the Central Government.  
(3) Subject to the general c
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL CO-OPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION ACT, 1962.pdf - page 7]
-Chairman of the Board shall be nomin ated by the Central Government.  
(3) Subject to the general control, direction and superintendence of the General Council, the Board 
shall be competent to deal with any matter within the  competence of the Corporation.  
(4) The Board shall meet at such times and at such places and shall observe such procedure in regard 
to transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum at meetings) as may be provided by 
regulations made by the Corporation under this Act.  
(5) The confirmed minutes of every meeting of the Board shall be laid before the General Council at 
its next following meeting.]  
11. Other committees .—The Corporation may constitute such other committees for general or 
special purposes as it deems necessary for  the efficient performance of its functions under this Act.  
12. Grants by the Cen tral Government to Corporation .—The Central Government shall, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this b ehalf, pay to the Corporation — 
(a) by way of grant each year, such sum of money as is required by the Corporation for giving 
subsidies to State Governments and for meeting its administrative expens es; 3*** 
(b) by way of loan, such sum of money on such terms and conditions as the Central Go vernment 
may dete rmine; 4[and]  
4[(c) such additional grants, if any, for the purposes of this Act.]  
                                                           
1. The proviso i ns. by Act 45 of 2002, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 6-9-2002).  
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1974, s. 9, for section 10 (w.e.f. 7 -4-1975).  
3. The word “and” omitted by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1974).  
4. Ins. by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1974).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL CO-OPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION ACT, 1962.pdf - page 8]
 
8 
 1[12A. Power of Corporation to borrow money .—(1) The Corporation may, for the purposes of 
carrying out its functions under this Act, and with the previous approval of, and subject to the directions 
of the Central Government, borrow money from — 
(a) the public by the issue  or sale of bonds or debentures,  or both, carrying interest at such rat es 
as may be specified therein;  
(b) any bank or other financial institution;  
(c) any other authority, organisation or institution as may be specially approved by the Cen tral 
Government in this behalf.  
(2) The Central Government may guarantee the repayment of the moneys borrowed by the 
Corporation under clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) and the payment of interest 
thereon and other incidental charges.]  
2[12B. Grants, donations, etc. —(1) The Corporation may receive gifts, grants, donations or 
benefactions from Government or any other agency in or outside India.  
(2) The Corporation shall not receive any gifts, grants, donations or benefac tions from a foreign 
government or, any other agency out side India except with the previous approval of the Central 
Government.]  
13. Corporation to maintain fund .—(1) The Corporation shall maintain a fund called the National 
Co-operative Development Fund (hereinafter referred to as the Fun d) to which shall be credited — 
(a) all moneys and other securities transferred to it under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 2) of section 
24; 
(b) the grants and other sums of money by way of loans paid to the Corporation by the Centr al 
Government under section 12;  
3[(bb) all moneys received under section 12B;  
  (bbb) all moneys received for services rendered;]  
4[(ba) all mone ys borrowed under section 12A;]  
(c) such additional grants, if any, as the Central Government may make to the Corporation fo r the 
purposes of this Act; and  
(d) such sums of money as may, from time to time, be realised out of repayment of loans made 
from the Fund
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL CO-OPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION ACT, 1962.pdf - page 8]
h sums of money as may, from time to time, be realised out of repayment of loans made 
from the Fund or from i nterest on loans or dividends 4[or other realisations] on investments made 
from the Fund.  
(2) The moneys in the Fund shall be applied for — 
(a) advancing loans and granting subsidies to State Governments on such terms and conditions as 
the Corporation may deem fit for the purpose of enabling State Governments to subscribe to the share 
capital of co -operative societies or for otherwise financing c o-operative societies;  
(b) meeting the pay and allowances of the 5[managing director, the officers] and other employees 
of the Corporation and other administrative e xpenses of the Corporation; and  
(c) carryin g out the purposes of this Act.  
6[(3) All moneys in the Fund shall be deposited in the Reserve Bank or the State Bank or a 
nationalised bank or a scheduled bank or a State Co -operative Bank.]   
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 1974, s. 11 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1974).  
2. Ins. by Act 45 of 2002, s. 6 ( w.e.f. 1 6-9-2002).  
3. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 14 -8-2002).  
4. Ins. by  Act 3 of 1974, s. 12(w.e.f. 1 -4-1974).  
5. Subs. by s. 12, ibid., for “officers” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1974).  
6. Subs. by Act 45 of 2002, s. 7, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 6-9-2002).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL CO-OPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION ACT, 1962.pdf - page 9]
 
9 
 14. Returns and reports .—(1) The Corporation shall furnish to the Central Government at such 
times and in such form and manner as may be prescribed or as the Central Government may direct, such 
returns and statements and such particulars in regard to the discharge of its functions under this Act as the 
Central Government m ay, from time to time, require.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Corporation shall, as soon as possible, 
after the end of each year, submit to the Central Government a report, in such form and manner and 
before such date as may be prescribed, giving a true  and full account of its activities, policy and 
programme during the pr evious year.  
(3) A copy of the report received under sub -section ( 2) shall be laid before both Houses of 
Parliament.  
15. Di rections by Central Government .—In all matters including matters of policy, the Corporation 
shall be guided by such directions as may be given to it by the Central Government.  
16. Submission of programme of acti vities and financial estimates .—(1) The Corporation shall 
prepare before the co mmencement of each year a statement of programme of its activities during the 
forthcoming year as well as a financi al estimate in respect thereof.  
(2) A statement prepared under sub -section ( 1) shall, not later than three months before the 
commencement of each year, be submitted to the Central Government for approval.  
17. Accounts of Board and audit .—(1) The Corporation shall maintain proper accounts and other 
relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed in 
consultation with the Comptrolle r and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The account of the Corporation shall be audited annually by the Comptroller and Auditor -General 
of India or any person authorised by him in this behalf and any expenditure incurred in conn ection with 
such audit shall  be payable by the Corporation.  
(3) The Comptrolle
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL CO-OPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION ACT, 1962.pdf - page 9]
 incurred in conn ection with 
such audit shall  be payable by the Corporation.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person authorised  by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the Corporation shall have the same rights, privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General has in connection with the audit of 
Government accounts and in  particular, shall have the right to demand the pro duction of books, 
accounnts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect  any office of the 
Corporation.  
(4) The accounts of the Corporation certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any 
other person authorised by him in this behalf together with an audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before both 
Houses of Parliament.  
18. Vacanci es, etc., not to invalidate acts and proceedings of the Corporation .—No act or 
procee ding of 1[the General Council, the Board or any of the committees of the Corporation] shall be 
invalid by reason only of the existence of any vacancy among its members or any defect in the 
constitution thereof.  
19. Delegation .—The Corporation may, by general or special orde r in writing, delegate to the 
2[President or the Vice -President] or any other member or any officer of the Corporation subject to such 
conditions and lim itations, if any, as may be specified in the order such of its powers and functions under 
this Act as it may deem necessary.  
20. Decla ration of fidelity and secrecy .—Every member, auditor, officer or other employee of the 
Corporation shall, before entering  upon his duties, make a declaration of fidelity and secrecy in the form 
set out in the Schedule.  
21. Dissolution of Corporation .—(1) The Central Government, if it is of opinion that the 
Corporation has failed to carry out its functions under this Act or t hat fo
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL CO-OPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION ACT, 1962.pdf - page 9]
is of opinion that the 
Corporation has failed to carry out its functions under this Act or t hat for any other reason it is not 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1974, s. 13, for “the Corporation” (w.e.f. 7-4-1975). 
2. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for “Chairman or the Vice -Chairman” (w.e.f. 7 -4-1975).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL CO-OPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION ACT, 1962.pdf - page 10]
 
10 
 necessary to continue the Corporation, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, dissolve the 
Corporation from such date as may be  specified in the notification.  
(2) When the Corporation is dis solved under sub -section  (1),— 
(a) all members of the Corporation shall, from the date of dissolution, vacate  their offices as such 
members;  
(b) all powers and duties of the Corporation shall, as from the date of dissolution, be exercised 
and performed by the Central Government o r such person or persons as the Central Governm ent may 
appoint in this behalf;  
(c) all moneys and other properties of the Corporation shall vest in the Central Government.  
22. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carr y out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powe r, such rules may provide for — 
1*    *    *    *   * 
(d) the term of office of members of the Corporation and the manner o f filling vacancies among 
them;  
(e) the methods of appointment, the conditions of service and the scale of pa y of the 2[managing 
director];  
3*   *    *   *   * 
(g) the  returns, statements and other particulars in regard to the discharge of its functions to be 
furnished by the Corpora tion to the Central Government;  
(h) the form and the manner in which, and the time within which, the Corporation shall furnish to 
the Centr al Government returns, statements and other particulars with regard to the discharge of its 
functions;  
(i) the form and the manner in which, and the time within which, the Corporation shall furnish to 
the Central Government a report of its ac tivities, poli cy and programme;  
(j) any other matter which ha s to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days  which ma y be compr
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL CO-OPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION ACT, 1962.pdf - page 10]
h 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days  which ma y be comprised in one 
session 4[or in two or m ore successive sessions, and if, before the  expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid], both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or bo th Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anyt hing p reviously done under that rule.  
23. Power of Corporat ion to make regulations .—(1) The Corporation may, with the previous 
sanction of the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations not 
inconsistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder, to provide for all matters for which provision is 
necessary or expedient for the purpose of giving effect  to the provisions of this Act.  
  
                                                           
1. Clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) omitted by Act 3 of 1974, s. 15 (w.e.f. 7 -4-1975).  
2. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for “Secretary to the Corporation” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1974).  
3. Clause ( f) omitted by s. 15, ibid. (w.e.f. 7 -4-1975).  
4. Subs. by Act 32 of 1973, s. 4 , for certain words  (w.e.f. 21 -8-1973).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL CO-OPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION ACT, 1962.pdf - page 11]
 
11 
 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, suc h regulations may 
provide for — 
(a) the manner in which meetings of 1[the General Council, the Board and other committees of 
the Corporation] shall be convened, the fees for attending such meetings and the pr ocedure to be 
followed thereat;  
(b) the methods of appointment, the conditions of service and the scales of pay of  the officers 
(other than the 2[managing director]) and other  employees of the Corporations;  
(c) the duties and conduct of officers and other em ployees of the Corporation; and  
(d) any  other matter in respect of which the Corporation is empowered or required to m ake 
regulations under this Act.  
(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, rescind any regulation 
which it has sanctioned and thereupon the regulat ion shall cease to have effect.  
24. Repeal and saving .—(1) With effect from the date on which the Corporation is established under 
section 3, the Agricultural Produce (Development and Warehousing) Corporations Act, 1956 (28 of 
1956), shall, in so far as it  relates to the National Co -operative Development and Warehousing Boa rd, 
stand repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, — 
(a) all moneys and other securities belonging to the National Co -operative Development Fund 
which, immediately before the said date, was maintained by the National Co -operative Development 
and Warehousing Board established under the repealed Act (hereinafter referred to as the said Board), 
shall stand transferred to, and be maintained by, the Corporation establish ed under section 3 of t his 
Act; 
(b) all moneys and other securities belonging to the National Warehousing Deve lopment Fund 
which, immediately before the said date, was maintained by the said Board under the repealed Act, 
shall stand transferred to and be maintained by the C entra l Warehousing Corporation;  
(c) all shares in the capital of the Centra
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL CO-OPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION ACT, 1962.pdf - page 11]
e maintained by the C entra l Warehousing Corporation;  
(c) all shares in the capital of the Central Warehousing Corporation held by the said Board shall 
stand transferred to the Central Government subject to the same liabilities as to payment of unpaid 
calls on such shares as  the sai d Board was subject to;  
(d) anything done or any action taken (including any loan advanced, subsidy granted and 
appointment, delegation, rule or regulation made) under the repealed Act shall, in so far as it is not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken under this Act; and  
(e) all rights, liabilities and obligations of the said Board, whether arising out of any contract or 
otherwise, shall be the rights, liabilities and obligations respectively of the Corporation established 
under section 3 of this Act.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1974, s. 16, for “the Corporation, the Executive Co mmittee and other committees thereof” (w.e.f. 7 -4-1975).  
2. Subs. by s. 16, ibid., for “Secretary” (w.e.f. 1-4-1975).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL CO-OPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION ACT, 1962.pdf - page 12]
 
12 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 20)  
DECLARATION OF FIDELITY AND SECRECY  
I...............declare that I will faithfully, truly and to the best of my judgment, skill and ability execute 
and perform the duties which are required of me as a member, officer, employee or auditor (as the case 
may be) of the National Co -operative Development Corporation and which properly relate to the office or 
position in t he said Corporation held by me.  
I further declare that I will not com municate or allow to be communicated to any persons not legally 
entitled thereto any information relating to the affairs of the said Corporation nor will I allow any such 
persons to inspect or have access to any books or documents belonging to, or in the p ossession of, the 
Corporation and relating to t he business of the Corporation.  
Signature  
Signature  
Signature  
Signed before me  
Date  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Declaration of National Dairy Development Board as an institution of national   importance.  
3. Definitions.  
CHAPTER  II 
THE NATIONAL  DAIRY  DEVELOPMENT  BOARD  
 
4. Incorporation of National Dairy Development Board . 
5. Vesting of undertakings of Indian Dairy Corporation in National Dairy Development Board and 
dissolution of Indian Dairy Corporation . 
6. Effect of incorporation of National Dairy Development Board . 
7. Saving of legal proceedings.  
CHAPTER  III 
MANAGEMENT OF THE NATIONAL  DAIRY DEVELOPMENT  BOARD  
8. Management of National Dairy Development Board and composition of its Board of   Directors . 
9. Terms of office and conditions of service, etc., of Chairman and directors . 
10. Meetings of Board . 
11. Manner of transacting business of Board . 
12. Management committees . 
13. Allowances, etc., of members of management committees . 
14. Delegation of powers to management committees , etc. 
15. Delegation  of powers to whole -time directors, etc.  
CHAPTER  IV 
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE NATIONAL  DAIRY  DEVELOPMENT  BOARD  
16. Powers and functions of National Dairy Development Board . 
CHAPTER  V 
PROVISIONS  RELATING TO DIRECTORS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE  NATIONAL  DAIRY                   
DEVELOPMENT BOARD  
17. Provisions regarding members of board of society and directors of dissolved company.  
18. Provisions relating to officers and other employees of society and of dissolved company.  
19. Power of Board to restructure and streamline or ganisational and functional set -up of National 
Dairy Development Board to secure utmost efficiency in functioning . 
20. Schemes regarding compensation to redundant employees, etc . 
21. Compensation for transfer of employees not payable . 
22. Provident fund, gratuity, wel fare and other funds . 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987.pdf - page 1]
not payable . 
22. Provident fund, gratuity, wel fare and other funds . 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987.pdf - page 2]
2 
 CHAPTER  VI 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
SECTIONS  
23. Borrowing powers of Board . 
24. Grants and loans by Central Government . 
25. Grants, donations, etc . 
26. National Dairy Development Board Fund . 
27. Preparation of accounts and balance -sheet . 
28. Audit . 
29. Reports to be laid before Parliament . 
30. Power to call for repayment before agreed period . 
31. Special provisions for enforcement of claims by National Dairy Development Board . 
CHAPTER  VII 
MISCELLANEOUS  
32. Defects in appointments not to invalidate acts, etc., of Board . 
33. Protection of acts done in good faith . 
34. Indemnity of directors . 
35. Obligation as to fidelity and secrecy . 
36. Recruitment of additional officers and other employees . 
37. Liquidation only under orders of Central Government . 
38. Delegation of certain powers by Central Government . 
39. Transitional provisions for auditors . 
40. Transitional provisions with regard to Chairman and Board . 
41. Management or assistance to others to continue . 
42. Mother Dairy to be a subsidiary unit of National Dairy Development Board . 
43. Formation of comp anies with previous approval of Central Government . 
44. [Omitted ] 
45. Returns . 
46. Power to make schemes and regulations regarding service matters retrospectively . 
47. Act to have overriding effect . 
48. Power to make regulations . 
49. Power to remove difficulties . 
50. Schemes and regu lations to be laid before Parliament . 
THE SCHEDULE  
 
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987.pdf - page 3]
3 
 THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987  
ACT NO. 37 OF 1987  
[15th September , 1987 .] 
An Act to declare the institution known as the National Dairy Development Board in the State of 
Gujarat to be an institution of national importance and  to provide for its incorporation and  for 
the vesting in that body corporate of the undertakings of the Indian Dairy Corporation with a 
view to provide for the administration and the carrying on of the functions to be performed 
by the body corporate more effectively throughout the country and for matters connected 
therewith and incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  the National Dairy Development Board, a society formed and registered under the 
Societies Registration Act, 1860  (21 of 1860)  has been serving the country by the adoption of a              
co-operative strategy, being a strategy evolved at Anand (Gujarat), for the economic development of the 
rural masses and has been playing a vital role in improving the quality of l ife of the people through       
co-operative effort;  
AND WHEREAS  the objects of the National Dairy Development Board are such as to make it an 
institution of national importance and to co nstitute it as a body corporate;  
AND WHEREAS the functions of the Indian Dairy Corporation, a company formed and registered under 
the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , and the functions of the National Dairy Development Board are 
complementary to each other and aimed at achieving common objectives;  
AND WHEREAS it is neces sary that the freedom and flexibility of operation hitherto available to the 
National Dairy Development Board should continue to be available to it so as to enable it to perform its 
functions more effectively and to play a wider and increasingly important role in serving the nation;  
AND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to vest the undertakings of the Indian Dairy Corporation in 
the National Dairy Development Board and to dissolve the said Corporation with a view to prov
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987.pdf - page 3]
on in 
the National Dairy Development Board and to dissolve the said Corporation with a view to provide for 
the administration and the c arrying on of the functions to be performed by the body corporate more 
effectively.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -eighth Year of t he Republic of India as follows :— 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the National Dairy Development 
Board Act, 1987.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may , by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Declaration of National Dairy Development Board as an institution of national   
importance .—Whereas the objects of the National Dairy Development Board at Anand in the State of 
Gujarat are such as to make the institution one of national importance, it is hereby declared that the 
National Dairy Development Board is an institution of national importance.  
                                                           
1. 12th October , 1987 , vide notification No. S.O. 898(E), dated 12th  October , 1987 , see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,    
sec. 3(i). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987.pdf - page 4]
4 
 3. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context oth erwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the date of commencement of this Act;  
(b) “Board ” means the Board of Directors of the National Dairy Development Board;  
(c) “Chairman ” means the Chairman of the National Dairy Development Board;  
(d) “Companies Act ” means the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) ; 
(e) “director ” means a director of the National Dairy Development Board, and includes the 
Chairman;  
(f) “foodstuffs ” means such of the foodstuffs as are included in the definition of                 
essential commodities as contained in clause ( a) of section 2 of the Es sential Commodities                    
Act, 1955  (10 of 1955) ; 
(g) “Indian Dairy Corporation ” means the Indian Dairy Corporation, a company formed and 
registered under the Companies Act, and having its registered office at Baroda in the State of Gujarat.  
(h) “milk product ” means— 
(i) sterili sed, standardised, recombined, toned, double -toned, skimmed, flavoured or acidified 
milk;  
(ii) ice-cream;  
(iii) cream;  
(iv) cheese;  
(v) butter;  
(vi) milk powders;  
(vii) weaning foods with milk and infant milk foods;  
(viii) malted milk foods with or without cocoa powder;  
(ix) ghee;  
(x) anhydrous milk fat and butter oil;  
(xi) casein;  
(xii) any other product containing milk or all or any of the milk products specified above 
which the Central Government may , by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf;  
(i) “National Dairy Development Board ” means the National Dairy Development Board 
incorporated under section 4;  
(j) “prescribed ” means prescribed by regulations made under this Act;  
(k) “restructuring and streamlining ”, in relation to the organisational and functional set -up of the 
National Dairy Development Board, includes — 
(i) opening or closing of units or offices;  
(ii) revision of the organisational and functional set -up; 
(iii) declaratio n of staff required;  
(iv) in
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987.pdf - page 4]
ision of the organisational and functional set -up; 
(iii) declaratio n of staff required;  
(iv) integration of posts, fixation of seniority and pay scales;  
(v) integration of required personnel in the revised set -up and issuance of appointment orders 
in that behalf;  
(vi) declaration or demarcation of duties and responsibilit ies attendant to posts;  
(vii) declaration of posts equivalent to one another; and  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987.pdf - page 5]
5 
 (viii) any other matter that may be necessary of incidental to meet the organisational or 
functional needs of the National Dairy Development Board;  
(l) “society ” means the National Dairy Development Board, a society formed and registered 
under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) and functioning as such immediately before 
the appointed day;  
(m) words and expressions used herein and not defined, but de fined in the Companies Act, have 
the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.  
CHAPTER  II 
THE NATIONAL  DAIRY  DEVELOPMENT  BOARD  
4. Incorporation of National Dairy Development Board .—(1) The National Dairy Development 
Board is hereby constituted a body corporate by the same name, and as such body corporate, it shall have 
perpetual succession and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold 
and dispose of property and to contract, and shall, by that name, sue and be sued.  
(2) The head office of the National Dairy Development Board shall be at Anand in the State of 
Gujarat.  
(3) The National Dairy Development Board may establish units, offices, branches or agencies at any 
such place in or outside India as it may cons ider necessary.  
5. Vesting of undertakings of Indian Dairy Corporation in National Dairy Development Board 
and dissolution of Indian Dairy Corporation .—(1) On and from the appointed day, subject to the other 
provisions of this Act, all the undertakings of the Indian Dairy Corporation shall stand transferred to and 
vest in the National Dairy Development Board.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act, the Indian Dairy Corporation shall, on 
and from the appointed day, stand dissolved by virtue of the provisions of this Act.  
6. Effect of incorporation of National Dairy Development Board .—On and from the appointed 
day,— 
(a) all properties and assets, movable and immovable , of, or belonging to, the society and the 
Indian Dairy Corporation (h
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987.pdf - page 5]
ssets, movable and immovable , of, or belonging to, the society and the 
Indian Dairy Corporation (hereinafter referred to as the dissolved company) shall vest in the National 
Dairy Development Board;  
(b) all the rights, debts, liabilities, interests, privileges and obligations of the society and the 
Indian Dairy Corporation shall stand transferred to, and be the rights, liabilities, interests, privileges 
and obligations of , the National Dairy Development Board;  
(c) without prejudice to the provisions of clause ( b), all debts , liabiliti es and obligations incurred, 
all contracts entered into and all matters and things engaged to be done by, with or for, the society or 
the dissolved company, immediately before the appointed day for or in connection with their 
purposes, shall be deemed to h ave been incurred, entered into, or engaged to be done by, with or for , 
the National Dairy Development Board;  
(d) all sums of money due to the society and the dissolved company, immediately before the 
appointed day, shall be deemed to be due to the Board;  
(e) every subsidiary or the society and the dissolved company shall become the subsidiary of the 
National Dairy Development Board;  
(f) every organisation, which was being managed immediately before the appointed day by the 
society or, as the case may be, b y the dissolved company, shall be managed by the National Dairy 
Development Board for such period to such extent and in such manner as the circumstances may 
require;   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987.pdf - page 6]
6 
 (g) every organisation which was getting financial, managerial or technical assistance fr om the 
society or the dissolved company, immediately before the appointed day, may continue to be given 
financial, managerial or technical assistance, as the case may be, by the National Dairy Development 
Board, for such period, to such extent and in such manner as the National Dairy Development Board 
may deem fit;  
(h) the amount representing the capital of the dissolved company shall form part of the funds of 
the National Dairy Development Board;  
(i) any reference to the society or, as the case may be, to the dissolved company, in any law other 
than this Act or in any contract or other instrument, shall be deemed to be reference to the National 
Dairy Development Board.  
7. Saving of legal proceedings .—If, on the appointed day, there is pending any suit, arbitration, 
appeal or other legal proceedings of whatever nature by or against the society or the dissolved company, 
the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be in any way prejudicially affected by reason of the 
incorporation of the National Dairy Dev elopment Board under section 4 or dissolution of the Indian Dairy 
Corpor ation under section 5, as the case may be, but the suit, arbitration, appeal or other proceedings may 
be continued, prosecuted and enforced by or against the National Dairy Development  Board in the same 
manner and to the same extent as it would or may have been continued, prosecuted and enforced by or 
against the society or the dissolved company, as the case may be, if this Act had not been passed.  
CHAPTER  III      
   MANAGEMENT OF THE NATIONAL  DAIRY DEVELOPMENT  BOARD  
8. Management of National Dairy Development Boa rd and composition of its Board of   
Directors .—(1) The general superintendence, direction, control and management of the affairs and 
business of the National Dairy Development  Board shall vest in a Board of Directors, which shall 
exercise all powers and d
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987.pdf - page 6]
 Dairy Development  Board shall vest in a Board of Directors, which shall 
exercise all powers and do all acts and things which may be exercised or done by the National Dairy 
Development Board.  
(2) The Board of Directors of the National Dairy Development Board shall c onsist of the following, 
namely :— 
(a) a Chairman;  
(b) one director from amongst the officials of the Central Government;  
(c) two directors from amongst the Chairmen of the State Co -operative Dairy Federations;  
(d) whole -time directors, not more than three in number, from amongst the executives of the 
highe st grade of the National Dairy Development Board;  
(e) one director, being an expert, from outside the National Dairy Development Board.  
(3) The Chairman and the director referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section (2) shall be nominated by 
the Central Government and the directors referred to in clauses ( c), (d) and ( e) of sub -section ( 2) shall be 
nominated by the Central Government after consultation with the Chairman:  
Provided that the Chairman and the director referred to in clause ( e) of sub -section ( 2) shall be 
persons professionally qualified in one or more specialities, namely, dairying, animal husbandry, rural 
economics, rural development, business administration or banking.  
(4) The Board may associate with  itself, in such manner, on such terms and for such purposes as it 
may deem fit, any person whose assistance or advice it may desire in complying with any of the 
provisions of this Act, and a person so associated shall have the right to take part in the di scussions of the 
Board relevant to the purposes for which he has been associated but shall not have the right to vote.  
9. Terms of office and conditions of service, etc., of Chairman and d irectors .—(1) The Chairman 
shall be the Chief Executive of the National Dairy Development Board and shall hold office for such 
period as the Central Government may determine and any person so nominated shall be e
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987.pdf - page 6]
fice for such 
period as the Central Government may determine and any person so nominated shall be eligible for 
renomination.   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987.pdf - page 7]
7 
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Central Government shall have the 
right to terminate the services of the Chairman, at any time before the expiry of the period determined 
under that sub -section, by giving him notice of not less than three mo nths in writing or three months’  
salary and allowances i n lieu thereof, and the Chairman shall also have the right to relinquish his office, at 
any time before the expiry of the period specified under that sub -section, by giving to the Central 
Government notice of not less than three months in writing.  
(3) The Chairman shall receive such salary and allowances as may be determined by the Central 
Government.  
(4) Where an executive of the National Dairy Development Board has been nominated under section 
8 as a whole -time director thereof, such nomination shall be w ithout prejudice to his continuance as an 
executive of the National Dairy Development Board and he may be continued as such executive on his 
ceasing to be a director.  
(5) The directors nominated under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2) of section 8 shall hold o ffice for such 
period not exceeding one year at a time as the Central Government may determine , and the directors 
nominated under clauses ( d) and ( e) of sub -section ( 2) of section 8 shall hold office for such period as the 
Central Government may determine.  
(6) Every director, other than the Chairman, shall hold office during the pleasure of the Central 
Government.  
(7) The directors referred to in clauses ( b), (c) and ( e) of sub -section ( 2) of section 8 shall be paid 
such allowances as the Central Government  may determine.  
10. Meetings of Board .—(1) The Board shall meet at the head office of the National Dairy 
Development Board or any of its offices at such times as the Chairman may direct, and shall observe such 
rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum at its 
meetings) as may be p
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987.pdf - page 7]
d to the transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum at its 
meetings) as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Chairman or, if he is unable to attend a meeting of the Board, any other director nominated by 
the Chairman in this behalf and, in the absence of s uch nomination or where there is no Chairman, any 
director chosen by the directors present from among themselves, shall preside at the meeting.  
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Board shall  be decided by a majority of 
votes of the d irectors present and voting, and in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairman or the 
person presiding shall have the right to exercise a second or casting vote.  
(4) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 3), every director of the Board shall have  one vote.  
11. Manner of transacting business of Board .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board 
shall, in the discha rge of its functions, act on s ound business principles with due regard to public interest.  
(2) Save as otherwise prescribed, the Chairman shall have the powers of general superintendence, 
direction, control and management of the affairs and business of the National Dairy Development Board, 
and he may exercise all other powers and do all acts and things which may be exercised or done by the 
Board.  
(3) The Chairman may, when he is unable to discharge his functions by reason of his being away or  
otherwise, authorise any whole -time director to discharge al l or any of his functions for a temporary 
period.  
(4) In the absence of the Cha irman and of an authorised whole -time director as referred to in         
sub-section ( 3), for whatsoever reason, the powers of the Chairman may be exercised by the senior -most 
of the whole -time directors referred to in clause ( d) of sub -section ( 2) of section 8.  
12. Management committees .—(1) The Board may from time to time constitute such number of 
management committees as it may deem fit for the purpo
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987.pdf - page 7]
 from time to time constitute such number of 
management committees as it may deem fit for the purpose of assisting the Board in the efficient 
discharge of its functions.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987.pdf - page 8]
8 
 (2) A management committee shall consist of such number of persons (whether directors or 
otherwise) as its members as the Board may determine, subject to the condition that in every such 
committee either the Chairman or a whole -time director shall be a member thereof.  
(3) Every mana gement committee shall function under the general control, direct ion and 
superintendence of the Board, and for such duration and in such manner as the Board may direct.  
(4) The minutes of every meeting of the management committees shall, as soon as may be,  be laid 
before the Board.  
13. Allowances, etc., of members of management committees .—(1) The members of any 
management committee, other than the Chairman and whole -time directors, may be paid such allowances, 
if any, as may be prescribed, for attending the meetings of the management committee or for attending to 
any other work of the National Dairy Development Board.  
(2) All other matters pertaining to the conduct of proceedings of the management committees shall be 
such as may be prescribed.  
14. Delegat ion of pow ers to management committee s, etc.—(1) The Board may delegate to any 
management committee or to any member thereof or to any officer of the National Dairy Development 
Board, subject to such conditions and limitations, if any, as may be specified by the Board, such of its 
powers and functions under this Act as it may deem necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions.  
(2) The Board may, if it considers it necessary so to do in the public interest, delegate any of its 
powers and functions, subject to such conditions and limitations, if any, as may be specified by it, to a   
co-operative federation at the National or State level, or to any organisation owned, managed, controlled 
or assisted by the National Dairy Development Board.  
15. Delegation of powers to whole -time directors, etc .—The Board may, from time to time, by 
order, delegate, subject to such general and special condi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987.pdf - page 8]
c .—The Board may, from time to time, by 
order, delegate, subject to such general and special conditions as it may deem fit to impose, the powers of 
appointment, termination, suspension and dismissal from serv ice of any employee of the Nat ional Dairy 
Development Board, — 
(a) who is drawing a salary in such higher grade as may be prescribed, to a whole -time director, 
and 
(b) who is drawing a salary in any grade, other than a h igher grade prescribed under clause  (a), to 
such officer of the National Dairy Development Board as it may deem fit:  
Provided that in relation to employees falling under clause ( b), the Chairman may, if he considers it 
necessary or expedient so to do, perform the functions of the Board under this section.  
CHAPTER  IV 
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE NATIONAL  DAIRY  DEVELOPMENT BOARD  
16. Powers and functions of National Dairy Development Board .—(1) Subject t o the provisions of 
this Act,—  
(a) it shall be the duty and function of the National Dairy Development Board to promote plan 
and organise programmes for the purposes of development of dairy and other agriculture based and 
allied industries and biologicals on an intensive and nation -wide basis and to render assistance in the 
implementation of suc h programmes;  
(b) it shall be the responsibility of the National Dairy De velopment Board to adopt the              
co-operative strategy in a more effective manner on an intensive and nation -wide basis and to take 
such steps as may be necessary for the pur poses aforesaid; and  
(c) the National Dairy Development Board may take such measures for carrying out the said 
purposes, and for the exercise of its powers and the performance of its functions and responsibilities 
under this Act, as it may consider necessa ry. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987.pdf - page 9]
9 
 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the measures 
referred to therein may provide for — 
(a) facilitating research and promotional activities in the fields of dairying, immunology , animal 
husbandry, agriculture and horticulture;  
(b) imparting technological know -how to such organisations in the co -operative or public sector 
as are engaged in the production, procurement, preservation or marketing of milk and milk products;  
(c) facilit ating the training of personnel for absorbing and utilising the technical know -how that 
may be imparted;  
(d) designing, planning, promoting developing, constructing, sponsoring and setting up of dairy 
industries and undertaking any other related promotiona l activity including the financing of the same;  
(e) providing consultancy and managerial services and the execution of any project on a turn -key 
basis or otherwise, furnishing integral services such as storage, transportation, processing, distribution 
of milk and milk products and to serve as a lead institution with reference to milk and milk products;  
(f) adopting such measures as may be practicable — 
(i) for the conservation of milk and milk products by avoidance of w aste at all stages or 
otherwise;  
(ii) to assist primary producers of milk and milk products and persons in the co -operative and 
public sector to get incentive prices; and  
(iii) to build up a national milk grid;  
(g) recommending to Government, as and when necessary, the maximum and minimum prices to 
be fixed for the purchase or sale of milk and, if so required, assist in the enforcement of it;  
(h) functioning as a channelising agency in respect of import and export of milk and milk 
products and of milch animals or bulls;  
(i) providing financ ial, technical, administrative , managerial or other assistance or taking such 
measures as may be necessary — 
(A) for the development (if required by the import of quality semen) and preser
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987.pdf - page 9]
 may be necessary — 
(A) for the development (if required by the import of quality semen) and preservation of high 
yielding cattle;  
(B) for adopting improved methods of cattle breeding;  
(C) for increasing production and supply of better and improved animal feed including 
fodder; and  
(D) generally for the enhancement of the cattle wealth of the country;  
(j) processing, promoting or  financing technological, industrial or economic research in milk and 
milk products in such manner as the Board may deem fit by the utilisation of available institutions or 
otherwise;  
(k) financing, in such manner as the Board may deem appropriate (includi ng contribution to 
capital), of co -operative federations, co -operative unions or co -operative enterprises or of any scheme 
in the co -operative or public sector intended to stimulate the production, preservation, distribution 
and consumption of milk and mil k products nation -wide;  
(l) regulating the dairy and allied industries and functioning as regulatory authority therefor, as 
may be required by the Central Government;  
(m) adopting measures for the development and co -ordination of organisations in the produ ction 
of milk and milk products so as to enable the primary producers thereof to become participants in, 
and beneficiaries of, the development and growth of dairy and allied industries;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987.pdf - page 10]
10 
 (n) collecting and compiling relevant data and statistics necessary fo r the efficient management of 
the national milk grid and national milch herd and on any other matter relating to dairying and allied 
industries;  
(o) promoting publicity on the research and development of dairy and allied industries;  
(p) promoting and  developing production, grading  and marketing of milk and milk products in 
various parts of the country;  
(q) co-operating with international organisation s and foreign experts and for functioning as the 
agent of the Central Government for the reception, uti lisation and disbursement of any gift of milk 
and milk products and any other foodstuffs;  
(r) building up of a reserve of buffer stock of basic commodities;  
(s) promoting the export of milk and milk products where, in the opinion of the Board, it is so 
required to avoid waste or to otherwise serve the public interest and generally for exporting any 
article produced, processed or promoted by it;  
(t) acquiring, holding and disposing of any property for the purposes of its business;  
(u) transferring the whole or any part of its managerial, technical or other functions in relation to 
any organisations receiving assistance from the National Dairy Dev elopment Board to the recipient  
organisation;  
(v) advancing o r lending money upon security of  movable or immovable property or otherwise;  
(w) borrowing money in such manner and upon such security as the Board may deem fit;  
(x) carrying on, either by itself or through any other organisations, any other business or class of 
business, in a case where such business or class of business was being carried on by the society or the 
dissolved company immediately before the appointed day;  
(y) promoting and encouraging co -operative effort among those engaged in the production of 
milk and milk products and other foodstuffs;  
(z) levying fees o r other charges for any assistance given or services rendered by the National 
Da
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987.pdf - page 10]
(z) levying fees o r other charges for any assistance given or services rendered by the National 
Dairy Development Board;  
(za) carrying on any other business or doing any other act or thing as may be necessary, 
incidental or conducive to further the objectives  of the National Dairy Development Board under this 
Act. 
(3) If, immediately before the appointed day, either the society or the dissolved company                
was engaged in the production, research and development, processing, marketing, import, export            
or other activities, or had been rendering any service or assistance, in relation to any article or         
product, other than milk and milk products or the dairy industry, then , notwithstanding anything 
contained in this Act or in any other law, the National Dairy Development Board may engage in the 
production, research and development, processing, marketing, import, export or other activities, or rend er 
such other services or assistance in relation to the said article or product as may be required, an d the 
provisions of sub -section s (1) and ( 2) shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to that article or product, as 
if any reference therein to milk an d milk products or to dairy and allied industries had been a reference to 
that article or product or service or activity.  
(4) Where the Central Government or the Government of any State considers that, having regard to 
the special expertise of the National  Dairy Development Board and the needs of the public, it is necessary 
or advisable to entrust the National Dairy Development Board with any activity, other than that to which 
the foregoing sub -sections apply, it may, entrust such activity to the National D airy Development Board, 
whereupon it shall be competent for the National Dairy Development Board to carry on such activity.  
(5) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, it shall be competent for the National 
Dairy Development Board to p artic
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987.pdf - page 10]
 of the foregoing powers, it shall be competent for the National 
Dairy Development Board to p articipate, with the prior approval of the Central Government, in any other 
organisation, financially, managerially or in any other manner.   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987.pdf - page 11]
11 
 CHAPTER  V 
PROVISIONS RELATING TO DIRECTORS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE  NATIONAL  DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD   
17. Provisions regarding members of board of society and directors of dissolved         
company .—Every person holding office as a member of the board of the society, or as a director of the 
dissolved company, immediately before the appointed day, shall, on and  from that day, cease to hold 
office as such member or director.  
18. Provisions relating to officers and other employees of society and of dissolved       
company .—Subject to the provisions of section 19, every full -time officer or other employee, holding 
office immediately before the appointed day, in the society or the dissolved company, shall, on and from 
the appointed day, become an officer or other employee, as the case may be, of the National Dairy 
Development Board and shall hold office or service in the National Dairy Development Board on the 
same terms and conditions of service as he would have had under the society or the dissolved company, 
as the case may be, and shall continue to do so unless and until his terms and conditions of service are 
duly altered by the Board.  
19. Power of Board to restructure and streamline organisational and functional set -up of 
National Dairy Development Board to secure utmost efficiency in functioning .—(1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Chapter, the National Dairy Development Board may make such orders or take 
such action as may be necessary for restructuring and streamlining the organisational and functional     
set-up of the National Dairy De velopment Board to secure utmost efficiency in its functioning, and the 
Board shall, for achieving this object, be competent to declare any officer or other employee or any class 
of officers or other employees to be redundant if it finds them redundant by way of being surplus or 
otherwise due to duplication of posts of the same nature, or absence of the special expertise required for 

<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987.pdf - page 11]
e due to duplication of posts of the same nature, or absence of the special expertise required for 
the post in the revised set -up, or the non -availability of posts in a particular office or unit of the National 
Dairy Develop ment Board and it is not practicable to accommodate him in the type of post in the 
particular grade.  
(2) Nothing in this  Chapter shall preclude the Board, if it is considered necessary for the purpose of 
rationalising the conditions of service of the offic ers and other employees so transferred to it, to change 
their designation, conditions of service or the scales of pay applicable to them or to reallocate their duties 
and functions.  
20. Schemes regarding compensa tion to redundant employees , etc.—(1) The officers or other 
employees declared as redundant in pursuance of section 19, shall be dealt with in accordance with such 
scheme or schemes as the Board may , with the previous approval of the Central Government, make in this 
behalf and different schemes ma y be made in relation to different classes or categories of officers and 
other employees.  
(2) The scheme or schemes referred to in sub -section ( 1) may provide for — 
(a) the quantum of compensation payable to any officer or other employee referred to in           
sub-section ( 1) and the mode of payment thereof:  
Provided that the compensation so payable shall in no case be less than that payable to him under 
the service conditions applicable to him if his services were dispensed with;  
(b) the quantum of ar rears of salary or other emoluments, provident fund, gratuity or any other 
amount that may be payable in accordance with the service conditions applicable to them;  
(c) the provision for appeal for the aggrieved redundant officers and other employees and for the 
appellate authority, being an officer not below the rank of a Joint Secretary to the Government of 
India in the Ministry dealing with Agriculture;  
(d) any other matter pertaining to the terminatio
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987.pdf - page 11]

India in the Ministry dealing with Agriculture;  
(d) any other matter pertaining to the termination of service consequent on their being declared 
redundant.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987.pdf - page 12]
12 
 21. Compensation for transfer of employees not payable .—The transfer of the services of any 
officer or other employee of the society or of the dissolved company to the National Dairy Development 
Board shall not entitle any such officer or other empl oyee to any compensation under the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947  (14 of 1947)  or any other law for the time being in force, and no such claim shall be 
entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority.  
22. Provident fund, gratuity, welfare and other funds .—(1) Where a provident fund has been 
established by the society or the dissolved company in respect of either of them for the benefit of the 
officers or other employees and the same stands vested in a trus t, the moneys and other assets standing to 
the credit of each provident fund shall continue to be held in trust with the same objects as were 
applicable before the appointed day and the trustees of such trusts immediately before the appointed day 
shall, su bject to the provisions of the trust deeds and the rules relating to the respective trusts, continue to 
function as trustees in respect of the respective provident fund until and unless otherwise directed by the 
National Dairy Development Board, and the ri ghts relating to the said trusts shall, as from the appointed 
day, vest in the National Dairy Development Board.  
(2) Where any gratuity, welfare or other fund had been established by the society or the dissolved 
company for the benefit of its officers or other employees and is in existence immediately before the 
appointed day, all moneys and other assets standing to the credit of or relatable to such gratuity, welfare 
or other fund shall vest in the National Dairy Development Board.  
(3) Notwithstanding any thing contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), the Board may give such 
directions relating to the trusts or funds or take such other action as it may deem fit so as to bring about 
uniformity or to effect integration in part o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987.pdf - page 12]
 other action as it may deem fit so as to bring about 
uniformity or to effect integration in part or in whole in such trusts or fund s. 
(4) The Board may, having regard to the welfare of the officers and other employees or their families, 
take such steps for the advancement of their health, education or other interests as may be prescribed and 
create such institutions as may be required  for the purpose.  
(5) Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this section shall derogate the power of the Board to make 
regulations for establishing or maintaining any provident fund, welfare fund, gratuity fund or other fund 
for any of its officers or oth er employees.  
CHAPTER  VI              
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
23. Borrowing powers of Board .—The Board may, with the previous approval of the Central 
Government or in accordance with the terms of any general or special authority given to it by the Central 
Government, borrow money from any source as it may deem fit for discharging all or any of its functions 
under this Act.  
24. Grants and loans by Central Government .—The Central Government may, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the National Dairy Development Board by 
way of grants or loans such sums of money as the Central Government may think fit for being utilised for 
the purposes of this Act.  
25. Grants, donations, etc .—The National Dairy Development Board may receive gifts, grants, 
donations or benefactions from Government or any other source in or outside India and the same shall be 
used by the Board for exercising its functions and discharging its responsibilities under this Act.  
(2) The National Dairy De velopment Board shall not receive any gifts, grants, donations or 
benefactions from a foreign government or any other source outside India except with the previous 
approval of the Central Government.  
26. National Dairy Development Board Fund .—(1) The National Dairy Development Board shall 
maintain
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987.pdf - page 12]
26. National Dairy Development Board Fund .—(1) The National Dairy Development Board shall 
maintain a Fund to be called the National Dairy Development Board Fund to which shall be credited — 
(a) all sums of money vested in the National Dairy Development Board under Chapter II;  
(b) all sums of money that may be provided by Government;   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987.pdf - page 13]
13 
 (c) all fees and other charges received by the National Dairy Development Board;  
(d) all sums of money generated from gift commodities by the National Dairy Development 
Board or received by it by way of grants, donations, benefactions, bequests or transfers; and  
(e) all sums of money received by the National Dairy Development Board in any other manner or 
from any other source.  
(2) All sums of money credited to the said Fund shall, subject to the regulations, if any, made in  this 
behalf, be deposited with the State Bank of India or any other nationalised bank.  
Explanation .—In sub-section “nationalised bank ” means a corresponding new bank as defined in the 
Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 (5 of 1970) and the Banking 
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980  (44 of  1980) . 
(3) The said Fund shall be applied towards meeting the administrative and other expenses of the 
National Dairy Development Board, including expenses i ncurred in the exercise of the powers and the 
discharge of its functions and responsibilities under section 16 or in relation to any of the activities 
referred to therein or for anything relatable thereto.  
27. Preparation of accounts and balance -sheet .—(1) The balance -sheet and accounts of the 
National Dairy Development Board shall be prepared in such form and in such manner as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) The Board shall cause the books and accounts of the National Dairy Development Board to be 
closed and balanc ed as on the 31st day of March each year or such other date as the Board may, with the 
concurrence of the Central Government, decide.  
28. Audit .—(1) The accounts of the National Dairy Development Board shall be audited by auditors 
duly qualified to act as auditors of companies under the Companies Act, and the appointment o f auditors 
and remuneration pay able to them shall be subject to the approval of the Central Government.  
(2) Every auditor in 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987.pdf - page 13]
pay able to them shall be subject to the approval of the Central Government.  
(2) Every auditor in the performance of his duties shall have at all reasonable time s access to books, 
accounts and other documents of the National Dairy Development Board.  
(3) The auditors shall submit their report to the Board which shall forward a copy of their report to 
the Central Government.  
29. Reports to be laid before Parliament .—The Central Government shall cause the report of the 
auditors under section 28 to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament as soon as may be after such 
report is received by the Central Government.  
30. Power to call for repayment before agreed period .—Notwithstanding anything contained in 
any agreement to the contrary, the Board may, by notice in writing, require any person to which the 
National Dairy Development Board or the society or the dissolved company has granted any loan or 
advance, to discharg e forthwith in full, its liabilities to the Board, — 
(a) if it appears to the Board that any false or misleading information in any material particular 
was given in the application for the loan or advance; or  
(b) if the person has failed to comply with the terms of its contract in the matter of the loan or 
advance; or  
(c) if there is a reasonable apprehension that the person is unable to pay his debts or that 
proceedings for liquidation may be commenced in respect thereof; or  
(d) if the property pledged, mortgaged, hypothecated or assigned as security for the loan or 
advance is not insured and kept insured by the person to the satisfaction of the Board (or depreciates 
in value to such an extent that, in the opinion of the Board, further security to the sat isfaction of the 
Board should be given and such security is not given after demand); or  
(e) if, without due permission, any machinery, plant or other equipment (whether forming par t of 
security or not) is removed from the concerned premises without being r eplaced; or
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987.pdf - page 13]
orming par t of 
security or not) is removed from the concerned premises without being r eplaced; or  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987.pdf - page 14]
14 
 (f) if it appears to the Board that any condition in the loan agreement relating to the supply of 
goods or implementation of the project is being substantially violated; or  
(g) if, for any other reason, the Board considers it necessary so to do  for protecting the interests of 
the National Dairy Development Board.  
31. Special provisions for enforcement of claims by National Dairy Development             
Board .—(1) Where any person, in breach of any agreement, makes any default in the repayment of any 
loan or advance or any instalment thereof (or in meeting its obligations in relation to the guarantee given 
by the National Dairy Development Board) or otherwise fails to comply with the terms of agreement with 
the Board or where the Board requires any  person to make immediate repayment of any loan or advance 
under section 30 and the person fails to make such repayment, then, without prejudice to the provisions of 
section 69 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882  (4 of 1882) , any officer of the National Dairy 
Development Board, generally or specially authorised by the Board in  this behalf, may apply to the c ourt 
for one or more o f the following reliefs, namely :— 
(a) for an order for the sale of the property pledged, mortgaged, hypothecated or assigned to the 
National Dairy Development Board as security for the loan or advance; or  
(b) for transferring the management of any org anisation to the National Dairy Development    
Board; or  
(c) for an ad interim  injunction where there is apprehension that the machinery or other 
equipment is being removed from the premises of the organisation without due permission.  
(2) The procedure for making an application under sub -section ( 1) and for the disposal thereof shal l 
be such as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER  VII 
MISCELLANEOUS  
32. Defects in appointments not to invalidate acts, etc., of Board .—No act or proceeding of the 
Board or of any committee of the National Dairy Development Board sh
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987.pdf - page 14]
 .—No act or proceeding of the 
Board or of any committee of the National Dairy Development Board shall be questioned on the ground 
merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution of, the Board or the committee, as 
the case may be.  
33. Protection of acts done in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 
National Dairy Development Board  or any director or any officer or other employee of the Board or any 
other person authorised by the Board to discharge any functions under this Act, for any loss or damage 
caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended t o be done in pursuance 
of this Act or of any other law or provision having the force of law.  
34. Indemnity of directors .—Every director shall be indemnified by the National Dairy 
Development Board against all losses and expenses incurred by him, in, or in relation to, the discharge of 
his duties, except such as are caused by his own wilful act or default.  
35. Obligation as to fidelity and secrecy .—(1) The Board sh all not, except as otherwise required by 
this Act or any other law, divulge any information relating to, or to the affairs of, the National Dairy 
Development Board or of the society or of the dissolved comp any except in circumstances in w hich it is 
in accordance with the law or practice and usage customary among financial institutions, necessary or 
appropriate for the Board to divulge such information.  
(2) Every director, member of a committee, auditor or officer or other employee of the National Dairy 
Development Board shall, before entering upon his duties, make a declaration of fidelity and sec recy in 
the form set out in the Schedule.  
36. Recruitment of additional officers and other employees .—Nothing contained in Chapter V 
shall be deemed to prejudice the right of the National Dairy Development Board to create such number of 
additional posts or  to appoint such number of additional offi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987.pdf - page 14]
pment Board to create such number of 
additional posts or  to appoint such number of additional officers or other employees as it may consider 
necessary or desirable for the efficient discharge of the functions of the National Dairy Development 
Board and where any such officer or other employee is appointed, the terms and conditions of service, 
including inter se  seniority, may also be determined by the Board.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987.pdf - page 15]
15 
 37. Liquidation only under orders of Central Government .—No provision of any law relating to 
the winding up of companies or corporations shall apply to the National Dairy Development Board and it 
shall not be placed in liquidation save by an order of the Central Government and in such manner as it 
may direct.  
38. Delegation of certain powers by Central Government .—(1) The Central Government may, on 
the recommendation of the National Dairy Development Board, if satisfied that it is necessary so to do in 
the public interest, make any scheme for the purpose of enabling the National Dairy Development Board 
to undertake and perform any of the activities or fu nctions of the Central Government relatable to dairy, 
foodstuffs and connected industries, particularly with reference to matters related to the development of 
the national milk grid by the regulation of the production, procurement, marketing, export -impor t, 
maintenance of standards or such like activities (including the collection and compilation of statistics and 
relevant data).  
(2) Every scheme made under sub -section ( 1) shall be published in the Official Gazette and may 
contain such conditions, restrict ions or limitations as the Central Government may deem fit to impose.  
39. Transitional provisions for auditors .—Any auditor appointed in relation to the society or the 
dissolved company, functioning immediately before the appointed day, may, notwithstanding anything 
contained in this Act, be continued by the National Dairy Development Board for such period and on 
such terms as may be considered necessary.  
40. Transitional provisions with regard to Chairman and Board .—The Chairman of the societ y, 
holding office immediately before the appointed day, shall be the Chairman of the National Dairy 
Development Board until a Chairman is nominated in accordance with the provisions of this Act and he 
shall be competent to perform the functions of the Boar d until the constitution of th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987.pdf - page 15]
s Act and he 
shall be competent to perform the functions of the Boar d until the constitution of the Board under this 
Act. 
41. Management or assistance to others to continue .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby 
declared that where, before the appointed day, either the society or the dissolved company was managing 
any ot her organisation or rendering any technical or other assistance to any organisation or person, the 
National Dairy Develop ment Board may continue to render  the same or similar service to such extent, for 
such period and with such modifications as the Board may deem fit.  
42. Mother Dairy to be a subsidiary unit of National Dairy Development Board .—The 
undertaking known as the Mother Dairy, Delhi, shall, on and from the appointed day, become a 
subsidiary unit of the National Dairy Development Board but shall r etain its separate character, unless 
otherwise decided by the Board.  
43. Formation of companies with previous approval of Central Government .—(1) Where the 
Board considers it necessary so to do, for the implementation of any of its o bjectives, it may, subject to 
the previous approval of the Central Government form one or more companies either by itself or in 
conjunction with any of its subsidiaries or with any other undertaking.  
(2) Where any company has been formed in  pursuance of sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) in the case of a company formed by the Board by itself or along with its subsidiaries, it may 
contribute such capital, transfer such of its assets or render such assistance, as may be required, so as 
to enable the company so formed to function; and  
(b) in any other case, it may contribute capital, transfer assets or render assistance in such manner 
and to such extent as the Board may deem fit subject to specific previous approval of the Central 
Government in that regard.  
44. [ Exemption from tax on income ] Omitted by Act 20 of 2002  (20 of 2002 ) s.162  
(w.e.f.  1-4-2003).  
45. Returns .—The National Dair
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987.pdf - page 15]
itted by Act 20 of 2002  (20 of 2002 ) s.162  
(w.e.f.  1-4-2003).  
45. Returns .—The National Dairy Development Board shall furnish, from time to time, to the 
Central Government such returns as the Central Government may require.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987.pdf - page 16]
16 
 46. Power to make schemes and regulations regarding service matters retrospectively .—Any 
scheme or regulation made under this Act in relation to conditions of service or like matters of officers or 
other employees of the National Dairy Development Board, may be made retrospectively from any date 
not earlier than the appointed day.  
47. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in the Companies Act, the Industrial Disputes                       
Act, 1947  (14 of 1947)  or any other law for the time being in force or in any instrum ent having effect by 
virtue of any law other than this Act, or in any decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority.  
48. Power to make regulations .—(1) The Board may, by notification in the Gazette of India, make 
regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act and the schemes made thereunder, to provide 
for all matters for which provision is necessary or expedient for the purpose of giving effect to the 
provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the genera lity of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) the procedure to be followed for the transaction of business at the meetings of the Board and 
the number of members which shall form quorum at a  meeting under sub -section ( 1) of section 10;  
(b) the allowan ces to be paid to the members of any management committee, other than the 
Chairman and whole -time directors, for attending the meetings of the management committee or for 
attending to any other w ork of the National Dairy Development Board under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 13 and the other matters pertaining to the conduct of proceedings of the management 
committees under sub -section ( 2) of that section;  
(c) the higher grade for the purposes of clause ( a) of section 15;  
(d) the particulars of 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987.pdf - page 16]
ion;  
(c) the higher grade for the purposes of clause ( a) of section 15;  
(d) the particulars of the steps for the advancement of the health, education or other interests of 
the officers and other employees or their families as referred to in sub -section ( 4) of section 22;  
(e) the matters of detail rega rding establishment or maintenance of funds referred to in             
sub-section ( 5) of section 22;  
(f) the conditions subject to which sums of money are to be deposited under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 26;  
(g) the form and manner in which the balance -sheet and accounts of the National Dairy 
Development Board shall be prepared under sub -section ( 1) of section 27;  
(h) the procedure for making an application under sub -section ( 1) of section 31 and for the 
disposal thereof under sub -section ( 2) of that section;  
(i) conditions of service of officers and other employees;  
(j) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed.  
49. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central  Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necess ary for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of fiv e years from the appointed day.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
50. Schemes and regulations to be laid before Parliament .—Every scheme and every regulation 
made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, 
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and, if, before the ex piry of the session immediately following the session or 
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987.pdf - page 16]
mmediately following the session or 
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the scheme or 
regulation or both Houses agree that the scheme or regulation should not be made, the scheme or 
regula tion shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that scheme or regulation .  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987.pdf - page 17]
17 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 35  (2)] 
Declaration of fidelity and secrecy  
I, ................. do hereby declare that I will faithfully, truly, and to the best of my skill and ability 
execute and perform the duties required of me as Chairman, director, member of committee, auditor, 
officer or other employee (as the case may be) of the National Dairy Development Board an d which 
properly relate to the o ffice or position held by me in or in relation to the National Dairy Development 
Board.  
I further declare  that I will not communicate or allow to be communicated to any person not legally 
entitled thereto any information relating to the affairs of any person having any dealing with the National 
Dairy Development Board nor will I allow any such person to inspe ct or have access to any books or 
documents belonging to or in the possession of the National Dairy Development Board and relating to the 
business of the National Dairy Development Board or the business of any person having any dealing with 
the National Da iry Development Board.  
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 1]
1 THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881  
_____________  
ARRENGMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
PREAMBLE.  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
   Local extent,  
   Saving of usages relating to hundis, etc. , 
   Commencement.  
2. [Repealed .]. 
3. Interpretation -clause.  
   “Banker. ” 
CHAPTER II  
OF NOTES , BILLSAND  CHEQUES  
4. “Promissory note .” 
5. “Bill of exchange .” 
6. “Cheque .” 
7.  “Drawer” , “Drawee”.  
 “Drawee in case of need .” 
 “Acceptor .” 
 “Acceptor for honour .” 
 “Payee .” 
8. “Holder .” 
9. “Holder in due course .” 
10. “Payment in due course .” 
11. Inland instrument.  
12. Foreign instrument.  
13. “Negotiable instrument .” 
14. Negotiation.  
15. Indorsement.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 2]
2 SECTIONS  
16. Indorsement “in blank” and “in f ull”. 
    “Indorsee .” 
17. Ambiguous instruments.  
18. Where amount is stated differently in figures and words.  
19. Instruments payable on demand.  
20. Inchoate stamped instruments.  
21. “At sight”  —“On presentment .” 
 “After sight .” 
22. “Maturity .” 
Days of grace.  
23. Calculating maturity of bill or note payable so many months after date or sight.  
24. Calculating maturity of bill or note payable so many days after date or sight.  
25. When day of maturity is a holiday.  
CHAPTER III  
P A  R T  I E  S  T  O   N O T  E  S,   B I L  L  S   A  N D   C H E Q  U E  S  .  
26.  Capacity to make, etc., promissory notes, etc.  
Minor.  
27. Agency.  
28. Liability of agent signing.  
29. Liability of legal representative signing.  
30. Liability of drawer.  
31. Liability of drawee of cheque.  
32. Liability of maker of note and acceptor of bill.  
33. Only drawee can be acceptor except in need or for honour.  
34. Acceptance by several drawees not partners.  
35. Liability of indorser.  
36. Liability of prior parties to holder in due course.  
37. Maker, drawer and acceptor principals.  
38. Prior party a principal in respect of each subsequent party.  
39. Suretyship.  
40. Discharge of indorser ’s liability.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 3]
3 SECTIONS  
41. Acceptor bound, although indorsement forged.  
42. Acceptance of bill drawn in fictitious name.  
43. Negotiable instrument made, etc., without consideration.  
44. Partial absence or failure of money -consideration.  
45. Partial failure of consideration not consisting of money.  
45A. Holder ’s right to dupli cate of lost bill.  
CHAPTER IV  
OF NEGOTIATION  
46. Delivery.  
47. Negotiation by delivery.  
48. Negotiation by indorsement.  
49. Conversion of indorsement in blank into indorsement in full.  
50. Effect of indorsement.  
51. Who may negotiate.  
52. Indorser  who excludes his own liability or makes it conditional.  
53. Holder deriving title from holder in due course.  
54. Instrument indorsed in blank.  
55. Conversion of indorsement in blank into indorsement in full.  
56. Indorsement for part of sum due.  
57. Legal representative cannot by delivery only negotiate instrument indorsed by deceased.  
58. Instrument obtained by unlawful means or for unlawful consideration . 
59. Instrument acquired after dishonour or when overdue . 
Accommodation note or bill . 
60. Instrument n egotiable till payment or satisfaction . 
C  H A  P  T E  R  V  
O F    P R  E  S  E  N  T  M  E  N  T  
61. Presentment for acceptance.  
62. Presentment of promissory note for sight.  
63. Drawee’s time for deliberation . 
64. Presentment for payment.  
65. Hours for presentment.  
66. Presentment for payment of instrument payable after date or sight.  
67. Presentment for payment of promissory note payable by instalments.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 4]
4 SECTIONS  
68. Presentment for payment of instrument payable at specified place and not elsewhere.  
69. Instrument payable at specified place.  
70.Presentment where no exclusive place specified.  
71. Presentment when maker, etc., has no known place of business or residence.  
72. Presentment of cheque to charge drawer.  
73. Presentment of cheque to charge any other person.  
74. Presentment of instrument payable on demand.  
75. Presentment by or to agent, representative of deceased, or assignee of insolvent.  
75A. Excuse for delay in presentment for acceptance or payment.  
76. Whe n presentment unnecessary.  
77. Liability of banker for negligently dealing with bill presented for payment.  
CHAPTER VI  
OF PAYMENT  AND INTEREST  
78. To whom payment should be made.  
79. Interest when rate specified.  
80. Interest when no rate specified.  
81. Delivery of instrument on payment , or indemnity in case of loss.  
CHAPTER VII  
OF DISCHARGE FROM LIABILITY ON NOTES , BILLS AND CHEQUES  
82. Discharge from liability.  
 (a) by cancellation ; 
 (b) by release ; 
 (c) by payment.  
83. Discharge by allowing drawee more  than forty -eight hours to accept.  
84. When cheque not duly presented and drawer damaged thereby.  
85. Cheque payable to order.  
85A. Drafts drawn by one branch of a bank on another payable to order.  
86. Parties not consenting discharged by qualified or limi ted acceptance.  
87. Effect of material alteration.  
 Alteration by indorsee.  
88. Acceptor or indorser bound notwithstanding previous alteration.  
89. Payment of instrument on which alteration is not apparent.  
90. Extinguishment of rights of action on bill in  acceptors ’ hands.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 5]
5 CHA PTER  VIII 
OF NOTIC E OF DISHONOUR  
SECTIONS  
91. Dishonour by non -acceptance.  
92. Dishonour by non -payment.  
93. By and to whom notice should be given.  
94. Mode in which notice may be given.  
95. Party receiving must transmit notice of dishonour.  
96. Agent for presentment.  
97. When party to whom notice given is dead.  
98. When notice of dishonour is unnecessary.  
CHAPTER IX  
O F   N O  T  I N G    A  N D   P R  O T  E  S T  
99. Noting.  
100. Protest.  
     Protest for better security.  
101. Contents of protest.  
102. Notice of protest . 
103. Protest for non -payment after dishonour by non -acceptance.  
104. Protest of foreign bills.  
104A. When noting equivalent to protest.  
CHAPTER X  
O F   R E  A  S  O  N  A  B  L  E    T I  M  E 
105. Reasonable time.  
106. Reasonable time of giving notice of dishonour.  
107. Reasonable time for transmitting such notice.  
CHAPTER XI  
OF ACCEPTANCE AND PAYMENT FOR HONOUR AND REFERENCE IN CASE OF NEED  
108.    Acceptance for honour.  
109.  How acceptance for honour  must be made.  
110. Acceptance not specifying for whose honour it is made.  
111. Liability of acceptor for honour.  
112. When acceptor for honour may be charged.  
113. Payment for honour . 
114. Right of payer for honour.  
115. Drawee in case of need.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 6]
6 SECTIONS  
116. Acceptance and payment without protest.  
CHAPTER XII  
O F   C O  M  P  E  N  S  A  T  I  O  N  
 117. Rules as to compensation . 
CHAPTER XIII  
S P  E  C  I  A  L    R U  L  E  S    O  F    E V  I  D  E  N  C  E  
118. Presumptions as to negotiable instruments.  
  (a) of consideration;  
  (b) as to date;  
  (c) as to time of acceptance;  
  (d) as to time of transfer;  
  (e) as to order of indorsements;  
  (f) as to stamp;  
  (g) that holder is a holder in due course;  
119. Presumption on proof of protest.  
120. Estoppel against denying original v alidity of instrument.  
121. Estoppel against denying capacity of payee to indorse.  
122. Estoppel against denying signature or capacity of prior party.  
CHAPTER XIV  
O F   C R  O  S  S  E  D    C H  E  Q  U  E  S  
123. Cheque crossed generally.  
124. Cheque crossed specially.  
125. Crossing after issue.  
126. Payment of cheque crossed generally.  
Payment of cheque crossed specially.  
127. Payment of cheque crossed specially more than once.  
128. Payment in due course of crossed cheque.  
129. Payment of crossed cheque out o f due course.  
130. Cheque bearing “not negotiable”.  
131. Non -liability of banker receiving payment of cheque.  
131A. Application of Chapter to drafts.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 7]
7 CHAPTER  XV 
O F   B I  L  L  S    I  N    S E  T  S 
SECTIONS  
132.  Set of bills.  
133. Holder of first acquired part entitled to . 
 
CHAPTER XVI  
O F    I N  T  E  R  N  A  T  I  O  N  A  L   LA  W 
134. Law governing liability of maker, acceptor or indorser of foreign instrument.  
135. Law of place of payment governs dishonour.  
136. Instrument made, etc., out of India, but in accordance with the law of India . 
137. Presumption as to foreign law.  
CHAPTER XVII  
OF PENALTIES IN CASE OF DISHONOUR OF CERTAIN CHEQUES FOR  INSUFFICIENCY OF FUNDS IN THE 
ACCOUNTS  
 
138. Dishonour of cheque for insufficiency, etc., of funds in the account.  
139. Presumption in favour of holder.  
140. Defence which may not be allowed in any prosecution under section 138.  
141. Offences by companies.  
142. Cognizance of offences.  
142A. Validation for transfer of pending cases.  
143. Power of Court to try cases summ arily.  
143A. Power to direct interim compensation.  
144. Mode of service of summons.  
145. Evidence on affidavit.  
146. Bank’s  slip prima fa cie evidence of certain facts.  
147. Offences to be compoundable.  
148. Power of Appellate Court to order payment pending  appeal against conviction.  
SCHEDULE .—[Enactments repealed ]. Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1891                                    
(12 of 1891), s. 2 and Schedule I.
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 8]
8 THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881  
ACT NO. 26 OF 18811 
[9th December, 1881.]  
An Act to define and amend the law relating to Promissory Notes, Bills of Exchange and Cheques . 
Preamble. —Whereas it is expedient to define and amend the law relating to promissory notes, bills 
of exchange and cheques; It is hereby enacted as follows: — 
CHA PTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title. —This Act  may be called the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881.  
Local extent. Saving of usages relating to hundis, etc. —It extends to the whole of India 2*** but 
nothing herein contained affects the 3Indian Paper Currency Act, 1871  (3 of 1871), section 21, or affects 
any local usage relating to any instrument in an oriental language: Provided that such usages may be 
excluded by any words in the body of the instrument which indicate an intention that the legal relations of 
the parties thereto shall he governed by this Act;  
Commencement. —and it shall come into force on the first day of March, 1882.  
2. [Repeal of enactments .] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1891 (12 of 1891), s. 2 and 
the Schedule  I. 
3. Interpretation -clause. —In this Act — 
4*      *   *   *   * 
“Banker” .—5[“banker” includes any person acting as a banker and any post office savings bank;]  
6*  *  *    *   * 
CHAPTER II  
OF NOTES , BILLSAND CHEQUES  
4. “Promissory note.” —A “Promissory note” is an instrument in writing (not being a bank -note or a 
currency -note) containing an unconditional undertaking, signed by the maker, to pay a certain sum of 
money only to, or to the order of, a certain person, or to the bearer of the instrument.  
Illustrations  
A signs instruments in the following terms:  
(a ) “I promise to pay B or order Rs. 500.”  
(b) “I acknowledge myself to be indebted to B in Rs. 1,000, to be paid on demand, for value received.”  
(c) “Mr. B, I O U Rs. 1,000.”  
(d) “I promise to Pay B Rs. 500 an d all other sums which shall be due to him.”  
(e) “I promise to Pay B Rs. 500, 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 8]
to Pay B Rs. 500 an d all other sums which shall be due to him.”  
(e) “I promise to Pay B Rs. 500, first deducting thereout any money which he may owe me.”  
(f) “I promise to Pay B Rs. 500 seven days after my marriage with C.”  
 (g) “I promise to Pay B Rs. 500 on D's death, provided D leaves me enough to pay that sum.”   
                                                           
1. The Act has been extended to Goa, Daman and Diu with modifications, by Reg. 12 of 1962, s. 3 and Sch.,  (w.e.f. 1 -10-1965)  
extended to and brought into force in Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and Sch. I (w.e.f. 1 -7-1965), to the 
Union territory of Lakshadweep by Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 and  the Sch. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1967) [and to the State of Arunac hal Pradesh 
by Act 44 of 1993, s. 2 and  the Sch. (w.e.f. 1 -7-1994)].  
2. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir”, which were subs. by Act 3 of 1951, for “except Part B States”, omitted 
by Act 62 of 1956, s. 2 and the Sch. 
3. Rep. by the Indian Pap er Currency Act, 1923 (10 of 1923). See now the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934), s. 31.  
4. Definition of the word “India”, which was subs. by Act 3 of 1951, for the definition of the word “State”, omitted by Act 6 2 of 
1956, s. 2 and the Sch . 
5. Subs. by Act 37 of 1955, s. 2, for  the definition of the word “banker”.  
6. Omitted by Act 53 of 1952, s. 16 (w.e.f. 14 -2-1956).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 9]
9 (h) “I promise to Pay B Rs. 500 and to deliver to him my black horse on 1st January next.”  
The instruments respectively ma rked (a) and (b) are promissory notes. The instruments respectively ma rked (c), 
(d), (e), (f), (g) and (h)are not promissory notes.  
5. “Bill of exchange .”—A “bill of exchange ” is an instrument in writing containing an unconditional 
order, signed by the maker, directing a certain person to pay a certain sum of money only to, or to the 
order of, a certain person or to the bearer of the instrument.  
A promise or order to pay is not  “conditional”, within the meaning of this section and section 4, by 
reason of the time for payment of the amount or any instalment thereof being expressed to be on the lapse 
of a certain period after the occurrence of a specified even which, according to the ordinary expectation of 
mankind, is certain to happen, although the time of its happening may be uncertain.  
The sum payble may be “certain”, within the meaning of this section and section 4, although it 
includes future interest or is payable at an indi cated rate of exchange, or is according to the course of 
exchange, and although the instrument provides that, on default of payment of an instalment, the balance 
unpaid shall become due.  
The person to whom it is clear that the direction is given or that pa yment is to be made may be a 
“certain person”, within the meaning of this section and section 4, although he is mis -named or 
designated by description only.  
1[6. “Cheque .”—A “cheque” is a bill of exchange drawn on a specified banker and not expressed to 
be payable otherwise than on demand and it includes the electronic image of a truncated cheque and a 
cheque in the electronic form.  
Explanation I.—For the purposes of this section, the expressions — 
2[(a) “a cheque in the electronic form ” means a cheque drawn in electronic form by using any 
computer resource and signed in a secure system with digital signature (with or without biom
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 9]
ng any 
computer resource and signed in a secure system with digital signature (with or without biometrics 
signature) and asymmetric crypto system or with electronic signature, as the case may be ;] 
(b) “a trunc ated cheque” means a cheque which is truncated during the course of a clearing cycle, 
either by the clearing house or by the bank whether paying or receiving payment, immediately on 
generation of an electronic image for transmission, substituting the furth er physical movement of the 
cheque in writing.  
Explanation II.— For the purposes of this section, the expression “clearing house” means the clearing 
house managed by the Reserve Bank of India or a clearing house recognised as such by the Reserve Bank 
of In dia.] 
3[Explanation  III.—For the purposes of this section, the expressions “asymmetric crypto system ”, 
“computer resource ”, “digital signature ”, “electronic form ” and “electronic signature ” shall have the same 
meanings respectively assigned to them in the Information Technology Act, 2000(21 of 2000).]  
7. “Drawer ” “Drawee ”.—The maker of a bill of exchange or cheque is called the “drawer”; the 
person thereby directed to pay is called the “drawee”.  
“Drawee in case of need ”.— When in the Bill or in any indorsement thereon the name of any person 
is given in addition to the drawee to be resorted to in case of need such person is called a “drawee in case 
of need.”  
“Acceptor ”.—After the drawee of a bill has si gned his assent up on the bill, or, if there are more parts 
thereof than one, upon one of such parts, and delivered the same, or given notice of such signing to the 
holder or to some person on his behalf, he is called the “acceptor”.  
“Acceptor for honour ”.— 4[When a bill of exchange has been noted or protested for non -acceptance 
or for better security,] and any person accepts it supra protest for honour of the drawer or of any one of 
the indorsers, such person is called an “acceptor for honour”.  
                    
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 9]
of any one of 
the indorsers, such person is called an “acceptor for honour”.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 55 of 2002, s. 2, for section 6  (w.e.f. 6 -2-2003).  
2. Subs. by Act 26 of 2015, s.2, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 15 -6-2015)  
3. The Explanation  III, ins. by  s. 2, ibid, (w.e.f. 15 -6-2015).  
4. Subs. by Act 2 of 1885, s. 2, for “When acceptance is refused and the bill is protested for non -acceptance.”  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 10]
10 “Payee ”.—The person named in t he instrument, to whom or to whose order the money is by the 
instrument directed to be paid, is called the “Payee”.  
8. “Holder ”.—The “holder” of a promissory note, bill of exchange or cheque means any person 
entitled in his own name to the possession thereof and to receive or recover the amount due thereon from 
the parties thereto.  
Where the note, bill or cheque is lost or destroyed, its holder is the person so entitled at the time of 
such loss or destruction.  
9. “Holder in due course ”.—“Holder in due course” means any person who for consideration 
became the possessor of a promissory note, bill of exchange or cheque if payable to bearer,  
or the payee or indorsee thereof, if 1[payable to order,]  
before the amount mentioned in it became payable, and witho ut having sufficient cause to believe that 
any defect existed in the title of the person from whom he derived his title.  
10. “Payment in due course ”.—“Payment in due course” means payment in accordance with the 
apparent tenor of the instrument in good fait h and without negligence to any person in possession thereof 
under circumstances which do not afford a reasonable ground for believing that he is not entitled to 
receive payment of the amount therein mentioned.  
11. Inland instrument. —A promissory note, bil l of exchange or cheque drawn or made in 2[India] 
and made payable in, or drawn upon any person resident in , 2[India] shall be deemed to be an inland 
instrument.  
12. Foreign instrument.  —Any such instrument not so drawn, made or made payable shall be 
deeme d to be a foreign instrument.  
13.“Negotiable instrument”. —3[(1) A “negotiable instrument” means a promissory note, bill of 
exchange or cheque payable either to order or to bearer.  
Explanation (i)—A promissory note, bill of exchange or cheque is payable to order which is 
expressed to be so payable or which is expressed to be payable to a particular person, and does not 
contain words pro
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 10]
 payable or which is expressed to be payable to a particular person, and does not 
contain words prohibiting transfer or indicating an intention that it shall not be transferable.  
Explanation (ii)—A promissory note, bill of exchange or cheque is payble to bearer which is 
expressed to be so payable or on which the only or last indorsement is an indorsement in blank.  
Explanation (iii)—Where  a promissory note, bill of exchange or cheque, either originally or by 
indorsement, is expressed to be payable to the order of a specified person, and not to him or his 
order, it is nevertheless payable to him or his order at his option.]  
4[(2) A negotiable instrument may be made payable to two or more payees jointly, or it m ay be made 
payable in the alternative to one of two, or one or some of serveral payees.]  
14. Negotiation. —When  a promissory note, bill of exchange or cheque is transferred to any person, 
so as to constitute that person the holder thereof, the instrument is  said to be negotiated.  
15. Indorsement. —When  the maker or holder of a negotiable instrument signs the same, otherwise 
than as such maker, for the purpose of negotiation, on the back or face thereof or on a slip of paper 
annexed thereto, or so signs for th e same purpose a stamped paper intended to be completed as a 
negotiable instrument, he is said to indorse the same, and is called the “indorser”.  
16. Indorsement “in blank” and “in f ull”.—5[(1)] If the indorser  signs his name only, the 
indorsement is said to be “in blank,” and if he adds a direction to pay the amount mentioned in the 
instrument to, or to the order of, a specified person, the indo rsement is said to be “in full”,  and the 
person so specified  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 8 of 1919. s. 2, for “payable to, or to the order of, a payee,” . 
2. Subs. by Act 36 of 1957, s. 3 and the Second Schedule “a State”.  
3. Subs. by Act 8 of 1919, s. 3, for the sub -section  (1).
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 10]
. 3 and the Second Schedule “a State”.  
3. Subs. by Act 8 of 1919, s. 3, for the sub -section  (1). 
4. Ins. by Act 5 of 1914, s. 2.  
5. S. 16 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) by s. 3, ibid. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 11]
11  “Indo rsee”. —is called the “indorsee” of the instrument.  
1[(2) The provisions of this Act relating to a payee shall apply with the necessary modifications to an 
indorsee.]  
17. Ambiguous instruments. —Where  an instrument may be construed either as a promissory note or 
bill of exchange, the holder may at his election treat it as either, and the instrument shall be thenceforward 
treated accordingly.  
18. Where amount is stated differently in figures and words. —If the amount undertaken or 
ordered to be paid is state d differently in figures and in words, the amount stated in words shall be the 
amount undertaken or ordered to be paid.  
19. Instruments payable on demand. —A promissory note or bill of exchange, in which no time for 
payment is specified, and a cheque, are p ayable on demand.  
20. Inchoate stamped instruments. —Where  one person signs and delivers to another a paper 
stamped in accordance with the law relating to negotiable instruments then in force in 2[India], and 
either wholly blank or having written thereon an incomplete negotiable instrument, he thereby gives 
prima facie authority to the holder thereof to make or complete, as the case may be, upon it a 
negotiable instrument, for any amount specified therein and not exceeding the amount covered by the 
stamp. The person so signing shall be liable upon such instrument, in the capacity in which he signed 
the same, to any holder in due course for such amount : provided that no person other than a holder in 
due course shall recover from the person delivering the instrument anything in excess of the amount 
intended by him to be paid thereunder.  
21. “At sight”. —“On presentment”. —Ina promissory note or bill of exchange the expressions “at 
sight” and “on presentment” mean on demand. The expression “After sight” —“after sight” means, in a 
promissory note, after presentment for sight, and, in a bill of exchange, after acceptance, or noth ing for        
non-acceptance, or protest fo
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 11]
 and, in a bill of exchange, after acceptance, or noth ing for        
non-acceptance, or protest for non -acceptance.  
22. “Maturity”. —The maturity of a promissory note or bill of exchange is the date at which it falls 
due. 
Days of grace. —Every promissory note or bill of exchange which is not expressed to be payable on 
demand, at sight or on presentment is at maturity on the third day after the day on which it is expressed to 
be payable.  
23. Calculating maturity of bill or note payable so many months after date or sight. —In 
calculating the date at which a prom issary note or bill of exchange, made payable a stated number of 
months after date or after sight, or after a certain event, is at maturity, the period stated shall be held to 
terminate on the day of the month which corresponds with the day on which the in strument is dated, or 
presented for acceptance or sight, or noted for non -acceptance, or protested for non -acceptance, or the 
event happens, or, where the instrument is a bill of exchange made payable a stated number of months after 
sight and has been acce pted for honour, with the day on which it was so accepted. If the month in which 
the period would terminate has no corresponding day, the period shall be held to terminate on the last 
day of such month.  
Illustrations  
(a) A negotiable instrument, dated 29th January, 1878, it made payable at one month after date. The instrument is at 
maturity on the third day after the 28th February, 1878.  
(b) A negotiable instrument, dated 30th August, 1878, it made payable three months a fter date. The instrument is at maturity 
on the 3rd December, 1878.  
(c) A promissory note or bill of exchange, dated 31st August, 1878, is made payable three months after date. The instrument 
is at maturity on the 3rd December, 1878.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 5 of 1914, s. 3. 
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and  the Sch., for “the States”.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 11]
 5 of 1914, s. 3. 
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and  the Sch., for “the States”.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 12]
12 24. Calculating maturi ty of bill or note payable so many days after date or sight. —In calculating 
the date at which a promissory note or bill of exchange made payable a certain number of days after date 
or after sight or after a certain event is at maturity, the day of the date , or of presentment for acceptance or 
sight, or of protest for non -acceptance, or on which the event happens, shall be excluded.  
25. When day of maturity is a holiday. —When the day on which a promissory note or bill of 
exchange is at maturity is a public h oliday, the instrument shall be deemed to be due on the next 
preceding, business day.  
Explanation. —The expression “public holiday” includes Sundays: 1*** and any other day declared by 
the 2[Central Government], by notification in the Official Gazette, to be a public holiday.  
CHAPTER III  
PA RT IES T O  NOT ES, BIL L S A ND CHEQUES .  
26. Capacity to make, etc., promissory notes, etc. —Every person capable of contracting, according 
to the law to which he is subject, may bind himself and be bound by the making, drawing,  acceptance, 
indorsement, delivery and negotiation of a promissory note, bill of exchange or cheque.  
Minor. —A minor may draw, indorse, deliver and negotiate such instrument so as to bind all parties 
except himself.  
Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to empower a corporation to make, indorse or accept such 
instruments except in cases in which, under the law for the time being in force, they are so empowered.  
27. Agency. — Every person capable of binding himself or of being bound, as mentioned in section  
26, may so bind himself or be bound by a duly authorized agent acting in his name.  
A general authority to transact business and to receive and discharge debts does not confer upon an 
agent the power of accepting or indorsing bills of exchange so as to bin d his principal.  
An authority to draw bills of exchange does not of itself import an authority to indorse.  
28. Liability of agen
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 12]
to draw bills of exchange does not of itself import an authority to indorse.  
28. Liability of agent signing. —An agent who signs his name to a promissory note, bill of exchange 
or cheque without indicating thereon that he signs  as agent, or that he does not intend thereby to incur 
personal responsibility, is liable personally on the instrument, except to those who induced him to sign 
upon the belief that the principal only would be held liable.  
29. Liability of legal representative signing. —A legal representative of a deceased person who 
signs his name to a promissory note, bill of exchange or cheque is liable personally thereon unless he 
expressly limits his liability to the extent of the assets received by him as suc h. 
30. Liability of drawer. —The drawer of a bill of exchange or cheque is bound, in case of dishonour 
by the drawee or acceptor thereof, to compensate the holder, provided due notice of dishonour has been 
given to, or received by, the drawer as hereinafter  provided.  
31. Liability of drawee of cheque. —The drawee of a cheque having sufficient funds of the drawer in his 
hands properly applicable to the payment of such cheque must pay the cheque when duly required so to do, 
and , in default of such payment, must compensate the drawer for any loss or damage caused by such default.  
32. Liability of maker of note and acceptor of bill. —In the absence of a contract to the contrary, the 
maker of a promissory note and the acceptor before maturity of a bill of exchan ge are bound to pay the 
amount thereof at maturity according to the apparent tenor of the note or acceptance respectively, and the 
acceptor of a bill of exchange at or after maturity is bound to pay the amount thereof to the holder on demand.  
In default of  such payment as aforesaid, such maker or acceptor is bound to compensate any party to 
the note or bill for any loss or damage sustained by him and caused by such default.  
                                            
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 12]
r damage sustained by him and caused by such default.  
                                                           
1. The words “New Year's day, Christmas day:  if either of such days falls on a Sunday, the next following Monday: Good -
Friday:” omitted by Act 37 of 1955, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1956).  
2. Subs by the A.O. 1937, for “L.G”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 13]
13 33. Only drawee can be acceptor except in need or for honour. —No person except the d rawee of 
a bill exchange, or all or some of several drawees, or a person named therein as a drawee in case of need, 
or an acceptor for honour, can bind himself by an acceptance.  
34. Acceptance by several drawees not partners. —Where  there are several drawee s of a bill of 
exchange who are not partners, each of them can accept it for himself, but none of them can accept it for 
another without his authority.  
35. Liability of indorser. —In the absence of a contract to the contrary, whoever indorses and delivers a 
negotiable instrument before maturity without, in such it indorsement, expressly excluding or making 
conditional his own liability, is bound thereby to every subsequent holder, in c ase of dishonour by the 
drawee, acceptor or maker, to compensate such holder for any loss or damage caused to him by such 
dishonour, provided due notice of dishonour has been given to, or received by, such indorser as hereinafter 
provided.  
Every indorser a fter dishonour is liable as upon an instrument payable on demand.  
36. Liability of prior parties to holder in due course. —Every  prior party to a negotiable instrument 
is liable thereon to a holder in due course until the instrument is duly satisfied.  
37. Maker, drawer and acceptor principals. —The maker of a promissory note or cheque, the drawer of 
a bill of exchange until acceptance, and the acceptor are, in the absence of a contract to the contrary, 
respectively liable thereon as principal debtors, and the  other parties thereto are liable thereon as sureties for 
the maker, drawer or acceptor, as the case may be.  
38. Prior party a principal in respect of each subsequent party. —As between the parties so liable 
as sureties, each prior party is, in the absence of a contract to the contrary, also liable thereon as a 
principal debtor in respect of each subsequent party.  
Illustration  
A draws a bill payable to hi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 13]

principal debtor in respect of each subsequent party.  
Illustration  
A draws a bill payable to his own order on B, who accepts. A afterwards indorses the bill to C, C to D, and D to E. As 
between E and B, B is the principal debtor, and A, C and D are his sureties. As between E and A, A is the principal debtor, and C 
and D are his sureties. As between E and C, C is the principal debtor and D is his surety.  
39. Suretyship. —When  the holder of an accepted bi ll of exchange enters into any contract with the 
acceptor which, under section 134 or 135 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 (9 of 1872), would discharge 
the other parties, the holder may expressly reserve his right to charge the other parties, and in such c ase 
they are not discharged.  
40. Discharge of indorser's liability. —Where  the holder of a negotiable instrument, without the 
consent of the indorser, destroys or impairs the indorser ’s remedy against a prior party, the indorser is 
discharged from liability  to the holder to the same extent as if the instrument had been paid at maturity.  
Illustration  
A is the holder of a bill of exchange made payable to the order of B, which contains the following indorsements in 
blank: — 
First indorsement, “B”.  
Second indorsement, “Peter Williams”.  
Third indorsement, “Wright & Co.”   
Fourth indorsement. “John Rozario”.  
This bill A puts in suit against John Rozario and strikes out, without John Rozario's consent, the indorsements by Peter 
Williams and Wright & Co. A is no t entitled to recover anything from John Rozario.  
41. Acceptor bound, although, indorsement forged. —An acceptor of a bill of exchange already 
indorsed is not relieved from liability by reason that such indorsement is forged, if he knew or had reason 
to bel ieve the indorsement to be forged when he accepted the bill.  
42. Acceptance of bill drawn in fictitious name. —An acceptor of a bill of exchange drawn in a 
fictitious name and payable to the drawer's order is not, by reas
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 13]
 of a bill of exchange drawn in a 
fictitious name and payable to the drawer's order is not, by reaso n that such name is fictitious, rel ieved 
from liability to any holder in due course claiming under an indorsement by the same hand as the drawer's 
signature, and purporting to be made by the drawer.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 14]
14 43. Negotiable instrument made, etc., without consideration. —A negotiable instrument made, 
drawn, accepted, indorsed or transferred without consideration, or for a consideration which fails, creates 
no obligation of payment between the parties to the transaction. But if any such party has transferred the 
instrument with or without indorsement to  a holder for consideration, such holder, and every subsequent 
holder deriving title from him, may recover the amount due on such instrument from the transferor for 
consideration or any prior party thereto.  
Exception I.—No party for whose accommodation a n egotiable instrument has been made, drawn, 
accepted or indorsed can, if he have paid the amount thereof, recover thereon such amount from any 
person who became a party to such instrument for his accommodation.  
Exception II.—No party to the instrument who has induced any other party to make, draw, accept, indorse 
or transfer the same to him for a consideration which he has failed to pay or perform in full shall recover 
thereon an amount exceeding the value of the consideration (if any) which he has actually  paid or performed.  
44. Partial absence or failure of money -consideration. —When  the consideration for which a 
person signed a promissory note, bill of exchange or cheque consisted of money, and was originally 
absent in part or has subsequently failed in pa rt, the sum which a holder standing in immediate relation 
with such signer is entitled to receive from him is proportionally reduced.  
Explanation. —The drawer of a bill of exchange stands in immediate relation with the acceptor. The 
maker of a promissory no te, bill of exchange or cheque stands in immediate relation with the payee, and 
the indorser with his indorsee. Other signers may by agreement stand in immediate relation with a holder.  
Illustration  
A draws a bill on B for Rs. 500 payable to the order of A, B accepts the bill, but subsequently dishonours , it by 
non-payment. A sues 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 14]
ble to the order of A, B accepts the bill, but subsequently dishonours , it by 
non-payment. A sues B on the bill, B proves that it was accepted for value as to Rs. 400, and as an accommodation to 
the plaintiff as to the r esidue. A can only recover Rs. 400.  
45. Partial failure of consideration not consisting of money .—Where a part of the consideration 
for which a person signed a promissory note, bill of exchange or cheque, though not consisting of money, 
is ascertainable in  money without collateral enquiry, and there has been a failure of that part, the sum 
which a holder standing in immediate relation with such signer is entitled to receive from him is 
proportionally reduced.  
1[45A. Holder's right to duplicate of lost bill .—Where a bill of exchange has been lost before it is 
over-due, the person who was the holder of it may apply to the drawer to give him another bill of the 
same tenor, giving security to the drawer, if required, to indemnify him against all persons whatever  in 
case the bill alleged to have been lost shall be found again.  
If the drawer on request as aforesaid refuses to give such duplicate bill, he may be compelled to do 
so.] 
CHAPTER IV  
OF NEGOTIATION  
46. Delivery. —The making, acceptance or indorsement of a p romissory note, bill of exchange or 
cheque is completed by delivery, actual or constructive.  
As between parties standing in immediate relation , delivery to be effectual must be made by the party 
making, accepting or indorsing the instrument, or by a person  authorized by him in that behalf.  
As between such parties and any holder of the instrument other than a holder in due course, it may be 
shown that the instrument was delivered conditionally or for a special purpose only, and not for the 
purpose of transfe rring absolutely the property therein.  
A promissory note, bill of exchange or cheque payable to bearer is negotiable by the delivery thereof.  
A promissory note, bill of exchange or cheque payable to o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 14]
 is negotiable by the delivery thereof.  
A promissory note, bill of exchange or cheque payable to order is negotiable by the holder by 
indorsement and deli very thereof.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 2 of 1885, s. 3 . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 15]
15 47. Negotiation by delivery. —Subject to the provisions of section 58, a promissory note, bill of 
exchange or cheque payable to bearer is negotiable by delivery thereof.  
Exception .—A promissory note, bill of exchange or cheque delivered on con dition that it is not to 
take effect except in a certain event is not negotiable (except in the hands of a holder for value without 
notice of the condition) unless such event happens.  
Illustrations  
(a) A, the holder of a negotiable instrument payable to be arer, delivers it to B's agent to keep for B. The instrument has been 
negotiated.  
(b) A, the holder of a negotiable instrument payable to bearer, which is in the hands of A's banker, who is at the time the 
banker of B, directs the banker to transfer the in strument to B's credit in the banker's account with B. The banker does so, and 
accordingly now possesses the instrument as B's agent. The instrument has been negotiated, and B has become the holder of it.  
48. Negotiation by indorsement. —Subject to the prov isions of section 58, a promissory note, bill of 
exchange or cheque  1[payable to order], is negotiable by the holder by indorsement and delivery thereof.  
49. Conversion of indorsement in blank into indorsement in full. —The holder of a negotiable 
instrument indorsed in blank may, without signing his own name, by writing above the indorser ’s 
signature a direction to pay to any other person as indorsee, convert the indorsement in blank into an 
indorsement in full; and the h older does not thereby incur the responsibility of an indorser.  
50. Effect of indorsement. —The indorsement of a negotiable instrument followed by delivery 
transfers to the indorsee  the property therein with the right of further negotiation; but the indorsement 
may, by express words, restrict or exclude such right, or may merely constitute the indorsee an agent to 
indorse the instrument, or to receive its contents for the indorser, o r for some other specified person. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 15]
e the instrument, or to receive its contents for the indorser, o r for some other specified person.  
Illustrations  
B signs the following indorsements on different negotiable instruments payable to bearer. — 
(a) “Pay the contents to C only”.  
(b) “Pay C for my use.”  
(c)  “Pay C or order for the account of B.”  
(d) “the within must be credited to C.”  
These indorsements exclude the right of further negotiation by C.  
(e) “Pay C.”  
(f) “Pay C value in account with the Oriental Bank.”  
(g) “Pay the contents to C, being part of the c onsideration in a certain deed of assignment executed by C to the indorser 
and others.”  
These indorsements do not exclude the right of further negotiation by C.  
51. Who may negotiate. —Every  sole maker, drawer, payee or indorsee, or all of several joint 
make rs, drawers, payees or indorsees, of a negotiable instrument may, if the negotiability of such 
instrument has not been restricted or excluded as mentioned in section 50, indorse and negotiate the same.  
Explanation .—Nothing  in this section enables a maker or drawer to indorse or negotiate an 
instrument, unless he is in lawful possession or is holder thereof; or enables a payee or indorsee to indorse 
or negotiate an instrument, unless he is holder thereof.  
Illustration  
A bill is drawn payable to A or order. A indorses it to B, the indorsement  not containing the words “or ord er” or any 
equivalent words. B may negotiate the instrument.  
52. Indorser who excludes his own liability or makes it conditional. —The indorser  of a negotiable 
instrument may, by express words in the indorsement, exclude his own liability thereon, or make such 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 8 of 1919, s. 4, for “payable to the order of a specified person, or to a specified person or order ”. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 16]
16 liability or the right of the indorsee to receive the amount due thereon depend upon the happening of a 
specified event, although such eve nt may never happen.  
Where an indorser so excludes his liability and afterwards becomes the holder of the instrument, all 
intermediate indorsers are liable to him.  
Illustrations  
(a) The indorser of a negotiable instrument sign; his name  adding the words — “Without recourse” .  
Upon this indorsement he incurs no liability.  
(b) A is the payee and holder of a negotiable instrument. Excluding personal liability by an indorsement 
“without recourse” he transfers the instrument to B, and B indorses it to C, who indorses it to A. A is not only 
reinstated in his former rights, but has  the rights of an indorsee against B and C.  
 
53. Holder deriving title from holder in due course .—A holder of a negotiable instrument who 
derives title from a holder in due course has the rights thereon of that holder in due course.  
54. Instrument indorsed  in blank. —Subject  to the provisions hereinafter contained as to crossed 
cheques, a negotiable instrument indorsed in blank is payable to the bearer thereof even although 
originally payable to order . 
55. Conversion of indorsement in blank into indorsement in full. —If a negotiable instrument, 
after having been indorsed in blank, is indorsed in full, the amount of it cannot be claimed from the 
indorser in full, except by the person to whom it has been indorsed  in full, or by one who derives title 
through such  person.  
56. Indorsement for part of sum due. —No writing on a negotiable instrument is valid for the 
purpose  of negotiation if such writing purports to transfer only a part of the amount appearing to be due 
on the instrument; but where such amount has been  partly paid, a note to that effect may be indorsed on 
the instrument, which may then be negotiated for the balance.  
57. Legal representative cannot by delivery only negotiate instrument indorsed by deceased
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 16]
alance.  
57. Legal representative cannot by delivery only negotiate instrument indorsed by deceased. —
The legal representative of a deceased person c annot negotiate by delivery only a promissory note, bill of 
exchange or cheque payable to order and indorsed by the deceased but not delivered.  
58.  Instrument obtained by unlawful means or for unlawful consideration .—When a negotiable 
instrument has been lost, or has been obtained from any maker, acceptor or holder thereof by means of an 
offence or fraud, or for an unlawful consideration, no possessor or indorsee who claims through the 
person who found or so obtained t he instrument is entitled to receive the amount due thereon from such 
maker, acceptor or holder, or from any party prior to such holder, unless such possessor or indorsee is, or 
some person through whom he claims was, a holder thereof in due course.  
59. Instrument acquired after dishonour or when overdue .—The holder of a negotiable 
instrument, who has acquired it after dishonour, whether by non -acceptance or non -payment, with notice 
thereof, or after maturity, has only, as against the other parties, the rig hts thereon of his transferor : 
Accommodation note or bill .—Provided that any person who, in good faith and for consideration, 
becomes the holder, after maturity, of a promissory note or bill of exchange made, drawn or accepted 
without consideration, for th e purpose of enabling some party thereto to raise money thereon, may 
recover the amount of the note or bill from any prior party.  
Illustration  
The acceptor of a bill of exchange, when he accepted it, deposited with the drawer certain goods as a collateral security for 
the payment of the bill, with power to the drawer to sell the goods and apply the proceeds in discharge of the bill if it wer e not 
paid at maturity. The bill not having been paid at maturity, the drawer sold the goods and retained the proceeds , but indorsed the 
bill to A. A's title is subject to the sa
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 16]
ld the goods and retained the proceeds , but indorsed the 
bill to A. A's title is subject to the same objection as the drawer's title.  
60. Instrument negotiable till payment or satisfaction .—A negotiable instrument may be 
negotiated (except by the maker, drawee or acceptor after maturity) until  payment or satisfaction thereof 
by the maker, drawee or acceptor at or after maturity, but not after such payment or satisfaction.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 17]
17 C  H A  P  T E  R   V 
O F    P R  E  S  E  N  T  M  E  N  T  
61. Presentment for acceptance. —A bill of exchange payable after sight must, if no time or place is 
specified therein for presentment, be presented to the drawee thereof for acceptance, if he can, after 
reasonable search, be found, by a person entitled to demand acceptance, within a reasonable time after it 
is drawn, and in busines s hours on a business day. In default of such presentment, no party thereto is 
liable thereon to the person making such default.  
If the drawee cannot, after reasonable search, be found, the bill is disho noured.  
If the bill is directed to the drawee at a pa rticular place, it must be presented at that place; and if at the 
due date for presentment he cannot, after reasonable search , be found there, the till is dishonoured . 
1[Where authorized by agreement or usage, a presentment through the post office by means  of a registered  
letter is sufficient.]  
62. Presentment of promissory note for sight. —A promissory note, payable at a certain period after 
sight, must be presented to the maker thereof for sight (if he can after reasonable search be found) by a person 
entitled to demand payment, within a reasonable time after it is made and in business hours on a business day. 
In default of such presentment, no party thereto is liable thereon to the person making such default.  
63. Drawee’s time for deliberation .—The hol der must, if so required by the drawee of a bill of 
exchange presented to him for acceptance, allow the drawee  2[forty -eight] hours (exclusive of public 
holidays) to consider whether he will accept it.  
64. Presentment for payment .—3[(1)] Promissory notes, bills of exchange and cheques must be 
presented for payment to the maker, acceptor or drawee thereof respectively, by or on behalf of the holder 
as hereinafter provided. In default of such presentment, t he other parties there to are not liable thereon to 
such holder.  
1[Where authori
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 17]
h presentment, t he other parties there to are not liable thereon to 
such holder.  
1[Where authorized by agreement or usage, a presentment through the post office by means of a 
registered letter is sufficient.]  
Exception .—Where a promissory note is payable on demand and is not payable at a specified place, 
no presentment is necessary in order to charge the maker thereof.  
4[(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 6, where an electronic image of a truncated 
cheque is presented for payment, the drawee bank is entitled to demand any further information regarding 
the tru ncated cheque from the bank holding the truncated cheque in case of any reasonable suspicion 
about the genuineness of the apparent tenor of instrument, and if the suspicion is that of any fraud, 
forgery, tampering or destruction of the instrument, it is en titled to further demand the presentment of the 
truncated cheque itself for verification:  
Provided that the truncated cheque so demanded by the drawee bank shall be retained by it, if the 
payment is made accordingly.]  
65. Hours for presentment —Presentment for payment must be made during the usual  hours of 
business and, if at a banker's within banking hours.  
66. Presentment for payment of instrument payable after date or sight —A promissory note or 
bill of exchange, made payable at a  specified period after da te or sight thereof, must be presented for 
payment at maturity.  
67.  Presentment for payment of promissory note payable by instalments. —A promissory note 
payable by instalments must be presented for payment on the third day after the date fixed for payment  of 
each instalment; and non -payment on such presentment has the same effect as non -payment of a note at 
maturity.  
                                                           
1. Added by Act 2 of 1885, s. 4.  
2. Subs. by Act 12 of 1921, s. 2 , for “twenty -four”.  
3. Section 64 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 55 of 2002, s. 3 (w.e.f.
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 17]
enty -four”.  
3. Section 64 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 55 of 2002, s. 3 (w.e.f. 6 -2-2003).  
4. Ins. by s. 3 , ibid, (w.e.f. 6 -2-2003).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 18]
18 68. Presentment for payment of instrument payable at specified place and not elsewhere. —A 
promissory note, bill  of exchange or cheque made, d rawn or accepted payable at a specified place and not 
elsewhere must, in order to charge any party thereto, be presented for payment at that place.  
69. Instrument payable at specified place. —A promissory note or bill of exchange made, drawn or 
accepted pay able at a specified place must, in order to charge the maker or drawer thereof, be presented 
for payment at that place.  
70. Presentment where no exclusive place specified. —A promissory note or bill of exchange, not 
made  payable as mentioned in sections 68 and 69, must be presented for payment at the place of business 
(if any), or at the usual residence, of the maker, drawee or acceptor thereof, as the case may be.  
71. Presentment when maker, etc., has no known place of business or residence. —If the maker, 
drawee or acceptor of a negotiable instrument has no known place of business or fixed residence, and no 
place is specified in the instrument for presentment for acceptance or payment such presentment may be 
made to him in person wherever he can be found.  
72. Presentment of cheque to charge drawer. — 1[Subject  to the provisions of section 84,] a cheque 
must, in order to charge the drawer , be presented at the bank upon which it is drawn before the relation 
between the drawer and his banker has been altered to the prejudice of the drawer.  
73. Presentment of cheque to charge any other person. —A cheque must, in order to charge any 
person excep t the drawer, be presented within a reasonable time after delivery thereof by such person.  
74. Presentment of instrument payable on demand. —Subject  to the provisions of section 31, a 
negotiable instrument payable on demand must be presented for payment wit hin a reasonable time after it 
is received by the holder.  
75. Presentment by or to agent, representative of deceased, or assignee of insolvent. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 18]
the holder.  
75. Presentment by or to agent, representative of deceased, or assignee of insolvent. —
Presentment for acceptance or payment may be made to the duly authorized agent of the drawee, maker 
or accept  or, as the case may be, or, where the drawee, maker or acceptor has died, to his legal 
representative, or, where he has been declared an insolvent, to his assignee.  
2[75A. Excuse for delay in presentment for acceptance or payment —Delay  in presentment 3[for 
acceptance or payment] is excused if the delay is caused by circumstances beyond the control of the 
holder, and not imputable to his default, misconduct or negligence. When the cause of delay ceases to 
operate, presentment must be made within a reasonable time.] 
76. When presentment unnecessary. —No presentment for payment is necessary, and the instrument 
is dishonoured at the due date for presentment, in any of the following cases: —  
(a) if the maker, drawee or acceptor intentionally prevents the presentmen t of the instrument, 
or, 
if the instrument being payable at his place of business, he closes such place on a business day 
during the usual business hours, or,  
if the instrument being payable at some other specified place, neither he nor any person 
authoriz ed to pay it attends at such place during the usual business hours, or,  
if the instrument not being payable at any specified place, he cannot after due search be 
found;  
(b) as against any party sought to be charged therewith, if he has engaged to pay notwi thstanding 
non-presentment;  
(c) as against any party if, after maturity, with knowledge that the instrument has not been 
presented — 
he makes a part payment on account of the amount due on the instrument,  
or promises to pay the amount due thereon in whole o r in part,  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 6 of 1897, s. 2.  
2. Ins. by Act 25 of 1920 , s. 2. 
3. Subs. by Act 12 of 1921, s. 3,  for “for payment”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 18]
. by Act 25 of 1920 , s. 2. 
3. Subs. by Act 12 of 1921, s. 3,  for “for payment”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 19]
19 or otherwise waives his right to take advantage of any default in presentment for payment;  
(d) as against the drawer, if the drawer could not suffer damage from the want of such 
presentment.  
77. Liability of banker for negligently dealing with bill presented for payment. —When  a bill of 
exchange, accepted payable at a specified bank, has been duly presented there for payment and 
dishonoured, if the banker so negligently or improperly keeps, deals with or delivers back such bill as to 
cause loss to the holder, he must compensate the holder for such loss.  
CHAPTER VI  
OF PAYMENTAND  INTEREST  
78. To whom payment should be made. —Subject to the provisions of section 82, clause (c), 
payment of the amount due on a promissory note, bill of exchange or cheque must, in order to discharge 
the maker or acceptor, be made to the holder of the instrument.  
79. Interest when rate specified. —When  interest at a specified rate is expressly made payabl e on a 
promissory note or bill of exchange, interest shall be calculated at the rate specified, on the amount of the 
principal money due thereon, from the date of the instrument, until tender or realization of such amount, 
or until such date after the inst itution of a suit to recover such amount as the Court directs.  
80. Interest when no rate specified. — When  no rate of interest is specified in the instrument, 
interest on the amount due thereon shall, 1[notwithstanding any agreement relating to interest bet ween any 
parties to the instrument], be calculated at the rate of 2[eighteen per centum] per annum, from the date at 
which the same ought to have been paid by the party charged, until tender or realization of the amount 
due thereon, or until such date afte r the institution of a suit to recover such  a mount as the Court directs.  
Explanation. —When  the party charged is the indorser of an instrument dishonoured by non -payment , 
he is liable to pay interest only from the time that he receives notic
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 19]
ishonoured by non -payment , 
he is liable to pay interest only from the time that he receives notice of the dishon our. 
81. Delivery of instrument on payment or indemnity in case of loss. —3[(1)] Any person liable to 
pay, and called upon by the holder thereof to pay, the amount due on a promissory note, bill of exchange 
or cheque is before payment entitled to have it shown, and is on payment entitled to have it delivered up, 
to him, or if the instrument is lost or cannot be produced, to be indemnified against any further claim 
thereon against him.  
4[(2) Where the cheque is an electronic image of a truncated  cheque, eve n after the payment  the 
banker who received the payment shall be entitled to retain the truncated cheque.  
(3) A certificate issued on the foot of the printout of the electronic image of a truncated cheque by the 
banker who paid the instrument, shall be prima facie proof of such payment.]  
CHAPTER VII  
OF DISCHARGE FROM LIABILITY ON NOTES , BILLS AND CHEQUES  
82. Discharge from liability. —The maker, acceptor or indorser respectively of a negotiable 
instrument is discharged from liability thereon —  
(a) by cancellation. —to a holder thereof  who cancels such acceptor's or indorser’s name with 
intent to discharge him, and to all parties claiming under such holder;  
(b) by release. —to a holder thereof who otherwise discharges such maker, acceptor or indorser, 
and to all parties deriving title under such holder after notice of such discharge;  
(c) by payment. —to all parties  thereto, if the instrument is payable to bearer, or has been 
indorsed in blank, and such maker, acceptor or indorser makes payment in due cours e of the amount 
due thereon.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 30 of 1926, s. 2, for “except in cases provided for by the Code of Civil Procedure, s . 532”.  
2. Subs. by Act 66 of 1988, s. 2, for “six per centum” (w.e.f. 30 -12-1988).  
3. Section 81 r e-numbered as sub -s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 19]
 66 of 1988, s. 2, for “six per centum” (w.e.f. 30 -12-1988).  
3. Section 81 r e-numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereo f by Act 55 of 2002, s. 4 (w.e.f. 6 -2-2003).  
4. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 6 -2-2003).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 20]
20 83. Discharge by allowing drawee more than forty -eight hours to accept. —If the holder of a bill 
of exchange allows the drawee more than 1[forty -eight] hours, exclusive of public holidays, to consider 
whether he will accept the same, all previous parties not consenting to such allowance are thereby 
discharge from liability to such holder.  
2[84. When cheque not duly presented and drawer damaged thereby .—(1) Where a cheque is not 
presented for payment within a reasonable time of its issue, and the drawer or person on whose account it 
is drawn had the right, at the time when presentment ought to have been made, as between himself and 
the banker, to have the cheque paid and suffers actual damage through the delay, he is discharged t o the 
extent of such damage, that is to say, to the extent to which such drawer or person is a creditor of the 
banker to a large amount than he would have been if such cheque had been paid.  
(2) In determining what is a reasonble time, regard shall be had t o the nature of the instrument, the 
usage of trade and of bankers, and the facts of the particular case.  
(3) The holder of the cheque as to which such drawer of person is so discharged shall be a creditor, in 
lieu of such drawer or person, of such banker to the extent of such discharge and entitled to recover the 
amount from him.  
Illustrations  
(a) A draws a cheque for Rs. 1,000, and, when the cheque ought to be presented, has funds at the bank to meet 
it. The bank fails before the cheque is presented. The drawer is discharged, but the holder can prove against the bank 
for the amount of the cheque.  
(b) A draws a cheque at Umballa on a bank in Calcutta. The bank fails before the cheque could be presented in 
ordinary course. A is not discharged, for he has not  suffered actual damage through any delay in presenting the 
cheque.]  
85. Cheque payable to order. —3[(1)] Where a cheque payable to order purports to be endorsed by or 
on behalf of the payee, the draw
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 20]
(1)] Where a cheque payable to order purports to be endorsed by or 
on behalf of the payee, the drawee is discharged by payment in due course.  
4[(2) Where a cheque is originally expressed to be payable to bearer, the drawee is discharged 
by payment in due course to the bearer thereof, notwithstanding any endorsement whether in full or 
in blank appearing thereon, and notwithstanding that any such endorsement pu rports to restrict or 
exclude further negotiation.] 
5[85A. Drafts drawn by one branch of a bank on another payable to order .—where any draft, that 
is an order to pay money, drawn by one office of a bank upon another office of the same bank for a sum 
of mon ey payable to order on demand, purports to be endorsed by or on behalf of the payee, the bank is 
discharged by payment in due course.] 
86. Parties not consenting discharged by qualified or limited acceptance. —If the holder of a 
bill of exchange acquiesces in a qualified acceptance, or one limited to part of the sum mentioned in 
the bill, or which substitutes a different place or time for payment, or which, where the drawees are 
not partners, is not signed by all the drawees, all previous p arties whose conse nt is not obtained to 
such acceptance are discharged as against the holder and those claiming under him, unless on notice 
given by the holder they assent to such acceptance.  
Explanation. —An acceptance is qualified  
(a) where it is conditional, declaring the  payment to be dependent on the happening of an event 
therein stated;  
(b) where it undertakes the payment of part only of the sum ordered to be paid;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 12 of 1921, s. 2, for “twenty -four”.  
2. Subs. by Act 6 of 1897, s. 3, for s. 84.  
3. S. 85 re -numbered as sub -section (1) thereof by Act 17 of 1934, s. 2.  
4. Ins. by s. 2 , ibid.  
5. Ins. by Act 25 of 1930, s. 2.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 20]
5 of 1930, s. 2.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 21]
21 (c) where no place of payment being specified on the order, it undertakes the payment at a 
specified place , and not otherwise or elsewhere; or where, a place of payment being specified in the 
order, it undertakes the payment at some other place and not otherwise or elsewhere;  
(d) where it undertakes the payment at a time other than that at which under the orde r it would be 
legally due.  
87. Effect of material alteration. —Any material alteration of a negotiable instrument renders the 
same void as against anyone who is a party thereto at the time of making such alteration and does not 
consent thereto, unless it was made in order to carry out the common intention of the original parties;  
Alteration by indorsee. —And any such alteration, if made by an indorsee, discharges his indorser 
from all liability to him in respect of the consideration thereof.  
The provisions of this section are subject to those of sections 20, 49, 86 and 125.  
88. Acceptor or indorser bound notwithstanding previous alteration. —An acceptor or indorser of 
a negotiable instrument is bound by his acceptance or indorsement notwithstanding any previous 
alteration of the instrument.  
89. Payment of instrument on which  alteration is not apparent. —1[(1)] Where a promissory note, 
bill of exchange or cheque has been materially altered but does not appear to have been so altered,  or 
where a cheque is presented for payment which does not at the time of presentation appear to  be crossed 
or to have had a crossing which has been obliterated,  payment thereof  by a person or banker liable to pay, 
and paying the same according to the apparent tenor thereof at the time of payment and otherwise in due 
course, shall discharge such pers on or banker from all liability thereon; and such payment shall not be 
questioned by reason of the instrument having been altered or the cheque crossed.  
2[(2) Where the cheque is an electronic image of a truncated cheque, any difference in apparent t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 21]
  
2[(2) Where the cheque is an electronic image of a truncated cheque, any difference in apparent tenor 
of such electronic image and the truncated cheque shall be a material alteration and it shall be the duty of 
the bank or the clearing house, as the case may be,  to ensure the exactness of the apparent tenor of 
electronic image of the truncated cheque while truncating and transmitting the image. 
(3) Any bank or a clearing house which receives a transmitted electronic image of a truncated cheque, 
shall verify from the party who transmitted the image to it, that the image so transmitted to it and received 
by it, is exactly the same.]  
90. Extinguishment of rights of action on bill in acceptor's hands. —If a bill of exchange which 
has been negotiated is, at or after mat urity, held by the acceptor in his own right, all rights of action 
thereon are extinguished.  
CHAPTER VIII  
OF NOTIC E OF DISHONOUR  
91. Dishonour by non -acceptance. —A bill of exchange is said to be dishonoured  by non -acceptance 
when the drawee, or one of several drawees not being partners, makes default in acceptance upon being 
duly required to accept the bill, or where presentment is excused and the bill is not accepted.  
Where the drawee is incompetent to cont ract, or the acceptance is qualified the bill may be treated as 
dishonoured.  
92. Dishonour by non -payment. —A promissory note, bill of exchange or cheque is said to be 
dishonoured by non -payment when the  maker of the note, acceptor of the bill or drawee of the cheque 
makes default in payment upon being duly required to pay the same.  
93. By and to whom notice should be given .—When a promissory note, bill of exchange or cheque 
is dishonoured by non -acceptance or non -payment, the holder thereof,  or some party thereto who remains 
                                                           
1. Section 89 r e-numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 55 of 20 02, s. 5 (w.e.f. 6 -2-2003).  
2. Ins. by , s. 5, ib
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 21]
ed as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 55 of 20 02, s. 5 (w.e.f. 6 -2-2003).  
2. Ins. by , s. 5, ibid, (w.e.f. 6-2-2003).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 22]
22 liable thereon, must give notice that the instrument has been so dishonoured to all other parties whom the 
holder seeks to make severally liable thereon, and to some one of several parties whom he seeks to make 
jointly l iable thereon.  
Nothing in this section renders it necessary to give n otice to the maker of the dishonoured promissory 
note or the drawee or acceptor of the dishonoured bill of exchange or cheque.  
94. Mode in which notice may be given. —Notice of dishonour m ay be given to a duly authorized agent 
of the person to whom it is required to be given, or, where h e has died, to his legal representative, or, where he 
has been declared an insolvent, to his assignee; may be oral or written; may, if written, be sent by p ost; and 
may be in any form; but it must inform the party to whom it is given, either in express terms or by reasonable 
intendment, that the instrument has been dishonoured, and in what way, and that he will be held liable thereon; 
and it must be given wit hin a reasonable time after dishonour, at the place of business or (in case such party 
has no place of business) at the residence of the party for whom it is intended.  
If the notice is duly directed and sent by post and miscarries, such miscarriage does not render the 
notice invalid.  
95. Party receiving must transmit notice of dishonour. —Any party receiving notice of dishonour 
must, in order to render any prior party liable to himself, give notice of dishonour  to such party within a 
reasonable time, unless such party otherwise receives due notice as provided by section 93.  
96. Agent for presentment. —When  the instrument is deposited with an agent for presentment, the 
agent is entitled to the same time to give no tice to his principal as if he were the holder giving notice of 
dishonour, and the principal is entitled to a further like period to give notice of dishonour.  
97. When party to whom notice given is dead. —when the party to whom notice of dishonour is 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 22]
nour.  
97. When party to whom notice given is dead. —when the party to whom notice of dishonour is 
dispat ched is dead, but the party dispatching the notice is ignorant of his death, the notice is sufficient.  
98. When notice of dishonour is unnecessary. —No notice of dishonour is necessary —  
(a) when it is dispensed with by the party entitled thereto;  
(b) in or der to charge the drawer , when he has countermanded payment;  
(c)when the party charged could not suffer damage for want of notice;  
(d) when the party entitled to notice cannot after due search be found; or the party bound to give 
notice is, for any other reason, unable without any fault of his own to give it;  
(e) to charge the drawers, when the acceptor is also a drawer;  
(f) in the case of a promissory note which is not negotiable;  
(g) when the party entitled to notice, knowing the facts, promises uncondit ionally to pay the 
amount due on the instrument.  
CHAPTER IX  
O F   N O  T  I NG    A  N D   P R O  T  E S T  
99. Noting. —When a promissory note or bill of exchange has been dishonoured by non -acceptance 
or non -payment, the holder may cause such dishonour to be not ed by a notary public upon the instrument, 
or upon a paper attached thereto, or partly upon each.  
Such note must be made within a reasonable time after dishonour, and must specify the date of 
dishonour, the reason, if any, assigned for such dishonour, or, if the instrument has not been expressly 
dishonoured, the reason why the holder treats it as dishonoured, and the notary's charges.  
100. Protest. —When  a promissory note or bill of exchange has been dishonoured  by non -acceptance 
or non -payment, the holder may, within a reasonable time, cause such dishonour to be noted and certified 
by a notary public. Such certificate is called a protest.  
Protest for better security. —When  the acceptor of a bill of exchange has b ecome insolvent, or 
his credit has been publicly impeached, before the maturity of the bi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 22]
nge has b ecome insolvent, or 
his credit has been publicly impeached, before the maturity of the bill, the holder may, within a 
reasonable time, cause a notary public to demand better security of the acceptor, and on its being 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 23]
23 refused may, within a reasonable time, cause such facts to be noted and certified as aforesaid. Such 
certificate is called a protest for better security.  
101. Contents of protest. —A protest under section 100 must contain — 
(a)  either the instrument itself, or a literal transcript of the instrument and of everything written 
or printed thereupon;  
(b) the name of the person for whom and against whom the instrument has been protested;  
(c) a statement that payment or acceptance, or better security, as the case may be, has been 
demanded of such  person by the notary public ; the terms of his answer, if any, or a statement that he 
gave no answer , or that he could not be found;  
(d) when the note or bill has been dishonoured, the place and time of dishonour, and, when better 
security has been refused , the place and time of refusal;  
(e) the subscription of the notary public making the protest;  
(f) in the event of an acceptance for honour or of a payment for honour, the name of the person by 
whom, of the person for whom, and the manner i n which, such ac ceptance or payment was offered 
and effected.  
1[A notary public may make the demand mentioned in clause (c) of this section either in person or 
by his clerk or, where authorized by agreement or usage, by registered letter.]  
102. Notice of protest .—When a p romissory note or bill of exchange is required by law to be 
protested, notice of such protest must be given instead of notice of dishonour, in the same manner and 
subject to the same conditions; but the notice may be given by the notary public who makes th e protest.  
103. Protest for non -payment after dishonour by non -acceptance. —All bills of exchange drawn 
payable at some other place than the place mentioned as the residence of the drawee, and which are 
dishonoured  by non -acceptance, may, without further presentment to the drawee, be protested for non -
payment , in the place specified for payment, unless paid before or at maturit
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 23]
e protested for non -
payment , in the place specified for payment, unless paid before or at maturity.  
104. Protest of foreign bills. —Foreign  bills of exchange must be protested for dis honou r when such 
protest is required by the law of the place where they are drawn.  
2[104A. When noting equivalent to protest. —For the purposes of this Act, where a bill of note is 
required to be protested within a specified time or before some further proceedin g is taken it is sufficient 
that the bill has been noted for protest before the expiration of the specified time or the taking of the 
proceeding; and, the formal protest may be extended at any time thereafter as of the date of the noting.] 
      CHAPTER X  
OF R E  A  S  O  N  A  B  L  E    T  I  M  E  
105. Reasonable time. —In determining what  is a reasonable time for presentment for acceptance or 
payment, for giving notice of dishonour and for noting, regard shall be had to the nature of the instrument 
and the usual cour se of dealing with respect to similar instruments; and, in calculating such time, public 
holidays shall be excluded.  
106. Reasonable time of giving notice of dishonour. —If the holder and the party to whom notice of 
dishonour is given carry on business or l ive (as the case may be) in different places, such notice is given 
within a reasonable time if it is dispatched by the next post or on the day next after the day of dishonour.  
If the said parties carry on business or live in the same place, such notice is given within a reasonable 
time if it is dispatched in time to reach its destination on the day next after the day of dishonour.  
107. Reasonable time for transmitting such notice. —A party receiving notice of dishonour, who 
seeks to enforce his right against  a prior party, transmits the notice within a reasonable time if he 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 2 of 1885, s. 5.  
2. Ins. by  s. 6,  ibid. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 23]
     
1. Ins. by Act 2 of 1885, s. 5.  
2. Ins. by  s. 6,  ibid. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 24]
24 transmits it within the same time after its receipt as he would have had to give notice if he had been the 
holder.  
CHAPTER XI  
OF ACCEPTANCE AND PAYMENT FOR HONOUR AND REFERENCE IN CASE OF NEED  
108.  Acceptance for honour. —When  a bill of exchange has been noted or protested for non -
acceptance or for better security, any person not being a party already liable thereon may, with the 
consent of the holder, by writing on the bill, accept the sam e for the honour of any party thereto. 1*** 
109.  How acceptance for honour must be made. —A person desiring to accept for honour must, 
2[by writing on the bill under his hand,] declare that he accepts under protest the protested bill for the 
honour of the drawer or of a particular indorser whom he names, or generally for honour. 3*** 
110. Acceptance not specifying for whose honour it is made. —Where  the acceptance does not 
express for whose honour it is made it shall be deemed to be made for the honour  of the drawer.  
111. Liability of acceptor for honour. —An acceptor for honour binds himself to all parties 
subsequent to the party for whose honour he accepts to pay the amount of the bill if the drawee do not; 
and such party and all prior parties are liab le in their respective capacities to compensate the acceptor for 
honour for all loss or damage sustained by him in consequence of such acceptance.  
But an acceptor for honour is not liable to the holder of the bill unless it is presented, or (in case the 
address given by such acceptor on the bill is a place other than the place where the bill is made payable) 
forwarded for presentment, not later than the day next after the day of its maturity.  
112. When acceptor for honour may be charged. —An acceptor for hon our cannot be charged 
unless the bill has at its maturity been presented to the drawee for payment, and has been dishonoured by 
him, and noted or protested for such dishonour.  
113. Payment for honour .—When a bill of exchange has been not
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 24]
ed or protested for such dishonour.  
113. Payment for honour .—When a bill of exchange has been noted or protested for  non-payment, 
any person may pay the same for the honour of any party liable to pay the same : provided that the person 
so paying  4[or his agent in that behalf] has previously declared before a notary public the party for whose 
honour he pays, and that such  declaration has been recorded by such notary public.  
114.  Right of payer for honour .—Any person so paying is entitled to all the rights in respect of the 
bill, of the holder at the time of such payment, and may recover from the party for whose honour  he pays 
all sums so paid, with interest thereon and with all expenses properly incurred in making such payment.  
115. Drawee in case of need .—Where a drawee in case of need is named in a bill of exchange, or in 
any indorsement thereon, the bill is not dish onoured until it has been dishonoured by such drawee.  
116. Acceptance and payment without protest .—A drawee in case of need may accept and pay the 
bill of exchange without previous protest.  
CHAPTER XII  
O F   C O  M  P  E  N  S  A  T  I  O  N  
 117. Rules as to compen sation .—The compensation payable in case of dishonour of a promissory 
note, bill of exchange or cheque, by any party liable to the holder or any indorsee, shall  5*** be 
determined by the following rules: — 
(a) the holder is entitled to the amount due upon the instrument together with the expenses 
properly incurred in presenting, noting and protesting it;  
                                                           
1. The second sentence rep. by Act 2 of 1885, s. 7. 
2. Subs. by s. 8, ibid.,  for “in the presence of a notary public, subscribe the bill with his own hand, and”.  
3. The words “and such declaration must be recorded by the notary in his register” rep. by s. 8, ibid.  
4. Ins. by Act 2 of 1885, s. 9.  
5. The brackets, words and figures “(except in cases provided for by the Code of Civil Proce
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 24]
s. 9.  
5. The brackets, words and figures “(except in cases provided for by the Code of Civil Procedure, s. 532)” omitted by Act 30 o f 1926 , s. 3.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 25]
25 (b) when the person charged resides at a place different from that at which the instrument was 
payable, the holder is entitled to receive such sum at the c urrent rate of exchange between the two 
places;  
(c) an indorser who, being liable, has paid the amount due on the same is entitled to the amount 
so paid with interest at  1[eighteen per centum] per annum from the date of payment until tender or 
realization thereof, together with all expenses caused by the dishonour and payment;  
(d) when the person charged and such indorser reside at different places, the indorser is entitled to 
receive such sum at the current rate of exchange between the two places;  
(e) the party entitled to compensation may draw a bill upon the party liable to compensate him, 
payable at sight or on demand, for the amount due to him, together with all expenses properly 
incurred by him. Such bill must be accompanied by the instrument dis honoured and the protest 
thereof (if any). If such bill is dishonoured, the party dishonouring the same is liable to make 
compensation thereof in the same manner as in the case of the original bill.  
CHAPTER XIII  
S P  E  C  I  A  L    R U  L  E  S    O  F    E V  I  D  E  N  C  E 
118. Presumptions as to negotiable instruments. —Until  the contrary is proved, the following 
presumptions shall be made: —  
(a) of consideration: —that every negotiable instrument was made or drawn for consideration, 
and that every such instrument, when  it has been accepted, indorsed, negotiated or transferred, was 
accepted, indorsed, negotiated or transferred for consideration;  
(b) as to date: —that every negotiable instrument bearing a date was made or drawn on such date;  
(c) as to time of acceptance: —that every accepted bill of exchange was accepted within a 
reasonable time after its date and before its maturity;  
(d) as to time of transfer: —that every transfer of a negotiable instrument was made before its 
naturity;  
(e) as to order of indorsement
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 25]
 transfer of a negotiable instrument was made before its 
naturity;  
(e) as to order of indorsements: —that the indorsements appearing upon a negotiable instrument 
were made in the order in which they appear then on;  
(f) as to stamp: — that a lost promissory note, bill of exchange or cheque was duly stamped;  
(g) that holder is a holder in due course: —that the ho lder of a negotiable instrument is a holder 
in due course: provided that, where the instrut ment has been obtained from its lawful owner, or from 
any person in lawful custody thereof, by means of an offence or fraud, or has been obtained from the 
maker or a cceptor thereof by means of an offence or fraud, or for unlawful consideration, the burden 
of proving that the holder is a holder in due course lies upon him.  
119. Presumption on proof of protest. —Ina suit upon an instrument which has been 
dishonoured, the  Court shall, on proof of the protest, presume the fact of dishonour, unless and until 
such fact is disproved.  
120. Estoppel against denying original validity of instrument. —No maker of a promissory note, 
and no drawer of a bill of exchange or cheque, and no acceptor of a bill of exchange for the honour of the 
drawer shall, in a suit thereon by a holder in due course, be permitted to deny the validity of the 
instrument as origina lly made or drawn.  
121. Estoppel against denying capacity of payee to indorse. —No maker of a promissory note and 
no acceptor of a bill of exchange 2[payable to order] shall, i n a suit thereon by a holder in due course, be 
permitted to deny the payee's capacity, at the date of the note or bill, to indorse the same.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 66 of 1988, s. 3, for “six per centum” (w.e.f . 30 - 12 - 1988 ). 
2. Subs. by Act 8 of 1919, s. 5, for “payable to, or to the order- of, a specified person”.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 26]
26 122. Estoppel against denying signature or capacity of prior party. —No indorser of a negotiable 
instrument shall, in a suit thereon by a subsequent holder, be permitted to deny the signature o r capacity 
to contract of any prior party to the instrument.  
CHAPTER XIV  
O F   CROSSED  C H   E  Q  U   E   S  
123. Cheque crossed generally. —Where a  cheque bears across its face an addition of the words 
“and company” or any abbreviation thereof, between two parallel transverse lines, or of two parallel 
transverse lines simply, either with or without the words “not negotiable, ” that addition shall be deemed a 
crossing, and the cheque shall be deemed to be crossed generally.  
124. Cheque crossed specially. —Where  a cheque bears across its face an addition of the name  of a 
banker, either with or without the words “not negotiable, ” that addition shall be deemed a crossin g and 
the cheque shall be deemed to be crossed specially, and to be crossed to that banker.  
125. Crossing after issue. —Where  a cheque is uncrossed, the holder may cross it generally or 
specially.  
Where a cheque is crossed generally, the holder may cross it specially.  
Where a cheque is crossed generally, or specially, the holder may add the words “not negotiable”.  
Where a cheque is crossed specially, the banker to whom it is crossed may again cross it specially to 
another banker, his agent, for collection.  
126. Payment of cheque crossed generally. —Where  a cheque is crossed generally, the banker on 
whom it is drawn shall not pay it otherwise than to a banker.  
Payment of cheque crossed specially. —Where  a cheque is crossed specially, the banker on whom it 
is drawn shall not pay it otherwise than to the banker to whom it is crossed, or his agent for collecti on. 
127. Payment of cheque crossed specially more than once. —Where  a cheque is crossed specially 
to more than one banker, except when crossed to an agent for the purpose of collection, the banker on 
whom it is draw
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 26]
anker, except when crossed to an agent for the purpose of collection, the banker on 
whom it is drawn shall refuse payment thereof.  
128. Payme nt in due course of crossed cheque. —Where  the banker on whom a crossed cheque is 
drawn has paid the same in due course, the banker paying the cheque, and (in case such cheque has come 
to the hands of the payee) the drawer thereof, shall respectively be ent itled to the same rights, and be 
placed in the same position in all respects, as they would respectively be entitled to and placed in if the 
amount of the cheque had been paid to and received by the true owner there of. 
129. Payment of crossed cheque out of  due course. —Any banker paying a cheque  crossed 
generally otherwise than to a banker, or a cheque crossed specially otherwise than to the banker to whom 
the same is crossed, or his agent for  collection, being a banker, shall  be liable to the true owner of the 
cheque for any loss he may sustain owing to the cheque having been so paid.  
130. Cheque bearing “not negotiable”. —A person taking a cheque crossed generally or specially, 
bearing in either case the words “not negotiable, ” shall not have, and shall not be capable of giving, a 
better title to the cheque than that which the person from whom he took it had.  
131. Non -liability of banker receiving payment of cheque. —A banker who has in good faith and 
without negligence received  payment for a customer of a cheque crossed generally or specially to himself 
shall not, in case the title to the cheque proves defective, incur any liability to the true owner of the 
cheque by reason only of having received such payment.  
1[Explanation 2[(I)].— A banker receives payment of a crossed cheque for a customer within the 
meaning of this section notwithstanding that he credits his customer ’s account with the amount of the 
cheque before receiving payment thereof.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 18 of 1922, s. 2
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 26]
reof.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 18 of 1922, s. 2.  
2. Explanation  re-numbered as Explanation I thereof by Act 55 of 2002, s. 6 (w.e.f. 6 -2-2003).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 27]
27 1[Explanation II.—It shall be th e duty of the banker who receives payment based on an electronic 
image of a truncated cheque held with him, to verify the prima facie genuineness of the cheque to be 
truncated and any fraud, forgery or tampering apparent on the face of the instrument that can be verified 
with due diligence and ordinary care.]  
2[131A. Application of Chapter to drafts. —The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to any draft, 
as defined in section 85A, as if the draft were a cheque.] 
CHAPTER XV  
O F   B I  L  L  S    I  N    S E  T  S   
132. Set of bills. —Bills of exchange may be drawn in parts, each part being numbered and containing 
a provision that it shall continue payable only so long as the others remain unpaid. All the parts together 
make a set; but the whole set constitutes only one bill, and is extinguished when one of the parts, if a 
separate bill, would be extinguished.  
Exception. —When  a person accepts or indorses different parts of the bill in favour of different 
persons, he and the subsequent endorsers of each part are liable  on such part as if it were a separate bill.  
133. Holder of first acquired part entitled to  all—As between holders in due course of different parts 
of the same set, he who first acquired title to his part is entitled to the other parts and the money represen ted 
by the bill.  
CHAPTER XVI  
O F    I N  T  E  R  N  A  T  I  O  N  A  L    LA  W 
134. Law governing liability of maker, acceptor or indorser of foreign instrument. —In the absence 
of a contract to the contrary, the liability of the maker or drawer of a foreign promissory note, bill of 
exchange or cheque is regulated in all essential matters by the law of the place where he made the instrument, 
and the respective liabilit ies of the acceptor and indorser by the law of the place where the instrument is made 
payable.  
Illustration  
A bill of exchange was drawn by A in California, where the rate of interest is 25 per cent., and ac
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 27]

A bill of exchange was drawn by A in California, where the rate of interest is 25 per cent., and accepted by B , payable in 
Washington, where the rat e of interest is 6 per cent. The bill is erdorsed in 3[India],  and is dishonoured. An action on the bill is 
brought against B in 3[India].  He is liable to pay interest at the rate of 6 per cent. only; but if A is charged as drawer, A is liable to 
pay inter est at the r ate of 25 per cent.  
 
135. Law of place of payment governs dishonour. —Where  a promissory note, bill of exchange or 
cheque is made payable in a different place from that in which it is made or indorsed, the law of the place 
where it is made payable determines what constitutes dishonour and wh at notice of dishonour is 
sufficient.  
Illustration  
A bill of exchange drawn and indorsed in 3[India],  but accepted payable in France, is dishonoured. The indorsee causes it to 
be protested for such dishonour, and gives notice thereof in accordance with the law of France, though not in accordance  with the 
rules herein contained in respect of bills which are not foreign. The notice is sufficient.  
136. Instrument made, etc., out of India , but in accordance with the law of India .—If a 
negotiable instrument is made, drawn, accepted or indorsed 4[outside India], but in accordance with the 
5[law of India], the circumstances that any agreement evidenced by such instrument is invalid according 
to the law of the country wherein it was entered into does not invalidate any subsequent acceptance or 
indor sement made thereon 6[within India].  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 55 of 2002, s. 6 (w.e.f. 6 -2-2003).  
2. Ins. by Act 33 of 1947, s. 2.  
3. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch edule for “the States”.  
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1948, A.O. 1950 and the Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch. for “out of British India”.  
5. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “law of  British India” .  
6. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “in
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 27]
 India”.  
5. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “law of  British India” .  
6. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “in British India”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 28]
28 137. Presumption as to foreign law. —The law of any foreign country 1*** regarding promissory 
notes, bills of exchange and cheques shall be presumed to be the same as that of 2[India], unless and until 
the contrary is pr oved.  
3[CHAPTER XVII  
OF PENALTIES IN CASE OF DISHONOUR OF CERTAIN CHEQUES FOR  INSUFFICIENCY OF FUNDS IN THE 
ACCOUNTS  
138. Dishonour of cheque for insufficiency, etc., of funds in the account. —Where any cheque 
drawn by a person on an account maintained by him with a banker for payment of any amount of money 
to another person from out of that account for the discharge, in whole or in part, of any debt or other 
liability, is returned by the bank u npaid, either because of the amount of money standing to the credit of 
that account is insufficient to honour the cheque or that it exceeds the amount arranged to be paid from 
that account by an agreement made with that bank, such person shall be deemed to  have committed an 
offence and shall, without prejudice to any other provision of this Act, be punished with imprisonment for 
4[a term which may be extended to two years’], or with fine which may extend to twice the amount of the 
cheque, or with both:  
Prov ided that nothing contained in this section shall apply unless — 
(a) thecheque has been presented to the bank within a period of six months from the date on 
which it is drawn or within the period of its validity, whichever is earlier ; 
(b) the payee or the h older in due course of the cheque, as the case may be, makes a demand for 
the payment of the said amount of money by giving a notice; in writing, to the drawer of the cheque, 
5[within thirty days] of the receipt of information by him from the bank regarding the return of the 
cheque as unpaid; and  
(c) the drawer of such cheque fails to make the payment of the said amount of money to the payee 
or, as the case may be, to the holder in due course of the cheque, within fifteen days of the receipt of 
the said notice.  
Expl
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 28]
e holder in due course of the cheque, within fifteen days of the receipt of 
the said notice.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “debt of other liability” means a legally enforceable debt 
or other liability.  
139. Presumption in favour of holder. —It shall be presumed, unless the contrary is proved, that the 
holder of a chequ e received the cheque of the nature referred to in section13 8 for the discharge, in whole 
or in part, of any debt or other liability.  
140. Defence which may not be allowed in any prosecution under section 138. —Itshall not be a 
defence in a prosecution for an offence under section 138 that the drawer had no reason to believe when 
he issued the cheque that the cheque may be dishonoured on presentment for the reasons stated in that 
section.  
141. Offences by companies. —(1) If the person committing an offence un der section 138 is a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence  and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any person liable to punishment if he 
proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge, or that he had exerci sed all due diligence 
to prevent the commission of such offence:  
6[Provided further that where a person is nominated as a Director of a company by virtue of his 
holding any office or employment in the Central Government or State Government or a financial 
                                                           
1. The words “or the State of Jammu and  Kashmir” omitted by Act 62 of 1956, s. 2 and the Sch edule . 
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1948, A.O. 1950 and the Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch edule  for “British India”.  
3. Ins. by Act 66 of 1988, s, 4 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1989).  
4. Subs. by Act 55 of 20
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 28]
or “British India”.  
3. Ins. by Act 66 of 1988, s, 4 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1989).  
4. Subs. by Act 55 of 2002, s.  7, for certain words (w.e.f. 6 -2-2003).  
5. Subs. by s. 7, ibid.,  for “within fifteen  days” (w.e.f. 6 -2-2003).  
6. Ins. by  s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 6 -2-2003).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 29]
29 corporation owned or controlled by the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, 
he shall not be liable for prosecution under this Chapter.]  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act h as been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manag er, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be 
guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section,  — 
(a) “company” means any  body  corporate and includes a firm or other association of 
individuals; and  
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
142. Cognizance of offences .—1[(1)] Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of  1974), — 
(a) no court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under section 138 except upon a 
complaint, in writing, made by the payee or, as the case may be, the holder in due course of the 
cheque;  
(b) such complaint is made within one month of th e date on which the cause of action arises 
under clause (c) of the proviso to section 138:  
2[Provided that the cognizance of a complaint may be taken by the Court after the prescribed period, 
if the complainant satisfies the Court that he had sufficient ca use for not making a complaint within such 
period ;] 
(c) no court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class 
shall try any offence punishable under section 138.].  
3[(2) The offence under section 138 shall be inquired into and tried only by a court within whose local 
jurisdiction, — 
(a) if the cheque is delivered for collection through an account, the branch of the bank where the 
payee or holder
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 29]
ue is delivered for collection through an account, the branch of the bank where the 
payee or holder in due course, as the case may be, maintains the account, is situat ed; or  
(b) if the cheque is presented for payment by the payee or holder in due course, otherwise through 
an account, the branch of the drawee bank where the drawer maintains the account, is situated.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of clause ( a), where a ch eque is delivered for collection at any 
branch of the bank of the payee or holder in due course, then, the cheque shall be deemed to have been 
delivered to the branch of the bank in which the payee or holder in due course, as the case may be, 
maintains the  account.]  
4[142A. Validation for transfer of pending cases. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) or any judgment, decree, order or direction of any court, 
all cases transferred to the court having jurisdiction under sub -section ( 2) of section 142, as amended by 
the Negotiable Instruments (Amendment) Ordinance, 2015  (Ord. 6 of 2015) , shall be deemed to have 
been transferred under this Act, as if that sub -section had been in force at all material time s. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2) of section 142 or sub -section ( 1), where the 
payee or the holder in due course, as the case may be, has filed a complaint against the drawer of a cheque 
in the court having jurisdiction under sub -section ( 2) of section 142 or the case has been transferred to 
that court under sub -section ( 1) and such complaint is pending in that court, all subsequent complaints 
arising out of section 138 against the same drawer shall be filed before the same court irrespective of 
                                                           
1. Section 142 numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 26 of 2015, s.  3 (w.e.f . 15-6-2015).  
2. Ins. by Act 55 of 2002,  s. 9 (w.e.f.  6-2-2003).  
3. Ins. Act 26 of 2015, s.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 29]
 . 15-6-2015).  
2. Ins. by Act 55 of 2002,  s. 9 (w.e.f.  6-2-2003).  
3. Ins. Act 26 of 2015, s.  3 (w.e.f. 15 -6-2015).  
4. Ins. by , s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f .15-6-2015).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 30]
30 whether those cheques were delivered for collection or presented for payment within the territorial 
jurisdiction of that court.  
(3) If, on the date of the commencement of the Negotiable Instruments (Amendment) Act, 2015  (26 
of 2015) , more t han one prosecution filed by the same payee or holder in due course, as the case may be, 
against the same drawer of cheques is pending before different courts, upon the said fact having been 
brought to the notice of the court, such court shall transfer the  case to the court having jurisdiction under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 142, as amended by the Negotiable Instruments (Amendment) Ordinance, 2015  
(Ord. 6 of 2015) , before which the first case was filed and is pending, as if that sub -section had been in 
force at all material times.]  
1[143. Power of Court to try cases summarily. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) all offences under t his Chapter shall be tried by a Judicial 
Magistrate of the first class or by a Metropolitan Magistrate and the provisions of sections 262 to 265 
(both inclusive) of the said Code shall, as far as may be, apply to such trials: 
Provided that in the case of any conviction in a summary trial under this section, it shall be lawful  for 
the Magistrate to pass a sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year and an amount of 
fine exceeding five thousand rupees:  
Provided further that when at the commencement of, or in the course of, a summary trial under this 
section, it ap pears to the Magistrate that the nature of the case is such that a sentence of imprisonment for 
a term exceeding one year may have to be passed or that it is, for any other reason, undesirable to try the 
case summarily, the Magistrate shall after hearing t he parties, record an order to that effect and 
thereafter recall any witness who may have been examined and proceed to hear or rehear the case in the 
manner provided by the said Code.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 30]
ave been examined and proceed to hear or rehear the case in the 
manner provided by the said Code.  
(2) The trial of a case under this section shall, so far as practicable,  consistently with the interests of 
justice, be continued from day to day until its conclusion, unless the Court finds the adjournment of the 
trial beyond the following day to be necessary for reasons to be recorded in writing.  
(3)  Every trial under this section shall be conducted as expeditiously as possible and an endeavour 
shall be made to conclude the trial within six months from the date of filing of the complaint.  
2[143A. Power to direct interim compensation. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in  the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the Court trying an offence under section 138 may order the drawer of 
the cheque to pay interim compensation to the complainant — 
(a) in a summary trial or a summons case, where he pleads not guilty to the accusation made in the 
complaint; and  
(b) in any other case, upon framing of charge.  
(2) The interim compensation under sub -section ( 1) shall not exceed twenty per cent. of the amount 
of the cheque.  
(3) The interim compensation shall be paid within sixty days from th e date of the order under sub -
section (1), or within such further period not exceeding thirty days as may be directed by the Court on 
sufficient cause being shown by the drawer of the cheque.  
(4) If the drawer of the cheque is acquitted, the Court shall di rect the complainant to repay to the 
drawer the amount of interim compensation, with interest at the bank rate as published by the Reserve 
Bank of India, prevalent at the beginning of the relevant financial year, within sixty days from the date of 
the orde r, or within such further period not exceeding thirty days as may be directed by the Court on 
sufficient cause being shown by the complainant.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 55 of 2002, s. 10 (w.e.f. 6 -2-2003)
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 30]
                                                
1. Ins. by Act 55 of 2002, s. 10 (w.e.f. 6 -2-2003).  
2. Ins. by Act 20 of 2018, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2018).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 31]
31 (5) The interim compensation payable under this section may be recovered as if it were a fine under 
section 421 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) . 
(6) The amount of fine imposed under section 138 or the amount of compensation awarded under 
section 357 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , shall be reduced by the amount paid or 
recove red as interim compensation under this section. ] 
144. Mode of service of summons .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) and for the purposes of this Chapter, a Magistrate issuing a 
summons to an accused or a witness may direct a copy of summons to be served at the place where such 
accused or witness ordinarily resides or carries on business or personally works for gain, by speed post or 
by such courier services as are approved by a Court of Session.  
(2) Where an acknowledgment purporting to be signed by the accused or the witness or an 
endorsement purported to be made by an y person authorised by the postal department or the courier services 
that the accused  or the witness refused to take delivery of summon s has been received, the Court issuing 
the summons may declare that the summons has been duly served.  
145. Evidence on affidavit. —(1)Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) , the evidence of the complainant may be given by him on affidavit and may, 
subject to all just exceptions be read in evidence in any enquiry, trial or other proceeding under the said 
Code.  
(2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, and shall, on the application of the prosecution or the accused, 
summon and examine any person giving evidence on affidavit as to the facts contained therein.  
146. Bank’s slip prima fa cie evidence of certain facts. —The Court shall, in respect of every 
proceeding under this Chapter, on production of Bank's slip or memo having thereon the official mark 
denoting that the cheq
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 31]
apter, on production of Bank's slip or memo having thereon the official mark 
denoting that the cheque has been dishonoured, presume the fact of dishonour of such cheque, unless and 
until such fact is disproved.  
147. Offences to be compoundable. —Notwithstanding  anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) ,every offence punishable under this Act shall be compoundable].  
1[148. Power of Appellate Court to order payment pending appeal against conviction. —(1) 
Notwithstanding anything containe d in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), in an appeal by 
the drawer against conviction under section 138, the Appellate Court may order the appellant to deposit 
such sum which shall be a minimum of twenty per cent. of the fine or compensation  awarded by the trial 
Court:  
Provided that the amount payable under this sub -section shall be in addition to any interim 
compensation paid by the appellant under section 143A.  
(2) The amount referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be deposited within sixty da ys from the date of the 
order, or within such further period not exceeding thirty days as may be directed by the Court on 
sufficient cause being shown by the appellant.  
(3) The Appellate Court may direct the release of the amount deposited by the appellant  to the 
complainant at any time during the pendency of the appeal:  
Provided that if the appellant is acquitted, the Court shall direct the complainant to repay to the 
appellant the amount so released, with interest at the bank rate as published by the Res erve Bank of India, 
prevalent at the beginning of the relevant financial year, within sixty days from the date of the order, or 
within such further period not exceeding thirty days as may be directed by the Court on sufficient cause 
being shown by the comp lainant.]  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 20 of 2018, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2018).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 31]
          
1. Ins. by Act 20 of 2018, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2018).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS ACT, 1881.pdf - page 32]
32 SCHEDULE .—[Enactments repealed ].—Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1891             
(12 of 1891),   s. 2 and Schedule  I. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES AND OUDH ACT, 1890.pdf - page 1]
1  THE  NORTH -WESTERN  PROVINCES  AND  OUDH  ACT,  1890  
 
 
ARRANGEMENT  OF SECTIONS  
 
 
SECTIONS.  
 
1. Title.   
PART  I 
THE NORTH -WESTERN  PROVINCES  
 
2. Commencement  of Part I. 
3. 3 and 4  [Repealed ]. 
5. Laws  in force  in certain  districts of  the Allahabad Division  to apply  to Jhansi.  
6. [Repealed .]. 
7. Discharge of functions assigned to Deputy Commissioner and Commissioner by  
Act 17 of 1866 . 
8. Jhansi Division  to cease to  be a Scheduled  District.  
9. Application  of Act 12  of 1887  to Jhansi,  and disposal  of pending  cases.  
 
PART  II 
OUDH  
 
10. Commencement  of Part II. 
11. Board of Revenue of the North -Western Provinces to be the Board of Revenue of,  
and Chief  Revenue -authority  in, Oudh.  
12. [Repealed .]. 
13. [Repealed. ]. 
14. [Repealed. ]. 
15. [Repealed .]. 
16. [Repealed .]. 
17. [Repealed. ]. 
18. [Repealed .]. 
19. [Repealed .]. 
20. [Repealed. ]. 
21. [Repealed .]. 
22. [Repealed. ]. 
23. [Repealed. ]. 
24. [Repealed .]. 
25. [Repealed .]. 
26. [Repealed. ]. 
27. [Repealed .]. 
28. [Repealed .]. 
29. [Repealed. ]. 
30. [Repealed .]. 
31. [Repealed. ]. 
32. [Repealed. ]. 
33. [Repealed .]. 
34. [Repealed .]. 
35. [Repealed. ]. 
36. [Repealed .]. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES AND OUDH ACT, 1890.pdf - page 2]
2  37. [Repealed .]. 
38. [Repealed. ]. 
39. [Repealed .]. 
40. [Repealed. ]. 
41. [Repealed. ]. 
42. [Repealed .]. 
43. [Repealed .]. 
44. [Repealed. ]. 
45. [Repealed .]. 
46. [Repealed .]. 
47. [Repealed. ]. 
48. [Repealed. ]. 
49. [Repealed. ]. 
50. [Repealed. ]. 
51. [Repealed. ]. 
52. [Repealed .]. 
53. [Repealed. ]. 
54. Pending  appeals.  
55. [Repealed. ]. 
56. [Repealed .]. 
57. [Repealed .]. 
58. [Repealed .]. 
59. [Repealed. ]. 
60. [Repealed .]. 
61. [Repealed .]. 
 
PART  III 
THE NORTH -WESTERN  PROVINCES  AND OUDH  
 
62. Commencement  of Part III. 
63. Place  where  the Board  may sit. 
64. [Repealed .]. 
.
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES AND OUDH ACT, 1890.pdf - page 3]
3  THE  NORTH -WESTERN  PROVINCES  AND  OUDH  ACT,  1890  
 
 
ACT NO. 20 OF 1890  
 
[16th October,  1890.]  
 
An Act to provide  for the better  administration  of the North -Western  Provinces  and Oudh  and to amend  
certain  enactments  in force  in those Provinces and  in Oudh.  
 
WHEREAS it is expedient to provide for the better administration of the territories respectively  
administered  by the Lieutenant  Governor  of the North -Western  Provinces  and the Chief  Commissioner  
of Oudh,  and for that purpose  to amend  certain  enactments  which  are in force  in the said Provinces  and 
in Oudh;  It is hereby  enacted  as follows: — 
 
1. Title.—This Act may  be called  the North -Western  Provinces  and Oudh  Act, 1890.  
 
PART I  
 
THE NORTH -WESTERN  PROVINCES  
 
2. Commencement  of Part I.—This Part shall come  into force  on such day1 as the said Lieutenant - 
Governor  may, by  notification in  the Official  Gazette,  direct.  
 
3. and 4. [Amendment of Act 19 of 1873.]  Rep. by the United Provinces Land -revenue Act , 1901  
(U.P. Act  3 of 1901).  
 
And whereas  it has been determined  to annex  the Jhansi  Division,  comprising  the districts  of Jhansi,  
Jalaun  and Lalatpur,  to the Allahabad Division;  
 
And whereas  the said Jhansi  Division  is a Schedule  District  under  the Scheduled  Districts  
Act, 1874;  (14 of 1874);2 
 
And whereas it is expedient that the law in force in the same division should, on such annexation, be  
the same  as the law in force  in the temporarily -settled  districts  comprised  in the Allahabad  Division,  and 
that the said division should cease  to be  a Schedule District;  
 
It is hereby  enacted as  follows:— 
 
5. Laws in force in certain districts of the Allahabad Division to apply to Jhansi. —(1) All  
enactments which shall on the day3 when this Part comes into force be in force in the said temporarily - 
settled districts and not in the said Jhansi Division shall be deemed to come into fo
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES AND OUDH ACT, 1890.pdf - page 3]
temporarily - 
settled districts and not in the said Jhansi Division shall be deemed to come into force in that Division  
on and  from  the said  day. 
 
(2) Except the Jhansi Encumbered Estates Act, 1882, (16 of 1882)4 and the   Jhansi and Morar  
Act, 1886,(17 of 1886)5 all enactments which shall on the said day3 be in force in the said division and  
not in the said temporarily settled districts, including the Jhansi Courts Act,  1867 (18 of 1867), and  
Act No.  27 of 1867, shall be deemed  to be repealed  on and from  the said day3 in the said  division.  
 
 
1. The 1st April,  1891,  see North -Western Provinces  and Oudh  Gazette,1891,  Pt. I, p. 130. 
2. Since  rep. by  the A.O.  1937.  
3. That is,  the 1st April,  1891.  
4. Since  rep. by the Bundelkhand  Encumbered Estates  Act, 1903 (U.P.  1 of 1903).  
5. Rep. by Act 42  of 1953.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES AND OUDH ACT, 1890.pdf - page 4]
4   
6. [Amendment  of Act 16 of 1882 .]—Rep. by the Bundelkhand  Encumbered  Estates  Act, 1903  (U.P. 
Act 1 of 1903) . 
7. Discharge of functions assigned to Deputy Commissioner and Commissioner by Act 17  of 
1886. —The functions assigned to the Deputy Commissioner and the Commissioner by the Jhansi and  
Morar  Act, 18861 (17 of 1886),  shall be discharged  by the  District Judge  and the High  Court,  
respectively, and references to Courts in the Jhansi district subordinate to the Commissioner shall be  
deemed to apply to the Civil Courts established in that district under the Bengal, 2North -Western  
Provinces  and Assam  Civil Courts Act,  1887 (12 of 1887).  
8. Jhansi  Division  to cease  to be a Scheduled  District.  — (1) On and from  the said day3 the said 
division  shall cease  to be  a Schedule District 4***. 
9. Application  of Act 12 of 1887  to Jhansi,  and disposal of  pending  cases. —5*** 
(2) All cases or proceedings pending in any Civil Court in the said division on the said day3 shall 
be disposed of  as follows: — 
(a) if pending  in the Court  of a Tahsildar  or of an Assistant  Commissioner  of the second  class — 
by the Munsif;  
(b) if pending  in the Court  of an Assistant  Commissioner  of the first class —by the Subordinate  
Judge;  
(c) if pending  in the Court  of a Deputy  Commissioner —by the District  Judge;  
(d) if pending in the Court of the Commissioner —by the District Judge, unless the case  
pending  is an appeal  from  a decree  or order  of the Deputy  Commissioner,  in which  case the appeal  
shall be  disposed of  by the High Court.  
(3) For the purposes  of sections  20 to 22, both inclusive,  of the Bengal,  2North -Western  Provinces  
and Assam Civil Courts Act, 1887 (12 of 1887), all decrees and orders passed by Civil Courts in the  
said division and not appealed against  before  the said  day3 shall be deemed — 
(a) if passed  by the Court  of a Tahsildar  or an Assistant  Commissioner  of the second  cl
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES AND OUDH ACT, 1890.pdf - page 4]
med — 
(a) if passed  by the Court  of a Tahsildar  or an Assistant  Commissioner  of the second  class —to 
have been passed by  a Munsif;  
(b) if passed  by the Court  of an Assistant  Commissioner  of the first class —to have been passed  
by a Subordinate  Judge;  
(c) if passed by the Court of a Deputy Commissioner or the Commissioner —to have been  
passed  by a District  Judge.  
(4) Where any Civil Court ceases by reason of the passing of this Act to have jurisdiction with  
respect to any case, any proceeding in relation to that case which, if that Court had not ceased to have  
jurisdiction,  might have  been had therein,  may be had in the Court  to which  the business  of the former  
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Rep. by Act 42 of  1953.  
2. “Agra”  has been subs.  for “North -Western Provinces”  by Act 16 of 1911.  
3. That is, the 1st April,  1891.  
4. The second  clause  of sub-section ( 1), and sub-section ( 2) were  rep. by Act 1 of 1938,  s. 2 and Sch.  
5. Sub-section  (1) rep., ibid. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES AND OUDH ACT, 1890.pdf - page 5]
5  Court  is transferred  by sub-section  (2); but this sub-section  shall not apply  to cases  for which  provision  
is made in  section  623 or section 649  of the Code of Civil  Procedure1 (14 of 1882).  
 
(5) In the case of appeals from the decrees and orders mentioned in sub -section ( 3) the period of  
limitation  shall be calculated  in accordance  with the provisions  of section  15 of the Jhansi  Courts  
Act, 18672 (18 of 1867),  as though this  Act had not been passed.  
 
PART  II 
OUDH  
 
10. Commencement of Part II. —This Part shall come into force on such day3 as the Chief  
Commissioner of Oudh may,  by notification  in the Official  Gazette,  direct.  
 
11. Board  of Revenue of the North -Western Provinces to be the Board  of Revenue of, and  
Chief Revenue authority in,  Oudh. —(1) On and from the day on which this Part comes into force  
the Board of Revenue constituted under the North -Western Provinces Land -revenue Act, 18734 (19 of  
1873), shall be deemed to be also the Board of  Revenue for the territories administered by the Chief  
Commissioner of Oudh, and shall be known and designated as the Board of Revenue of the North - 
Western  Provinces  and Oudh5. 
 
(2) All references  made  in any enactment  as amended  by this Part to the Board  of Revenue  shall  be 
deemed,  so far as they  relate to Oudh,  to refer  to the said Board.  
 
(3) In any enactment for the time being  in force in the territories administered by the Chief  
Commissioner of  Oudh, in which the expression “Chief Revenue -authority” or “Chief Controlling  
Revenue -authority” is used, the expression shall, subject to the  provisions of any enactment passed  
after the said day3, be construed, so far as the said territories are concerned,  as referring to the Board  
of Revenue of the North -Western Provinces  and Oudh5. 
 
12. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the U.P. Act,  1901  (3 of  1901).  
 
13. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the U.P. Act,  1901  (3 of  1901).  
 
14. [Repealed.
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES AND OUDH ACT, 1890.pdf - page 5]
01  (3 of  1901).  
 
13. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the U.P. Act,  1901  (3 of  1901).  
 
14. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the U.P. Act,  1901  (3 of  1901).  
 
15. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the U.P. Act,  1901  (3 of  1901).  
 
16. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the U.P. Act,  1901  (3 of  1901).  
 
17. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the Repealing  and Amending  Act, 1891  (12 of 1891).  
 
18. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the U.P. Act,  1901  (3 of  1901).  
 
19. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the U.P. Act,  1901  (3 of  1901).  
 
20. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the U.P. Act,  1901  (3 of  1901).  
 
21. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the U.P. Act,  1901  (3 of  1901).  
 
 
 
1. See now the Code  of Civil  Procedure,  1908  (5 of 1908).  
2. Act 18 of 1867  rep. by s. 5 (2) of this Act.  
3. 1st January,  1891,  see the North -Western  Provinces  and Oudh  Gazette,  1890,  Pt. I, p.661.  
4. Since rep. by the U.P. Land -revenue Act,1901 (U.P. 3 of 1901), s. 2, but not so as to affect anything done under Act 19 of  
1873,  see s. 3. 
5. Now  the Board  of Revenue of  the U.P. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES AND OUDH ACT, 1890.pdf - page 6]
6  22. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the U.P. Act,  1901  (3 of  1901).  
 
23. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the U.P. Act,  1901  (3 of  1901).  
 
24. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the U.P. Act,  1901  (3 of  1901).  
 
25. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the U.P. Act,  1901  (3 of  1901).  
 
26. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the U.P. Act,  1901  (3 of  1901).  
 
27. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the U.P. Act,  1901  (3 of  1901).  
 
28. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the U.P. Act,  1899  (3 of  1899).  
 
29. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the U.P. Act,  1899  (3 of  1899).  
 
30. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the U.P. Act,  1899  (3 of  1899).  
 
31. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the U.P. Act,  1899  (3 of  1899).  
 
32. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the U .P. Act,  1901  (3 of  1901).  
 
33. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the U.P. Act,  1901  (3 of  1901).  
 
34. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the U.P. Act ,1901  (3 of  1901).  
 
35. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the Repealing  and Amending  Act, 1891  (12 of 1891).  
 
36. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the U.P. Act,  1894  (5 of  1894).  
 
37. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the U.P. Act,  1894  (5 of  1894).  
 
38. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the Repealing  Act, 1938  (1 of 1938).  
 
39. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the U.P. Act,  1925  (4 of  1925).  
 
40. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the U.P. Act,  1925  (4 of  1925).  
 
41. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the U.P. Act, 1925  (4 of  1925).  
 
42. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the U.P. Act, 1925  (4 of  1925).  
 
43. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the Repealing  and Amending  Act, 1891  (12 of 1891).  
 
44. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the Repealing  Act, 1938  (1 of 1938).  
 
45. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the Repealing  Act, 1938  (1 of 1938).  
 
46. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the Repealing  Act, 1938  (1 of 1938).  
 
47. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the Repealing  Act, 1938  (1 of 1938).  
 
48. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the Repealing  and Amending  Act, 1891  (12 of 1891).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES AND OUDH ACT, 1890.pdf - page 7]
7  49. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the Repealing  Act, 1938  (1 of 1938).  
 
50. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the Repealing  and Amending  Act, 1891  (12 of 1891).  
 
51. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the Repealing  Act, 1938  (1 of 1938).  
 
52. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the Repealing  Act, 1938  (1 of 1938).  
 
53. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the Repealing  Act, 1938  (1 of 1938).  
 
54. Pending appeals. —All appeals pending when this Part comes  into force1 from decrees or  
orders  passed under  the same Act shall be disposed  of as if this  Act had not  been passed:  
 
Provided  that the 2[State  Government]  may,  by order,  transfer  to the District  Judge  any appeals  then 
pending before the Commissioner or Collector in cases in which the appeal will, under the Oudh Rent  
Act, 1886, (22  of 1886)  as amended by  this Part, lie  to the District  Judge.  
 
55. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the Repealing  Act, 1938  (1 of 1938).  
 
56. [Repealed.] — Rep. by the Repealing  and Amending  Act, 1891 (12  of 1891).  
 
57. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the Repealing  Act, 1938  (1 of 1938).  
 
58. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the Repealing  Act, 1938  (1 of 1938).  
 
59. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the Repealing  Act, 1938  (1 of 1938).  
 
60. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the Repealing  Act, 1938  (1 of 1938).  
 
61. [Repealed.] —Rep. by the Repealing  Act, 1938  (1 of 1938).  
 
PART  III 
THE NORTH -WESTERN  PROVINCES  AND  OUDH  
 
62. Commencement of Part III. — This part shall come into force on such day3 as the Lieutenant  
Governor  of the North -Western  Provinces  and Chief  Commissioner  of Oudh  may,  by notification  in the 
Official Gazette, direct.  
 
63. Place where the Board  may sit.—(1) Notwithstanding anything 4*** in section 128 of the  
Oudh Rent Act, 1886 (22 of 1886), the Board  of Revenue of the North -Western Provinces and Oudh  
shall, for the disposal of cases under those Acts, sit in such place or places in the  North -Western  
Provinces  or Oudh as 5[the State Government] may, by notification in 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES AND OUDH ACT, 1890.pdf - page 7]
aces in the  North -Western  
Provinces  or Oudh as 5[the State Government] may, by notification in the Official Gazette,6appoint in  
respect  to cases under  either of  those Acts.  
 
(2) For the disposal of cases other than those referred to in sub -section ( 1) the said Board may,  
subject to the orders of 5[the State Government], sit in any place in the North -Western Provinces or  
Oudh  that the Board  thinks  fit. 
 
 
1. That is, the 1st January,  1891.  
2. Subs.  by the A.O.  1937  for “Chief  Commissioner”.  
3. 1st January, 1891,  see the North -Western  Provinces  and Oudh  Gazette,  1890,  Pt. I, p. 661. 
4. Section 63, so far as it relates to Act 12 of 1881, that is the  words “in s. 152 of the North -Western Provinces Rent  
Act, 1881,  or” were  rep. by  the Agra  Tenancy  Act, 1901  (U.P. 2  of 1901).  
5. Subs.  by the A.O.  1937  for “the said Lieutenant -Governor  and Chief  Commissioner”.  
6. For notification  declaring  that the  Board of  Revenue  may sit at the  head-quarters  of any district  of the United  Provinces,  
see U.P. Local Rules  and Orders.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES AND OUDH ACT, 1890.pdf - page 8]
8  64. [Amendment  of section  4, Act 19 of 1873 .] Rep. by the United  Provinces  Land -revenue  
Act, 1901 (U.P. Act  3 of 1901).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
 
PREAMBLE  
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
 Local extent.  
2. [Repealed. ] 
3. Interpretation clause.  
4. Power to appoint officers.   
PART II  
OF THE APPLICATION  OF WATER FOR PUBLIC  PURPOSES  
5. Notification to issue when water -supply is to be applied for public purposes.  
6. Powers of Canal -officer.  
7. Notice as to claims for compensation.  
8. Damage for which com pensation shall not be awarded.  
Matters in respect of which compensation may be awarded.  
9. Limitation of claims.  
10. Enquiry into claims and amount of compensation.  
11. Abatement of rent on interruption of water -supply.  
12. Enhancement of rent on restoration of water -supply.  
13. Compen sation when due.  
 Interest.    
PART III  
OF THE  CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF WORKS  
14. Power to enter and survey, etc.   
 Power to clear land.   
 Power to inspect and regulate water -supply.   
 Notice of intended entry into houses.   
 Compensation for damage caused by entry.  
15. Power to enter for repairs and to prevent accidents.   
 Compensation for damage to land.  
 16. Application by persons desiring to use canal -water.   
 Contents of application.  
  Liability of applicants for cost of works.  
  Recovery of am ount due.   
17. Government to provide means of crossing canals.  
  
*Subject to verification and confirmation by Ministry.   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 2]
2 
 SECTIONS  
18. Persons using water -course to construct works for passing water across  roads, etc . 
 If they fail, Canal -officer may constr uct, and recover cost.   
19. Adjustment of claims between persons jointly using water -course.   
 Recovery of amount found due.  
20. Supply of water through intervening wa ter-course.  
21. Application for construction of new water -course.  
22. Proced ure of Canal -officer thereupon.  
23. Application for transfer of existing water -course.   
 Procedure thereupon.  
24. Objections to construction or transfer applied for.   
25. When applicant may be placed in occupation . 
26. Procedure when objection is held valid.  
27. Procedure when Canal -officer disagrees with Collector.  
28. Expenses to be paid by applicant before receiving occupation.   
 Procedure in fixing compensation.   
 Recovery  of compensation and expenses.   
29. Conditions binding on applicant placed in occupatio n.  
30. Procedure applicable to occupation for extensions and alterations.   
PART IV  
OF THE SUPPLY  OF WATER  
31.  In absence of written contract, water -supply to be subject to rules.  
32. Conditions as to — 
 power to stop water -supply;   
 claims to compensation in case of failure or stoppage of supply;   
 claims on account of interruption from other causes;   
 duration of supply;   
 sale or sub -lettin g of right to use canal -water;   
 transfer, with land, of contracts for water;   
 no right acquired by us er.  
PART V  
OF WATER -RATES  
33. Liability when person using unauthori zedly cannot be identified.  
34. Liability when water runs to waste.  
35. Charges recoverable in addition to penalties.  
 Decision of questions under sections 33 and 34.  
36. Charge on occu pier for water, how determined.  
 “Occupier ’s rate .”  
37. “Owner ’s rate .”  
38. Amount of owner ’s rate.  
39. Owner ’s rate, when not chargeable.  
40. When occupier is to pay both owner ’s rate and occupier ’s rate.   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 2]
0. When occupier is to pay both owner ’s rate and occupier ’s rate.   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 3]
3 
 SECTIONS  
41. Power to make rules for apportion ing owner ’s rate.  
42. When owner is to pay ‘owner ’s rate.  
43. Effect of introduction of canal -irrigation on landlord ’s right to enhance.   
44. Water -rate by whom payable, when charged on land held by several owners.   
Recovery of charges  
45. Certified dues r ecoverable as land -revenue.   
46. Power to contract f or collection of canal -dues.   
47. Lambardars may be required to collect canal -dues.  
48. Fines excluded from sections 45, 46  and 47. 
PART VI  
OF CANAL  NAVIGATION  
49. Detainer of vessels violating rules.  
 Liability of own ers of vessels causing damage.  
50. Recovery of fines for offences in navigating canals.  
51. Power to seize and detain vessel on failure to pay charges.   
52. Power to seize cargo or goods, if charges due thereon are not paid.  
53. Procedure for recovery of such charges after seizure.  
54. Procedure in respect of vessels abandoned and goods unclaimed.  
 Disposal of proceeds of sale.  
PART VII  
OF DRAINAGE  
55. Power to prohibit obstructions or order their removal.   
56. Power to remove obstructions  after prohibition.  
57. Preparation of schemes for works of improvement.   
58. Powers of persons employed on such schemes.  
59. Rate on lands benefited by works.  
60. Recovery of rate.  
61. Disposal of claims to compensation.   
62. Limitation of such claims.  
PART VIII  
OF OBTAINING  LABOUR  FOR CANALS  AND DRAINAGE -WORKS  
63. Definition of “labourer ”. 
64. Power to prescribe number of labourers to be supplied by persons benefited  by canal.   
65. Procedure for obtaining labour for works urgently required.   
66. Liability of labourers under requisition.  
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 4]
4 
 PART IX  
OF JURISDICTION  
SECTIONS  
67. Jurisdiction under this Act of Civil Courts.  
68. Settlement of differences as to mutual rights and liabilities of persons interested in water -course.  
69. Power to summon and examine witnesses.   
PART X  
OF OFFENCES  AND PENALTIES  
70. Offences under Act.  
 Penalty.  
71. Saving o f prosecution under other laws.  
72. Compensation to person injured.  
73. Power to arrest without warrant.   
74. Definition of “canal ”.  
PART XI  
OF SUBSIDIARY  RULES  
75. Power to make, alter and cancel rules.  
 Publication of rules.   
 
 SCHEDULE .—[Repealed. ] 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 5]
5 
 THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE A CT, 1873  
ACT NO. 8 OF 1873  
[11th February , 1873.]  
An Act to regulate irrigation, navigation and drainage in Northern India . 
Preamble.—WHEREAS , throughout the territories to which this Act extends, the State 
Government is entitled to use and control for public purposes the water of all rivers and streams 
flowing in natural channels, and of all lakes and other natural collections of still water; and whereas 
it is expedient to amend the law relating to irrigation, navigation and drainage in the said territo ries; 
It is hereby enacted as follows: —  
PART I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title. —This Act may be called the Northern India Canal and Drainage Act, 1873.  
Local extent. —It extends to 1[Uttar Pradesh and the 2[territories which, immediately before 
the 1st November, 1956, were comprised in the States of Punjab and Delhi]] and applies to all 
lands whether permanently settled, temporarily settled, or free from revenue.  
3*   *   *   *       * 
2. [Repeal of Acts. ] Rep. by the Repealing Act, 1873 (12 of 1873), s. 1 and Sch edule.  
3. Interpretation -clause.—In this Act, unless there be something repugnant in the subject or 
context: —  
(1) “Canal”.—“canal ” includes —  
(a) all canals, channels and reservoirs constructed, maintained or controlled by the State 
Government for the supply or storage of water;  
(b) all works, embankments, structures, supply and escape channels connected with such 
canals, channels or reservoirs;  
(c) all water -courses as defined in the second clause of this section;  
(d) any part of a river, stream, lake  or natural collection of water , or natural 
drainage -channel, to which the State Government has applied the provisions of   
Part II of this Act;  
(2) “Water -course”.—“water -course ” means any channel which is supplied with water 
from a canal, but which is not maintained at the cost of the State Government, and all 
subsidiary works belonging to any such channel;  

<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 5]
ned at the cost of the State Government, and all 
subsidiary works belonging to any such channel;  
(3) “Drainage -work”.—“drainage -work ” includes escape -channels from a canal, dams, 
weirs, embankments, sluices, groins and other works for the protection of lands from flood or 
from  erosion, formed or maintained b y the State Government under the provisions of Part VII 
of this Act, but does no t include works for the removal of sewage from towns;  
4(4) “Vessel”.—“vessel ” includes boats, rafts, timber and oth er float ing bodies; 
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O.1948, for the original words as amended by the A.O.1937. The Act originally extended to the 
territories which are now the U.P., the Punjab, and the C. P. It has been rep. in the C.P. by the C.P. Irrigation Act, 
1931 (C.P. Act 3 of 1931). It has been declared not to apply to any canal which is included for the time being under 
Sch. I or Sch. II to the Punjab Minor C anals Act, 1905 (Pun. Act 3 of 1905), see s. 2 ( 3) of that Act. The Act has 
been amended and in Punjab by Pun. Acts 19 of 1953, 22 of 1960 and 18 of 1974’ ’ in U.P. by U.P. Acts 30 of 1956 
and 16 of 1974; and in Haryana by Haryana Acts 4 of 1971 and 29 of 1 974.  
2. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956, for “States of Punjab and Delhi”.  
3. The commencement paragraph rep. by Act 16 of 1874, s. 1 and Sch edule .    
4. Cf. definition  in the General Clauses Act, 1 897 (10 of 1897), s. 3.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 6]
6 
 (5) “Commissioner ”.—“Commissioner ” means a Commissioner of a division, and includes any 
officer appointed under this Act to exercise all or any of the powers of a Commissioner;  
1(6) “Collector ”.—“Collector ” means the head revenue -officer of a district, and includes a 
Deputy Commissioner or  other officer appointed under this Act to exercise all or any of the powers of 
a Collector;  
(7) “Canal -officer”.—“Canal -officer ” means an officer appointed under this Act to exercise 
control or jurisdiction over a canal or any part thereof;  
“Superintendin g Canal -officer”.—“Superintending Canal -officer ” means an officer exercising 
general control over a canal or portion of a canal;  
“Divisional Canal -officer”.—“Divisional Canal -officer ” means an officer exercising control 
over a division of a canal;  
“Sub-divisional Canal -officer”.—“Sub-divisional Canal -officer ” means an officer exercising 
control over a sub -division of a canal;  
(8) “District”.—“District ” means a district as fixed for revenue purposes.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 3 of Act No. VIII of 1873. — In clause ( 8) of section 3 of the Northern India 
Canal and Drainage Act, 1873 (hereinafter called the principal Act) for the full stop a semi -colon shall be 
substituted and thereafter the following shall be added as new clauses ( 9) and ( 10) ; 
“(9) ‘irrigable command area’ means such area of culturable land or  grove land which, for purposes 
of irrigation, can be commanded through a single  outlet in a canal or by a single tube -well and the limits 
of which are f ixed in this  behalf by the Divisional Canal Officer ; and  
(10) ‘Prescribed’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act V of 1963, s. 2]  
4. Power to appoint officer s.—The State Government may from time to time declare, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, the officers by whom, and th e local limits within which, or any of the powers or 
duties hereinaf
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 6]
, the officers by whom, and th e local limits within which, or any of the powers or 
duties hereinafter conferred or imposed shall be exercised or performed.  
All officers mentioned in section 3, clause ( 7), shall be respec tively subject to the orders of such 
officers as the State Government from time to time directs.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 4 of Act No. XVII of 1878. —In the first proviso to section 4 of the Northern 
India Ferries Act,  1878, as ame nd in its application to Uttar Pradesh, between the words “two  States” and 
the words “the powers”, the words “to which this Act applies” shall  be inserted.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act IV of 1960, s. 2]  
PART II  
OF THE APPLICATION OF WATER FOR PUBLIC  PURPOSES  
5. Notification to issue when water -supply is to be applied for public purposes. —Whenever it 
appears expedient to the State Government that the water of any river or stream flowing in a natural 
channel, or of any lake or other natural collection of still w ater, should be applied or used by the State 
Government for the purpose of any existing or projected canal or drainage -work, the State Government 
                                                      
1. Cf. definition  in the General Clauses Act, 1 897 (10 of 1897), s. 3  (11). 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 7]
7 
 may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that the said water will be so applied or used after a 
day to be named in the said notification, not being earlier than three months from the date thereof.  
6. Powers of Canal -officer.—At any time after the day so named, any Canal -officer, acting under the 
orders of the State Government in this behalf, may enter  on any land and remove any obstructions, and 
may close any channels, and do any other thing necessary for such application or use of the said water.  
7. Notice as to claims for compensation. —As soon as is practicable after the issue of such 
notification, t he Collector shall cause public notice to be given at convenient places, stating that the State 
Government intends to apply or use the said water as aforesaid, and that claims for compensation in 
respect of the matters mentioned in section 8 may be made be fore him.  
8. Damage for which compensation shall not be awarded. —No compensation shall be awarded for 
any damage caused by —  
(a) stoppage or diminution of percolation or floods;  
(b) deterioration of climate or soil;  
(c) stoppage of navigation, or of the means of drifting timber or watering cattle;  
(d) displacement of labour.  
Matters in respect of which compensation may be awarded. —But compensation may be awarded 
in respect of any of the following matters :—  
(e) stoppage or diminution of supply of water th rough any natural channel to any defined 
artificial channel, whether above or underground , in use at the date of the said notification;  
(f) stoppage or diminution of supply of water to any work erected for purposes of profit on any 
channel, whether natural  or artificial, in use at the date of the said notification;  
(g) stoppage or diminution  of supply of water through any natural channel which has been 
used for purposes of irrigation within the five years next before the date of the said notification;  
(h) damage done in respect of any right to a water -co
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 7]
t before the date of the said notification;  
(h) damage done in respect of any right to a water -course or the use of any water to which any 
person is entitled under the 1Indian Limitation Act, 1877 (15 o f 1877), Part IV;  
(i) any other substantial damage, not falling under any of the above clauses ( a), (b), (c) or 
(d), and caused by the exercise of the powers conferred by this Act, which is capable of being 
ascertained and estimated at the time of awarding such compensation.  
In determining the amount of such compensation, regard shall be had to the diminut ion 
in the market -value, at the time of awarding compensation of the property in respect of 
which compensation is claimed; and, where such market -value is not ascertainable, the 
amount shall be reckoned at twelve times the amount of the diminution of the a nnual net t 
profits of such property caused by the exercise of the powers conferred by this Act.  
No right to any such supply of water as is referred to in clauses (e), (f) or (g) of this 
section, in respect of a work or channel not in use at the date of the notification, shall be 
acquired as against the State Government, except by grant or under the 1Indian Limitation 
Act, 1877 (15 of 1877), Part IV;  
and no right to any of the adva ntages referred to in clauses (a), (b) and (c) of this section shall be 
acquired, as against the State Government, under the same Part.  
9. Limitation of claims. —No claim for compensation for any such stoppage, diminution 
or damage shall be made after the e xpiration of one year from such stoppage, diminution or 
damage, unless the Collector is satisfied that the claimant had sufficient cause for not making 
the claim within such period.  
                                                      
1. See now the Indian Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 8]
8 
 10. Enquiry into claims and amount of compensation. —The Collector shall pr oceed to 
enquire into any such claim, and to determine the amount of compensation, if any, which should 
be given to the claimant; and sections 9 to 12 (inclusive), 14 and 15, 18 to 23 (inclusive), 26 to 
40 (inclusive), 51, 57, 58 and 59 of the 1Land Acquisition Act, 1870 (10 of 1870), shall apply to 
such enquiries:  
Provided that, instead of the last clause of the said section 26, the following shall be 
read: —“The provisions of this section and of section 8 of the Northern India Canal and 
Drainage  Act, 1873  (8 of 1873) , shall be read to every assessor in a language which he 
under stands, before he gives his opinion as to the amount of compensation to be 
awarded. ” 
11. Abatement of rent on interruption of water -supply .—Every tenant holding under 
an unexpired lease, or having a right of occupancy, who is in occupation of any land at the 
time when any stoppage or diminution of water -supply, in respect of which compen sation 
is allowed under section 8, takes place, may claim an abatement of the rent prev iously 
payable by him for the said land, on the ground that the interruption reduces the value of 
the holding.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of  section 11 of  Act XVII of  1878.— In section 11 of the Northern India Ferries Act, 
1878, for the words “one month’s thin” the word “three months” shall be substituted.  
[Vide  Uttar Pradesh Act XXIX of 1948, s. 2]  
12. Enhancement of rent on restoration of water -supply.—If a water -supply inc reasing the value 
of such holding is afterwards restored to the said land, the rent of the tenant may be enhanced in respect 
of the increased value of such land due to the restored water -supply, to an amount not exceeding that at 
which it stood immediately  before the abatement.  
Such enhancement shall be on account only of the restored water -supply, and shall not 
affect the liability of the tenant to enhancemen
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 8]
 only of the restored water -supply, and shall not 
affect the liability of the tenant to enhancement of rent on any other grounds.  
13. Compensation when due. —All sums of money payable for compensati on under this 
Part shall become due three months after the claim for such compensation is made in 
respect of the stoppage, diminution or damage complained of,  
Interest. —and simple interest at the  rate of six  per cent.  per annum shall be allowed on any 
such sum remaining unpaid after the said three months, except where the non -payment of such 
sum is caused by the wilful neglect or refusal of the claimant to receive the same.  
PART III  
OF THE  CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF WORKS  
14. Power to enter and sur vey, etc.—Any Canal -officer, or other person acting under the general or 
special order of a Canal -officer,  
may enter upon any lan ds adjacent to any canal, or  through which any canal is 
proposed to be made, and undertake surveys or levels thereon;  
and dig and bore into the sub -soil; 
and make and set up-suitable land -marks, level -marks and water -gauges;  
and do all other acts necessary for the pro per prosecution of any enquiry relating to any 
existing or projected canal under the charge of the said Canal -officer; 
                                                      
1. See now the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (1 of 1894).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 9]
9 
 Power to clear land. —and, where otherwise such enquiry cannot be completed, such 
officer or other person may cut down and clear away any part of any standing crop, fence 
or jungle;  
Power to inspect and regulate water -supply.—And may also enter upon an y land, 
building or water -course on account of which any water -rate is chargeable, for the purpose 
of inspecting or regulating the use of the water supplied, or of measuring the lands 
irrigated thereby or chargeable with a water -rate, and of doing all thin gs necessary for the 
proper regu lation and management of such canal:  
Notice of intended entry into houses. —Provided that, if such Canal -officer or 
person proposes to enter into any building or enclosed court or garden  attached to a 
dwelling -house not supplied with water flowing from any canal, he shall previously give 
the occupier of such building, court or garden at least seven days ’ notice in writing of 
his intention to do so.  
Compensation for damage caused by entry. —In every case of entry under this  section, the Canal -
officer shall, at the time of such entry, tender compensation for any damage which may be occasioned by 
any proceeding under this section; and, in case of dispute as to the suffic iency of the amount so tendered,  
he shall forthwith refer  the same for decision by the Collector, and such decision shall be final.  
15. Power to enter for repairs and to prevent accidents. —In case of any accident happen ing or 
being apprehended to a canal any Divisional Canal -officer or any person act ing under h is general or 
special  orders in this behalf may enter upon any lands adjacent to such canal, and may execute all works 
which may be necessary for the purpose of repairing or preventing such accident.  
Compensation for damage to land. —In every such case such Canal -officer or person 
shall tender compensation to the proprietors or occupiers of the said lands for all damage 
done to the same. If such tender is not acce
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 9]
prietors or occupiers of the said lands for all damage 
done to the same. If such tender is not accepted, the Canal -officer shall refer the matter to 
the Collector, who shal l proceed to award compensation for the damage as though the State 
Government had directed the occupation of the lands under section 43 of the 1Land Acquisi -
tion Act, 1870 (10 of 1870).  
16. Application by persons desiring to use canal -water.—Any persons de siring to use the water of 
any canal may apply in writing to the Divisional or Sub -Divisional Canal -officer of the division or          
sub-division of  the canal from which the water -course is to be supplied, requesting such officer to 
construct or improve  a water -course at the cost of the applicants.  
Contents of application. —The application shall state the works to be undertaken, their approximate 
estimated cost, or the amount which the applicants are willing to pay for the same, or whether they 
engage to pay the actual cost as settled by the Divisional Canal -officer, and how the payment is to be 
made.  
Liability of applicants for cost of works. —When the assent of the Superintending Canal -officer is 
given to such application, all the applicants shall, after the application has been duly attested before the 
Collector, be jointly and severally liable for the cost of such  works to the extent mentioned therein.  
Recovery of amount due. —Any amount becoming due under the terms of such appli cation, and not 
paid to t he Divisional Canal -officer, or the person authorised by him to receive the same, on or before the 
date on which it becomes due, shall, on the demand of such officer, be recoverable by the Collector as if it 
were an arrear of land -revenue.  
17. Government t o provide means of crossing canals. —There shall be provided, at the cost of the 
State Government, suitable means of crossing canals constructed or maintained at the cost of the State 
Government, at such places as the State Government thinks ne
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 9]
or maintained at the cost of the State 
Government, at such places as the State Government thinks necessary for t he reasonable convenience of 
the inhabitants of the adjacent l ands. 
                                                      
1. See now the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (1 of 1894).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 10]
10 
 On receiving a statement in writing, signed by not less than five of the owners of  such lands, to the 
effect that suitable crossings have not been provided on any canal, the Collector shal l cause enquiry to be 
made int o the circumstances of the case , and if he thinks that the statement is established, he shall report 
his opinion thereon for the consi deration of the State Government, and the State Government shall cause 
such measures in reference thereto to be taken as it thinks proper.  
18. Persons using water -course to construct works for passing water across roads, etc. —The 
Divisional Canal -officer may issue an order to the persons using any water -course to construct su itable 
bridges, culverts or other works for the passage of the water of such water -course across any public road, 
canal or drainage -channel in use befo re the said water -course was ma de, or to repair any such works.  
Such order shall specify a reasonable pe riod within which such construction or repairs shall be 
completed;  
If they fail, Canal -officer may constr uct.—and if, after the receipt of such order, the persons to 
whom it is addressed do not, within the said period, construct or repair such works to the  satisfaction of 
the said Canal -officer, he may, with the previous approval of the Superintending Canal -officer, himself 
construct or repair the same;  
and recover cost .—and if the said persons do not, when so required, pay the cost of such 
construction or repairs as declared by the Divisional Canal -officer, the amount shall, on the demand of the 
Divisional Canal -officer, be recoverable from them by the Collector as if it were an arrear of                    
land-revenue.  
19. Adjustmen t of claims between per sons jointly using water -course .—If any person, jointly 
responsible with others for the construction or maintenance of a water -course, or jointly making use of a 
water -course with others, neglects or refuses to pay his share of the cost 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 10]
ointly making use of a 
water -course with others, neglects or refuses to pay his share of the cost of such constructio n or 
maintenance, or to execute his share of any work necessary for such construction or maintenance, the 
Divisional or Sub -divisional Canal -officer, on receiving an application in writing from any person injured 
by such neglect or refusal, shall serve not ice o n all the par ties concerned th at, on the expiration of a 
fortnight from the service, he will investigate the case; and shall, on the expiration of that period, 
investigate the case accordingly , and make such order thereon as to him seems fit.  
Such order shall be  appealable to the Commissioner, whose order thereon shall be final.  
Recovery of amount found due. —Any sum directed by such order to be paid within a 
specified period may, if not paid within such period, and if the order remains in force, be 
recovered by the Collector, from the person directed to pay the same, as if it were an 
arrear of land -revenue.  
20. Supply of water through intervening water -course.—Whenever application is 
made to a Divisional Canal -officer for a supply of water from a can al, and  it appears to him 
expedient th at such supply should be given and that it should be conveyed through some 
existing water -course, he shall give notice to the persons responsible for the maintenance 
of such water -course to show cause, on a day not le ss than fourteen days from the date of 
such notice, why the said s upply should not be so conveyed;  and, after making enquiry on 
such day, the Divisional Canal -officer shall determine whether and on what conditions the 
said supply shall be conveyed through such water -course.  
When such officer  determines that a supply of canal -water may be conveyed through 
any water-course as aforesaid, his decision shall, when confirmed or modified by the 
Superintend ing Canal -officer, be binding on the applicant and also on  the persons 
responsible for the mainten
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 10]
ng Canal -officer, be binding on the applicant and also on  the persons 
responsible for the maintenance of the said water -course.  
Such applicant sh all not be entitled to use such water -course until he has paid the 
expense of any alteration of such water -course necessary in order to his being supplied 
through it, a nd also such share of the first cost of such water -course as the Divisional or 
Superintending Canal -officer may determine.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 11]
11 
 Such applicant shall also be liable for his share of the cost of maintenance of such 
water -course so long as he uses it.  
21. Applica tion for construction of new water -course.—Any person desiring the construction of a 
new water -course may apply in writing to the Divisional Canal -officer, stating —  
(1) that he has endeavoured  unsuccessfully to acquire, from the owners of the land 
through which he desires such water -course to pass, a right to oc cupy so much of the 
land as wil l be needed for such water -course;  
(2) that he desires the said Canal -officer , in his behalf and at his cost, to do all things necessary 
for acquiring such right;  
(3) that he is able to defray all costs involved in acquiring such right and constructing such 
water -course.  
22. Procedure of Canal -officer thereup on.—If the Divisional Canal -officer considers —  
(1) that the const ruction of such water -course is expedient, and  
(2) that the statements in the application are true,  
he shall call upon the applicant to make such deposit as the Divisional Canal -officer considers necessary 
to defray the cost of the prelimin ary proceedings, and the amount of any compen sation which he 
considers likely to become due under section 28;  
and, upon such deposit being made, he shall cause enquiry to be made into the most suitable 
alignment for the said wa ter-course, and shall mark o ut the land which, in his opinion, it will b e necessary 
to occupy for the construction thereof, and shall forthwith publish a notice in every village through which 
the water -course is proposed to be taken, that so much of such land as belongs to such villa ge has been so 
marked out, and shal l send a copy of such notice to  the Collector of every district in which any part of 
such land is situate.  
23. Application for transfer of existing water -course.—Any person desiring that an existing                   
water -course should be transferred from its present owner to himself may ap
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 11]
ting                   
water -course should be transferred from its present owner to himself may apply in writing to the 
Divisional Canal -officer, stating —  
(1) that he has endeavoured unsuccessfully to procure such transfer from the owner of such 
water -course;  
(2) that he desire s the said Canal -officer, in his behalf and at his cost, to do all things necessary 
for procuring such transfer;  
(3) that he is able to defray the cost of such transfer.  
Procedure thereupon .—If the Divisional Canal -officer considers —  
(a) that the said tr ansfer is necessary for the better Management of the irrigation from such 
water -course, and  
(b) that the statements in the application are true,  
he shall call upon the applicant to make such deposit as the Divisional Canal -officer considers necessary 
to de fray the cost of the preliminary proceedings, and the amount of any com pensation that may become 
due under the provisions of section 28 in respect of such transfer;  
and upon such deposit being made, he shall publish a notice of the application in every village, and 
shall send a copy of the notice to the Collector of every district, through which such water -course passes.  
24. Objections to construction or transfer applied for. —Within thirty days from the publi cation of 
a notice under section 22 or sectio n 23, as the case may be, a ny person interested in the land or                      
water -course to which the notice refers may apply to the Collector by petition , stating his objection to the 
construction or transfer for which application has been made.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 12]
12 
 The Collector may either reject the petition or may proceed to inquire into the validity of the 
objection, giving previous notice to the Divisional Canal -officer of the place and time at which such 
inquiry will be held.  
The Collector shall record in writing  all orders passed by him under this section and the grounds 
thereof.  
25. When applicant may be placed in occupation. —If no such objection is made, or (where such 
objection is made) i f the Collector over -rules it, he shall give notice to the Divisional Can al-officer to that 
effect, and shall proceed forthwith to place the said applicant in occupation of the land marked out or of 
the water -course to be transferred, as the case may be.  
26. Procedure when objection is held valid. —If the Collector considers any  objection made as 
aforesaid to be valid he shall inform the Divisional Canal -officer accordingly; and, if such officer sees fit, 
he may, in the case of an application under section 21, alter the boundaries of the land so marked out, and 
may give fresh not ice under secti on 22; and the procedure herein before provided shall be applicable to 
such notice, and the Collector shall thereupon proceed as before provided.  
27. Procedure when Canal -officer disagrees with Collector. —If the Canal -officer disagrees with 
the Collector, the matter shall be referred for decision to the Commissioner.  
Such decision shall be final, and the Collector, if he is so directed by such decision, shall, subject to 
the provisions of section 28, cause the said applicant to be placed in oc cupation of the land so marked out 
or of the water -course to be transferred, as the case may be.  
28. Expenses to be paid by applicant before receiving occupation. —No such applicant shall be 
placed in occupation of such land or water -course until he has paid to the person named by the Collector 
such amount as the Collector determines to be due as compensation for the land or water -course so 
occupied or tran
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 12]
he Collector determines to be due as compensation for the land or water -course so 
occupied or transferred, and for any damage caused by the marking out or occupation of such land, 
together with all expenses incidental to such occupation or transfer.  
Procedure in fixing compensation. —In determining the compensation to be made under this section 
the Collector shall proceed under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 18701 (10 of 1870); but he 
may, if the person to be compensated so desires, award such compensation in the form of a rent -charge 
payable in respect of the land or water -course occupied or transferred.  
Recovery of compensation and expenses. —If such compensation and expenses are not paid  when 
demanded by the person entitled to receive the same, the amount may be recovered by the Collector as if 
it were an arrear of land -revenue, and shall, when recovered, be paid by him to the person entitled to 
receive the same.  
29. Conditions binding on  applicant placed in occupation. —When any such applicant is placed in 
occupation of land or of a water -course as aforesaid, the following rules and conditions shall be binding 
on him and his representative in interest: —  
First.—All works necessary for the passage across such water -course, of water -courses existing 
previous to its construction and of the drainage intercepted by it, and for affording proper 
communications across it for the convenience of the neighbouring lands, shall be constructed by the 
applicant, and be maintained by him or his representative in interest to the satisfaction of the 
Divisional Canal -officer.  
Second.—Land occupied for a water -course  under the provisions of sectio n 22 s hall be used only 
for the purpose of such water -course.  
Third.—The proposed water -course shall be completed to the satisfactio n of the Divi sional Canal -
offic er within one year a fter the applicant is placed in occupation of the land.  
In cases in which land is occupied or 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 12]
r a fter the applicant is placed in occupation of the land.  
In cases in which land is occupied or a water -course is transferred on the terms of a rent -charge.  
                                                      
1. See now the Land Acquisition Act, 1894   (1 of 1894).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 13]
13 
 Fourth.—The applicant or his representative in interest shall, so long as he occupies such land or 
water -course, pay rent for the same at such rate and on such days as are determined by the Collector 
when the applicant is placed in occupa tion. 
Fifth.—If the right to occupy the la nd cease owing to a breach of any of these rules, the liability to 
pay the said rent shall continue until the applicant  or his representative in inter est has restored the 
land to its original condition, or until he  has paid, by way of compensatio n for any injury done to the 
said land, such amount and to such persons as the Collector determines.  
Sixth.—The Collector may, on the application of the person entitled to receive such rent or 
compensation, determine the amo unt of rent due or assess the amount of such compensation; and, if 
any such rent or compensation be not paid by the applicant or his representative in interest, the 
Collector may recover the amount, with interest thereon at the rate of six per cent. per an num from 
the date on which it became due, as if it were an arrear of land -revenue, and shall pay the same, when 
recovered, to the person to whom it is due.  
If any of the rules and conditions prescribed by this section are not complied with,  
or if any water -course constructed or transferred under this Act is disused for three years 
continuously,  
the right of the applicant, or of his representative in interest, to occupy such land or water -course 
shall cease absolutely.  
30. Procedure applicable to occupation for extensions and alterations .—The procedure 
hereinbefore provided for the occup ation of land for the construction of a w ater-course shall be 
applicable to the occupation of land for any extension or alteration of a water -course, and for 
the deposit of soil from water -course clearances.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Addition of new section 30 -A to 30 -G in Act No. VIII of 1873 .—After section 30 of the principal 
Act, the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 13]
of new section 30 -A to 30 -G in Act No. VIII of 1873 .—After section 30 of the principal 
Act, the following shall be added as new sections 30 -A to 0 -G : 
“30-A. Preparation of the schem e for an irrigable command area. —The Divisional Canal 
Officer may, with a view to providing for or improving irrigation facilities in an irrigable command 
area, prepare a scheme for the construction of water -courses and the carrying out of any work 
connect ed therewith in such area, anything to the contrary contained in any  other law 
notwithstanding. The scheme shall contain — 
(i) a plan showing the site of the outlet, the existing water -courses, if  any, the proposed 
water -courses and works connected therewit h, and the  areas already served and to be served by 
the existing or proposed watercourses;  
(ii) a statement showing the estimated cost of constructing the  proposed water -courses and 
works connected therewith ;  
(iii) a memorandum showing the manner in which  the scheme may be  implemented; and  
(iv) such other particulars as may be prescribed.  
30-B. Calling upon the Gaon Sabhas to implement the scheme. —(1) The Divisional Canal 
Officer shall, as soon as may be,  forward a copy of the scheme prepared under section  30-A to each 
of the  Gaon Sabhas and Block Development Officers within whose jurisdiction the  land affected 
thereby is situate, and call upon the Gaon Sabhas to submit to  him within a period of thirty days from 
the date of receipt of the copy, their  approv al or the scheme, or any objections, suggestions or 
modifications  thereto.  
(2) The copy of the scheme shall, within three days of its receipt by the  Gaon Sabha, be affixed 
by it on its notice board, and shall, within twelve days  thereafter, be considered i n a meeting of the 
Gaon Panchayat convened for  the purpose and the decision of the Gaon Panchayat shall be deemed to 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 14]
14 
 be for  and on behalf of the Gaon Sabha concerned. The decision shall be  communicated to the 
Divisional Canal Officer within the time allowe d under  sub-section (1).  
(3) If no objections, modifications or suggestions are submitted by any  of the Gaon Sabhas within 
the time specified in sub -section (1), the Gaon  Sabhas shall be deemed to have approved the scheme, 
which shall thereupon  become final.  
(4) Upon receipt of the objections, modifications or suggestions, made  by the Gaon Sabhas under 
sub-section (2), the Divisional Canal Officer may  either confirm the scheme or amend or modify it 
and thereupon the scheme so  confirmed, amended or modif ied, shall become final.  
(5) When the scheme has become final, the Divisional Canal Officer shall, by notice in writing, 
call upon the Gaon Sabhas  concerned to take all such steps as may be necessary for the 
implementation  of the scheme, and in particular to construct or cause to be constructed, the  water -
courses and carry out, or cause to be carried out, all works connected  therewith, within the period 
fixed therefor in the notice, which may be extended  from time to time.  
30-C. Securing or  acquiring land  for the  scheme .—(1) Upon receipt of the notice mentioned in 
sub-section (5) of  section 30 -B, the Gaon Sabha shall give to all persons on whose land any  water -course 
is proposed to be constructed, or on which any work connected  therewith is proposed to be carried out, 
option to transfer by way of gift or  surrender, as the case may be, free from all encumbrances, within the 
period  provided therefor in the notice, so much of the said land in its favour as may be  necessary for the 
implementation of the scheme.  
(2) Where any land required for the implementation of the scheme is  not transferred to, or 
surrendered in favour of the Gaon Sabha under subsection  (1), it may — 
(i) either purchase the land at such rates as may be prescribed ; or   
(ii) move the State Gov ernment t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 14]
ither purchase the land at such rates as may be prescribed ; or   
(ii) move the State Gov ernment to acquire the same under the Land  Acquisition Act, 1894  (Act 
no. 1 of 1894)  ; or 
(iii) If the land for construction of water -courses is likely to be required  for a limited period 
only, apply to the Requisitioning Authority under section 6  of U. P.  Rural Development 
(Requisitioning of Land) Act, 1948  (U.P. Act no XXVII of 1948)  to requisition  the land ;  
Provided that if it appears after the construction of water -courses on the land so requisitioned that the 
alignment of the water -courses as construc ted will be retained unchanged for long the Gaon Sabha shall, 
as early as possible, move the State Government to acquire the land on a permanent basis.  
(3) Where, on the application of the Gaon Sabha under sub -section  (2), any land has been acquired in 
accordance with the provisions of the Land  Acquisition Act, 1894  (Act no. 1 of 1894) , the State 
Government shall, subject to such terms and  conditions as may be imposed by it in this behalf, transfer to, 
or vest in, the  Gaon Sabha, the land so acquired for the implementation of the scheme.   
(4) The land transferred to, or vested in, the Gaon Sabha under subsection  (3), or of which the 
management has been vested in the Gaon Sabha  under section 11 of the U. P. Rural Development 
(Requisitioning of  Land) Act,  1948  (U.P. Act no. XXVII of 1948) , shall be utilized by the Gaon Sabha for 
the implementation of the  scheme, and it shall construct or cause to be constructed, in the manner  
hereinafter provided, the water -courses, and carry out or cause to be carried  out, all works connected 
therewith as may be necessary for the  implementation of the scheme.  
(5) In implementing the scheme the Gaon Sabha shall, in the first instance, give option, by notice in 
writing, published the manner   prescribed,  to all per sons having a holding in the irrigable command area, 
to construct, within s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 14]
prescribed,  to all per sons having a holding in the irrigable command area, 
to construct, within such time as may be fixed therefor in the notice, the water  courses, and carry out all 
such work connected therewith, as may be  necessary for the implementation of the scheme.  
(6) Wh ere the persons concerned fail to construct the whole or a ny part of any water -course, or to 
carry out any work connected therewith, in  accordance with the scheme, the Gaon Sabha shall construct, 
or carry out, or  cause to be constructed, or carried out , the same in the manner provided under                        
section 17 of the Uttar Pradesh Panchayat Raj Act, 1947, for the execution of  small Irrigation projects.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 15]
15 
 30-D. Inspection of  work by the Divisional Canal Officer .—(1) On the expiry of the period or  
extended period, as the case  may be, specified in the notice under sub -section ( 5) of section 30 -B, the  
Divisional Canal Officer shall inspect, or cause to be inspected, the water courses and all works 
connected therewith, constructed or carried out, by t he Gaon Sabha, either directly or through the tenure -
holders of the irrigable  command area, and if the same are in accordance with scheme and otherwise  
properly constructed, or carried out, approve the same.  
(2) Where the water -courses or all works connected therewith, have  not been properly constructed or 
carried out in accordance with the scheme,  the Divisional Canal Officer, shall, by order in writing, require 
the Gaon Sabha  concerned to remove and remedy, or cause to be removed and remedied, all  the defects 
within the period specified in the order.  
(3) On the expiry of the period allowed in the order under sub -section  (2), the Divisional Canal 
Officer shall again inspect, or cause to be inspected,  the water -courses, and all works connected 
therewi th, and shall either approve  or dis -approve the same.  
30-E.Implementation  of the  scheme by the  State  Government.  —Where the Gaon Sabha fails — 
(i) to take all or any of the steps required to be taken by it in  accordance with the provisions of 
section 30 -C ; or 
(ii) to construct, or cause to be constructed, the whole of the watercourses,  or to carry out all 
works connected therewith, in accordance with the  scheme, within the period or the extended period 
provided therefor in the  notice under sub -section ( 5) of section 30 -B ; or  
(iii) to remove the defects in the water -courses or in any work  connected therewith as required to 
be done under sub -section ( 2) of section  30-D, or to obtain final approval of the Divisional Canal 
Officer in respect of  them under sub -section ( 3) of the said section ;  
the State Go
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 15]
onal Canal 
Officer in respect of  them under sub -section ( 3) of the said section ;  
the State Government shall take all such steps, including acquisition of the  land, as may be necessary for 
the implementation of the scheme, and cause to  be constructed and carried out the water -courses and all 
works conne cted therewith in accordance with the scheme.  
30-F.Vesting of  water -courses  etc. in the Gaon  Sabha.—With effect from the date a notification in 
this behalf is published  in the Gazette by the State Government, and subject to such terms and  conditions 
as may  be prescribed, all the water -courses and all works carried  out by the State Government in 
conne ction with the implementation of the  scheme, shall vest in the Gaon Sabha within whose jurisdiction 
the same lie.  
30-G. Maintenance  of the watercourses,  etc.—The Gaon Sabha shall at all times maintain and keep 
in good  repairs all the water -courses, and all the works connected therewith,  constructed or carried out by 
it, or vested in it under section 30 -F. 
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act V of 19 63, s. 3]  
Uttar Pradesh  
Insertion of new section 30 -EE is Act no. 8 of 1873. —After  section 30 -E of the Northern India 
Canal and  rainage Act, 1873, amended in its application to Uttar Pradesh, the following section shall be 
inserted,  namely : — 
“30-EE. Special provisions in respect of major irrigation projects. —(1) In any area covered 
by the Command of the Gandak, the Sharda Sahayak or the Ram Ganga Irrigation Project or any 
other major project specified in this behalf by the State Government by notification in the Gazette, the 
Divis ional Canal Officer of the Irrigation Division may prepare a scheme containing the particulars 
referred to in section 30 -A, and hereupon he may take all such steps as may be necessary for the 
implementation of the scheme, and cause to be constructed and ca rried out water -courses and all 
works connected therewith in accordance with the scheme, and not
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 15]
a rried out water -courses and all 
works connected therewith in accordance with the scheme, and nothing in sections 30 -B, 30 -C, 30 -D 
and 30 -E, shall apply in relation to such scheme . 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section  (1), the Divisional Canal 
Officer may — 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 16]
16 
 (a) apply to the requisitioning authority under the U. P. Rural  Development (Requisitioning 
of Land) Act, 1948, to requisition any land  required for implementation of the scheme ; or  
(b) move the State Government to acq uire under the Land Acquisition  Act, 1894, any land 
required for implementation of the scheme ; or  
(c) take action both under clauses ( a) and ( b), namely, to have land  requisitioned in the first 
instance, and thereafter acquired.  
(3) The Divisional Canal O fficer may delegate his functions under sub -section  (2) to a                       
Sub-divisional Canal Officer.  
(4) The provisions of sections 30 -F, 30 -G and 36 -A, shall apply in  relation to a scheme prepared 
under this section and to water -courses and other works constructed under such scheme as they apply 
to any  scheme referred to in sections 30 -A, 30 -B, 30 -C, 30 -D and 30 -E and to water -courses  and 
other works constructed in accordance therewith.”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 16 of 1974, s. 2]  
PART IV  
OF THE SUPPLY  OF WATER  
31. In absence of written contract, water -supply to be subject to rules. —In the absence 
of a written contract, or so far as any such contract does not extend, every supply of                   
canal -water shall be deemed to be given at the  rates and subject to the conditions prescribed 
by the rules to be made by the Stat e Government in respect thereof.  
32. Conditions as to. —Such contracts and rules must be consistent  with the following 
conditions: —  
(a) power to stop water -supply.—The Divisional Canal -officer may not stop  the supply of water 
to any water -course, or to any person, except in the following cases: —  
(1) whenever and so long as it is necessary to stop such supply for the purpose of 
executing any work ordered by competent aut horit y and with the previous sanction of 
the State Government;  
(2) whenever and so long as any water -course is not maintained in such proper customary 
repair as to preve
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 16]
ever and so long as any water -course is not maintained in such proper customary 
repair as to prevent the wasteful escape of water therefrom;  
(3) within periods fixed from time to time by the Divisional Canal -officer;  
(b) claims to compensation in case of failure or stoppage of supply. —No claim shall be made 
against the State Government for compensation in respect of loss caused by the failure or 
stoppage of the water in a canal, by reas on of any cause beyond the control of the State 
Government or of any  repairs, alterations or additio ns to the canal, or of any measures 
taken for regulating the proper flow of water therein, or for maintaining the established 
course of irrigation which the  Divisional Canal -office r considers necessary; but the person 
suffering such loss may claim such remission of the ordinary charges payable for the use 
of the water as is aut horised by the State Government : 
(c) claims on account of interruption from other c auses.—If the supply of w ater to 
any land irrigated from a canal be interrupted otherwise than in the manner described in the 
last preceding clause, the occupier or owner of such land may present a petition for 
compensation to the Collector for any loss arising from such interruption, and the Collector 
may award to the petitioner reasonable compensation for such loss:  
(d) duration of supply. —When the water of a canal is supplied for the irrigation of                
a single crop, the permission to use such  water shall be held to continue only until that 
crop comes to maturity, and to apply only to that crop; but , if it be supplied for irrigating 
two or more crops to be raised on the same land within the year, such permission shall be 
held to continue for on e year from the commencement of the irrigation, and to apply to 
such crops only as are matured within that year : 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 17]
17 
 (e) sale or subletting of right to use canal -water.—Unless with the permission of the 
Superintending Canal -officer, no person entitled to use t he water of any canal, or any 
work, building or land appertaining to any canal, shall sell or sublet or otherwise transfer 
his right to such use:  
Provided that the former part of this clause shall not apply to the use by a cultivating 
tenant of water suppl ied by the owner of a water -course for the irrigation of the land held 
by such tenant : 
transfer, with land, of contracts for water .—But all contracts made between the State 
Government and the owner or occupier of any immovable property, as to the supply of 
canal -water to such property, shall be transferable therewith, and shall be presumed to have 
been so transferred whenever a transfe r of such property takes place : 
(f) No right acquired by user. —No right to the use of the water of a canal shall be, or 
be deemed to have been, acquired under the 1Indian Limitation Act, 1877 (15 of 1877),                
Part IV, nor shall the State Govern ment be bound to supply any person with water except in 
accordance with the terms of a contract in writing.  
PART  V 
OF WATER -RATES   
33. Liability when person using unauthorisedly cannot be identified. —If water supplied through a 
water -course be used in an unauthorised manner, and if the person by whose act or neglect such use has 
occurred cannot be identified,  
the person on whose land such water has flowed if such land has derived benefit therefrom,  
or if such person cannot be identified or if such land has  not derived benefit therefro m, all 
the persons chargeable in respect of the water supplied through such water -course, shall be 
liable, or jointly liable, as the case may be, to the charges made for such use.  
34. Liability when water runs to waste. —If wate r supplied through a water -course be 
suffered to run to waste, and if, after enqu iry by the Divisional Canal -office r, the person 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 17]
 be 
suffered to run to waste, and if, after enqu iry by the Divisional Canal -office r, the person 
through whose act or neglect such water was suffered to run to waste cannot be discovered, all 
the persons chargeable in respec t of the water supplied t hrough such water -course shall b e 
jointly liable for the charges made in respect of the water so wasted.  
35. Charges recoverable in addition to penalties. —All charges for the unauthorised use or 
for waste of water may be recovered in addition to any penalties incurred on account of such 
use or waste.  
Decision of questions under  sections 33 and 34. —All ques tions under section 33 or sectio n 
34 shall be decided by the Divisional Canal -officer, subject to an appeal to the head Revenue -
officer of the district, or such other appeal as may be provided under section 75.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 36 of Act no. VIII of 1873. —In section 35 of the Northern India Canal and 
Drainage Act, 1873, hereinafter referred to as the principal Act, for the words “shall be determined by the 
rules to be made by the State Government”, the words “and any other incidental charges shall be 
determ ined by the rules to be made by the State Government”, shall be substituted.  
[Vide  Uttar Pradesh Act 22 of 1979, s. 2]  
36. Charge on occupier for water, how determined. —The rates to be charged for canal -
water supplied for purposes of irrigation to the occu piers of la nd shall be determined by the rules 
                                                      
1. See now the Indian Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 18]
18 
 to be made by the State Government, and such occupiers as accept the water shall pay for 
accordingly.  
“Occupier ’s rate”.—A rate so charged shall be called the “occupier ’s rate ”. 
1[The rules hereinbefore referred to may prescribe and determine what persons or classes of 
persons a re to be deemed to be occupiers for the purposes of this section, and may also determine 
the several liabilities, in respect of the payment of the occupier ’s rate, of tenants and o f persons to 
whom tenants may have sublet their lands or of proprietors and of persons to whom proprietors 
may have let the lands held by them in cultivating occupancy.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Addition of new section 36 -A in Act no. VIII of 1873. — After section 36 of the principal Act, the 
following shall be added as  a new section 36 -A:— 
“36-A. (1) There shall be levied on and collected from in the manner  prescribed, the persons 
mentioned in sub -section (2) a development charge  for recovering the cos t of the land acquired or 
requisitioned and the cost of  construction of the water -courses, and all works carried out, in conne ction 
with the implementation of the scheme, calculated — 
(i) for the cost of acquisition and requisition of the land at the rate of 40  Naya Paise per acre per 
annum ; and  
(ii) for the cost of constructing the water -courses and for carrying out  the works connected 
therewith, at the rate of 60 Naya Paise per acre per  annum.  
(2) Every person having a holding in the irrigable command ar ea except those who have surrendered 
or transferred by way of gift, as the case  may be, to the Gaon Sabha such portion of their land on which 
any watercourse  has been constructed, or on which any work connected therewith has  been carried out, 
shall be liab le and pay till such time as the cost together with  interest at 4 per cent per annum on the same, 
has been realized in full to the  State Government, if the cost of acquisition has been met out of th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 18]
as been realized in full to the  State Government, if the cost of acquisition has been met out of the  
Consolidated Fund of the State, or to the Gaon Sabha, if  the compensation for  acquisition or requisition 
has been paid by the Gaon Sabha, a development  charge levied under clause (i) of sub -section (1), and 
every person in that  area, who has failed to implement the scheme in accordance with the  provisions of 
sub-section (5) of section 30 -C, or sub -section (2) of section 30 -D, so far as it relates to his land, shall, in 
lieu of the benefits derived from the  implementation of the scheme, pay till such time as the expenditure 
incurred in  this conne ction, together w ith interest at 4 per cent per annum on the same,  has been realized 
in full, to the State Government or the Gaon Sabha, whos e ever may have constructed the water -courses 
or carried out the works  connected therewith, in the implementation of the scheme, a d evelopment  charge 
levied at the rate provided in clause (ii) of sub -section (1) ;  
Provided however that the development charges shall in the first  instance be payable to the State 
Government till such time as the  expenditure incurred by it in this conne ction, together with interest at 4 
per cent  per annum on the same, has been realized in full .” 
[Vide  Uttar Pradesh Act V of 1963, s. 4]  
37. ‘Owner’s  rate’.—In addition to the occupier ’s rate, a rate to be called the “owner ’s rate ” 
may be imposed  according to  rules to be made b y the State Government, on the owners of canal -
irrigated lands, in respect of the benefit which they derive from such irrigation.  
38. Amount of owner ’s rate.—The owner ’s rate shall not exceed the sum which,  under 
the rules for the time being in force for the assessment of land -revenue, might be assessed on 
such land on account of the increase in the annual value of prod uce thereof caused by the 
canal -irrigation. And, for the purpo se of this section only, lan d which is perma
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 18]
f caused by the 
canal -irrigation. And, for the purpo se of this section only, lan d which is permanently settled 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 16 of 1899, s. 2.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 19]
19 
 or held free of revenue shall be considered as though it were temporarily settled and liable to 
payment of revenue.  
39. Owner ’s rate, when not chargeable. —No owner ’s rate shall be ch argeable either on 
the owner or o ccupier of  land temporarily assessed to pay land -revenue at irrigation -rates, 
during the currency of such assessment.  
140. When occupier is to pay both owner ’s rate and occupier ’s rate.—If such land is occupied by 
the owner,  
or if it is occupied by a tenant whose re nt is not liable t o enhancement on the ground that 
the value of the produce of the land or the productive po wers  of the land has or have been 
increased by irrigation,  
such owner or tenant shall pay the owner ’s rate as well as the occupier ’s rate.  
141. Power to make rules for apportioning owner ’s rate.—In the case of a tenant with a 
right of occupancy, the State Go vernment shall have pow er to make rules for dividing the 
owner ’s rate between such tenant and his landlord, proportionately to the extent of t he 
beneficial interest of each in the land.  
142. W hen owner is to pay owner ’s rate.— If the owner of the land is not the occupier, but has 
power to enhance the rent of the occupier o n the ground that the value of the produce or the productive 
powers of the  land has or have been increased by irrigation,  
or if, when the amount of a rent was fixed, the land was irrigated from the  canal,  
the owner shall pay the owner ’s rate.  
143. Effect of introduction of canal -irrigation on landlord ’s right to enhance. —If a 
revision of settlement is a ground for entertaining a suit for the enhancement of rent, the 
introduction of canal -irrigation into any land shall have the same effect on the landlord ’s right 
to re -enhance the rent of a tenant with a right of occupancy of su ch land, as if a revision of 
settlement had taken place, under which the revenue payable in respect of such land had been 
increased.  
44. Water -rate by whom  payable, whe
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 19]
revenue payable in respect of such land had been 
increased.  
44. Water -rate by whom  payable, when charged on land held by several                       
owners.—Where a water -rate is cha rged on land held by several joint owners, it shall be 
payable by the manager or other person who receives the rents or profits of such land, and 
may be deducted b y him from such rent s or profits before division, o r may be recovered by 
him from the persons  liable to such rate in the manner customary in the recovery of other 
charges on such rents or profits.  
Recovery of charges  
45. Certified dues recoverable as land -revenue. —Any sum lawfully due under this Part, 
and certified by the Divisional Canal -officer to be so due, which remains unpaid after the day 
on which it becomes due, shall be recoverable by the Collector from the person liable for the 
same as if it were an arrear of land -revenue.  
46. Power to contract for collection of canal -dues.—The Divisional Canal -officer or the 
Collector may enter into an agreement with any person for the collection and payment to the 
State Government by such person of any sum payable under this Act by a third party.  
When such agreement has been made, such person may recover such sum by suit as though it 
were a debt due to him, or an arrear of rent due to him on account of the land, work or building 
in respect of which such sum is payable, or for or in which the canal -water shall have been 
supplied or used.  
                                                      
1. ss. 40 to 43 rep. in the Punj ab by the Punjab Tenancy Act, 1887 (16 of 1 887), s. 3 and  the Schedule . 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 20]
20 
 If such person make s default in the payment of any sum collected by him under this section, such sum 
may be recovered from him by the Collector under section 45; and, if such sum or any part of it be still 
due by the said third party, the sum or part so due may be recovered in like manner by the Collector from 
such third party.  
47. Lambardars may be required to collect canal -dues.—The Collector may require the 
lambardar, or person under engagement to pay the land -revenue of any estate, to collect and 
pay any sums payable unde r this Act by a third party, in respect of any land or water in such 
estate.  
Such sums shall be recoverable by the Collector as if they were arrears of land -revenue 
due in respect of the defaulter ’s share in such estate;  
and for the purpose of  collecting such sums from the subordinate zamin dars, ra iyats, 1[tenants or               
sub-tenants], such lambardar  or person may exercise the pow ers, and shall be subject to the rules, laid 
down in the law for the time being in force in respect to the c ollection by him of the rents of land or of 
shares of land -revenue.  
The State Government shall provide —  
(a) for remunerating persons collecting sums under this section; or  
(b) for indemnifying them against expenses properly incurred by them in such 
collection; or  
(c) for both such purposes.  
48. Fines excluded from sections 45, 46, 47. —Nothing in section s 45, 46 or 47 applies to fines.  
PART VI  
OF CANAL -NAVIGATION  
49. Detainer of vessels violating rules. —Any vessel entering or navigating any canal 
contrary to the rules made in that behalf by the State Government, or so as to cause danger 
to the canal or the other vessels therein, may be removed or detained, or both removed and 
detained, by the Divisional C anal -officer, or by any other person duly authorised in this 
behalf.  
Liability of owners of vessels causing damage. —The owner of any vessel causing 
damage to a canal, or removed or detained 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 20]
vessels causing damage. —The owner of any vessel causing 
damage to a canal, or removed or detained under this section, shall be liable to pay to the 
State Government  such sum as the Divisional Canal -officer, with the approval of the 
Superintend ing Canal -officer, determines to be necessary to defray the expenses of repairing 
such damage or of such removal or detention, as the case may be.  
50. Recovery of fines for off ences in navigating canals. —Any fine imposed under this 
Act upon the owner of any vessel, or the servant or agent of such owner or other person in 
charge of any vessel, for any offence in respect of the navigation of such vessel, may be 
recovered either in  the manner prescribed by the Code of Criminal Procedure2 or, if the 
Magistrate imposing the fine so directs, as though it were a charge due in respect of such 
vessel.  
51. Power to seize and detain vessel on failure to pay charges. —If any charge due 
under the provisions of this Part in respect of any vessel is not paid on demand to the person 
authorised to collect the same, the Divisional Canal -officer may seize and detain such vessel 
and the furniture thereof, until the charge so due, together with all exp enses and additional 
charges arising from such seizure and detention, is paid in full.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 16  of 1899, s. 3, for “or tenants”.  
2. See now the Code of Criminal Procedure , 1973 ( 2 of 1974).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 21]
21 
 52. Power to seize cargo or goods, if charges due thereon are not paid. —If any charge 
due under the provisions of this Part in respect of any cargo or goods carried in a  Government 
vessel on a canal, or stored on or in lands or warehouses occupied for the purposes of a canal , 
is not paid on demand to the person authorised to collect the same, the Divisional                         
Canal -officer may seize such cargo or goods and detain them until the charge so due, together 
with all expenses and additional charges arising from such seizure and detention, is paid in 
full.  
53. Procedure for recovery of such charges after seizure. —Withi n a reasonable time after 
any seizure under section 51  or section 52, the said Canal -officer shall give notice to the owner or 
person in charge of the property seized that it, or such portion of it as may be necessary, will, on a 
day to be named in the notice, but not sooner than fifteen days from the date of the notice, be sold 
in satisfaction of the claim on account of which such property was seized, unless the claim be 
discharged before the day so named.  
And, if such claim be not so discharged, the said Canal -officer may, on such day, sell the property 
seized or such part thereof as may be necessary to yield the amount due, together with the expenses of 
such seizure and sale:  
Provided that no greater part of the furniture of any vessel or of any cargo or goods shall be  
so sold than shall, as nearly as may be, suffice to cover the amount due in respect of such 
vessel, cargo or goods.  
The residue of such furniture, cargo or goods, and of the proceeds of the sale, shall be made over to 
the owner or person in charge of the property seized.  
54. Procedure in respect of vessels abandoned and goods unclaimed. —If any vessel be 
found abandoned in a c anal, or any cargo or goods carried in a Government vessel on a canal, or 
stored on or in lands or warehouses occupied for the purposes of a canal, be lef
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 21]
sel on a canal, or 
stored on or in lands or warehouses occupied for the purposes of a canal, be left unclaimed for a 
period of two months, the Divisional Canal -officer may take possession of the same.  
The officer so taking possession may publish a notice that, if such vessel and its contents, or such 
cargo or goods, ar e not claimed previously to a day to be named in the notice, not sooner than thirty days 
from the date of such notice, he will sell the same; and, if such vessel, contents, cargo or goods be not so 
claimed, he may, at any time after the day named in the no tice, proceed to sell the same.  
Disposal of proceeds of sale. —The said vessel and its contents, and the sa id cargo or goods if 
unsold, or,  if a sale has taken place, the proceeds of  the sale, after paying all toll s, charges and expenses 
incurred by the Div isional Canal -officer on account of the taking possession and sale, shall be made over 
to the owner of the same, when his ownership is established to the satisfaction of the Divisional                      
Canal -officer.  
If the Divisional Canal -officer is doubtful to whom such property or proceeds should be made over, 
he may direct the property to be sold as aforesaid, and the proceeds to be paid into the district treasury, 
theretobe held until the right thereto be decided  by a Court of competent jurisdiction.  
PART  VII 
OF DRAINAGE   
55. Power to prohibit obstructions or order their removal. —Whenever it appears to the State 
Government that injury to any land or the public health or public convenience has arisen or may arise 
from the obstruction of any river, stream or drainage -channel, such Government may, by notification 
published in the Official Gazette, prohibit, within limits to be defined in such notification, the formation 
of any obstruction, or may, within such limits,  order the removal or other modification of such 
obstruction.  
Thereupon so much of the said river, stream or drainage -channel as is c
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 21]
ion of such 
obstruction.  
Thereupon so much of the said river, stream or drainage -channel as is comprised within 
such limits shall be held to be a drainage -work as defined in section 3.  
56. Power to remove obstructions a fter prohibition. —The Division al Canal -officer, or 
other person authorised by the State Government in that behalf, may, after such publication issue 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 22]
22 
 an order to the person causing or having control over any such obstruction to remove or modify 
the same wit hin a time to be fixed in the order.  
If, within the time so fixed, such person does not comply with the order, the said Canal -officer may 
himself remove or modify the obstruction; and if the person to whom the order was issued does not, when 
called upon, p ay the expenses involved in such removal or modification, such expenses shall be 
recoverable by the Collector from him or his representative in interest as an arrear of land -revenue.  
57. Preparation of schem es for works of improvement. —Whenever it appears to the State 
Government that any drainage -works are necessary for  the im provement of any lands, or for the proper 
cultivation or irri gation thereof,  
or that protection from floods or other accumulations of water, or from erosion by a river, 
is required for  any lands, the State Government may cause a scheme for such drainage -works 
to be drawn up and published, together with an estimate of its co st and a statement of the 
propor tion of such cost which the State Government proposes to defray, and a schedule of the 
lands which it is proposed to make chargeable in respect of the scheme.  
58. Powers of persons employed on such schemes. —The persons authorised by the State 
Government to draw up such scheme may exercise all or any of the powers conferred on the                          
Canal -officers by section 14.  
59. Rate on lands benefited by works. —An annual rate, in respect of such scheme, may be 
charged, according to rules to be made by the State Government, on the owners of all lands 
which shall, in the ma nner prescribed by such rules, be determined to be so chargeable.  
Such rate shall be fixed, as nearly as possible, so as not to exceed  either of the following 
limits : —  
(1) six per cent. per annum on the first cost of the said works, adding thereto the 
estimated yearly cost of the maintenance and supervision
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 22]
cost of the said works, adding thereto the 
estimated yearly cost of the maintenance and supervision of the same, and deducting 
therefrom the estimated income, if any, derived from the works, excluding the said rate:  
(2) in the case of agricultural land, the sum which under the rules then in force fo r the 
assessment of land -revenue , might be assessed on such land on account of the increase of 
the annual value or produce thereof caused by the drainage -work.  
Such rate may be varied from time to time, within such maximum, by the State Government.  
So far a s any defect to be remedied is due to any canal, water -course, road or other 
work or obstruction, constructed or caused by the State Government or by any person, a 
proportionate share of the cost of the drainage -works required for the remedy of the said 
defect shall be borne by such Government or such person, as th e case may be.  
60. Recovery of rate. —Any such drainage -rate may be collected and recovered in manner provided 
by sections 45, 46 and 47 for the collection and recovery of water -rates.  
61. Disposal of claims to compensation. —Whenever, in pursuance of a notification made under 
section 55, any obstruction is removed or modified,  
or  whenever any drainage -work is carried under section 57,  
all claims for compensation on account of  any loss consequent on the removal or 
modification of the said obstruction or the construction of such work may be made before the 
Collector, and he shall deal with the same in the manner provided in section 10.  
62. Limitation of such claims. —No such clai m shall be entertained after the expiration of 
one year from the occurrence of the loss complained of, unless the Collector is satisfied that the 
claimant had sufficient cause for not making the claim within such period.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 23]
23 
 PART VIII  
OF OBTAINING  LABOUR  FOR CANALS  AND DRAINAGE -WORKS  
63. Definition of “labourer ”.—For the purposes referred to in this Part, the word 
“labourer ” includes persons who exercise any handicraft specified in rules to be made in that 
behalf by the State Government.  
64. Power to prescribe number of labourers to be supplied by persons benefited by canal. —In 
any district in which a canal or drainage -work is constructed, maintained or projected by the State 
Government, the State Government, may, if it thinks fit, direct the Collector — 
(a) to ascertain the proprietors, sub -proprietors or farmers whose villages or estates are 
or will be in the judgment of the Collector, benefited by such canal or drainage -work, and  
(b) to set down in a list, having due regard to the circumstances of the districts and of 
the several proprietors, sub -proprietor s or farmers, the number of lab ourers which shall be 
furnished by any of the said persons, jointly or severally, from any such village or estate, 
for employment on any such canal or drainage -work when required as hereinafter 
provided.  
The Collector may, from time to time, add to or alter such list or any part thereof.  
65. Procedure for obtaining labour for works urgently required. —Whenever it appears to a 
Divisional Canal -officer d uly authorised by the State Government that, unless some work is immediately 
executed, such serious damage will happen to any canal or drainage -work as to cause sudden and 
extensive public injury,  
and that the labourers necessary for the proper execution t hereof cannot be obtained in the 
ordinary manner within the time that can be allowed for the execution of such work so as to 
prevent such injury, the said officer may require any person named in such list to furnish as 
many labourers (not exceeding the num ber which, according to the said list he is liable to 
supply) as to the said officer seems necessary for the immediate execution of such work.  
E
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 23]
ble to 
supply) as to the said officer seems necessary for the immediate execution of such work.  
Every requisition so made shall be in writing, and shall state —  
(a) the nature and locality of the work to be do ne; 
(b) the number of labourers to be supplied by the person upon whom the requisition is made : 
and 
(c) the approximate time for which and the day on which the labourers will be required;  
and a copy thereof shall be immediately sent to the Superintending Canal -officer for the 
information of the State Government.  
The State Government shall fix, and may from time to time alter the rates to be paid to any such 
labourers:  
Provided that such rates shall exceed the highest rates for the time being paid in the ne ighbourhood 
for similar work.  In the case of every such labourer, the payment shall continue for the whole 
period during which he is, in consequence of the provisions of this Part, prevented from 
following his ordinary occupation.  
The State Government may  1*** direct that the provisions of this Part shall apply,  either 
permanently or temporarily ( as the case may be), to any district or part of a district for the 
purpose of effecting necessary annual silt -clearances, or to prevent the proper operation of a 
canal or drainage -work being stopped or so much interfered with as to stop the established 
course of irrigation or drainage.  
                                                      
1. The words “ with the previous sanction of the G. G. in C.” omitted by Act 4 of 1914 , s. 2 and the Schedule.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 24]
24 
 66. Liability of labourers under requisition. —When any requisition has been made on any person 
named in the said list, every labour er ordinarily resident within the village or estate of such person shall 
be liable to supply, and to continue to supply, his labour, for  the purposes aforesaid.  
PART IX  
OF JURISDICTION  
67. Jurisdiction under this Act of Civil Courts. —Except where herein ot herwise provided, all 
claims against the State Government in respect of anything done under this Act may be tried by the Civil 
Courts; but no such Court shall in any case pass an order as to the supply of canal -water to any crop sown 
or growing at the time  of such order.  
68. Settlement of differences as to mutual rights and liabilities of persons interested 
in water -course.—Whenever a difference arises between two or more persons in regard to 
their mutual rights or liabilities in  respect of the use, constru ction or maintenance of a                 
water -course, any such person may apply in writing to the Divisional Canal -officer stating the 
matter in dispute. Such officer shall thereupon give notice to the other persons interested that, 
on a day to be named i n such notice, he will proceed to inquire into the said matter. And, after 
such inquiry, he shall pass his order thereon, unless he transfers (as he is hereby empowered 
to do) the matter to the Collector, who shall thereupon inquire into and pass his order  on the 
said matter.  
Such order shall be final as to the use or distribution of water for any crop sown or growing 
at the time when such order is made, and shall thereafter remain in force until set aside by the 
decree of a Civil Court.  
69. Power to summon  and examine witnesses. —Any officer empowered under this Act to 
conduct any inquiry may exercise all such  powers connected with the summo ning and exa mining 
of witnesses as are conferred on Civil Courts by the 1Code of Civil Procedure, and every such 
inqui ry shall be deemed a j
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 24]
ferred on Civil Courts by the 1Code of Civil Procedure, and every such 
inqui ry shall be deemed a judicial proceeding.  
PART X  
OF OFFENCES  AND PENALTIES  
70. Offences under Act. —Whoever, without proper authority and voluntarily, does any of the acts 
following, that is to say: —  
(1) damages, alters, enlarges or obstructs any canal or drainage -work;  
(2) interferes with, increases or diminishes the supply of water in, or the flow of water from, 
through, over or under, any canal or drainage -work;  
(3) interferes with or alters the flow of water in any river or stream, so as to  endanger, damage or 
render less useful any canal or drainage -work;  
(4) being responsible for the maintenance of a water -course, or using a water -course, 
neglects to take proper precautions for the prevention of waste of the water thereof, or 
interferes wi th the authorised distribution of the water therefrom, or uses such water in an 
unauthorised manner;  
(5) corrupts or fouls the water of any canal so as to render it less fit for the purposes for which it 
is ordinarily used;  
(6) causes any vessel to enter o r navigate any canal contrary to the rules for the time being 
prescribed by the State Government for entering or navigating such canal;  
(7) while navigating on any canal, neglects to take proper precautions for the safety of the canal 
and of vessels thereo n; 
                                                      
1. See now the Code of Civil Procedure, 190 8 (Act 5 of 1908).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 25]
25 
 (8) being liable to furnish labourers under Part VIII of this Act, fails without                
reaso nable cause, to supply or to assist in supplying the labourers required of him;  
(9) being a labourer liable to supply his labour  under Part VIII of this Act, neglects, without 
reasonable cause, so to supply, and to continue to supply, his labour;  
(10) destroys or moves any level -mark or water -gauge fixed by the authority of a public 
servant;  
(11) passes, or causes animals or vehicl es to pass, on or across any of the works, 
banks or channels of a canal or drainage -work contrary to rules made under this Act, 
after he has been desired to desist therefrom;  
(12) violates any rule made under this Act, for breach whereof a penalty may be  
incurred.  
Penalty. —shall be liable, on conviction before a Magis trate of such class as the State  
Government directs in this behalf, to a fine not exceeding fifty rupees, or to imprisonment not 
exceeding one month, or to both.  
71. Saving of prosecution under  other laws .—Nothing herein after contained shall prevent any 
person from being prosecuted under any other law for any offence punishable under this Act:  
Provided that no person shall be punished twice for the same offence.  
72. Compensation to person injure d.—Whenever any person is fined for an offence under this Act, 
the Magistrate may direct that the whole or any part of such fine may be paid by way of compensation to 
the person injured by such offence.  
73. Power to arrest without warrant. —Any person in ch arge of or employed upon any 
canal or drainage -work may remove from the lands or buildings belonging thereto, or may take 
into custody without a warrant and take forthwith before a Magistrate or to the nearest police -
station, to be dealt with according to law, any person who, within his view, commits any of the 
following offences: —  
(1) wilfully damages or obstructs any canal or drainage -work;  
(2) without proper authority inte
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 25]
 
(1) wilfully damages or obstructs any canal or drainage -work;  
(2) without proper authority interferes with the supply or flow of water in or from any 
canal or drainage -work, or in any river or stream, so as to endanger, damage or render less 
useful any canal or drainage -work.  
74. Definition of “Canal”.—In this Part the w ord ‘Canal’ shall (unless there be something 
repugnant in the subject or context) be deemed to include also all lands occupied by the State 
Government for the purposes of canals, and all buildings, machinery, fences, gates and other 
erections, trees, crops , plantations or other produce occupied by or belonging to the  State 
Government upon such lands.  
PART  XI 
OF SUBSIDIARY RULES   
75. Power to make, alter and cancel rules. —The State Government may, from time to  time 
1*** make rules to  regulate the following matters :—  
(1) the proceedings of any officer who, under any provision of this Act, is required or 
empowered to take action in any matter;  
(2) the cases in which, and the officers to whom, and the conditions subject to which, 
orders  and decision s given under any provision of this Act, and not expressly provided for 
as regards appeal, shall be appealable;  
                                                      
1. The words “subject to the control of the G. G. in C.” omitted by Act 38 of 1920.   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 26]
26 
 (3) the persons by whom, 1[and] the time, place or manner at or in which anything for the doing  
of which provision is made under th is Act, shall be done;  
(4) the amount of any charge made under this Act; and 
(5)  generally to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
The State Government may from time to time , 2*** alter or cancel any rules  so made.  
Publication of rules. —Such rules, alter ations and cancelments shall be published in the Official 
Gazette, and shall thereupon have the force of law.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 75 of Act VIII of 1873. — Section 75 of the principal Act shall be re -numbered 
as sub -section  (1) thereof, and the following shall be added as sub -sections (2) and (3)  thereof  ; 
“(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the powers contained under  sub-section (1), the rules 
may provide for — 
(i) the particulars to  be mentioned in the scheme repaired under this  chapter ;  
(ii) the manner of implementation of the scheme ;   
(iii) the manner of publication of the scheme and giving or publishing of  notice under this 
chapter ; and  
(iv) the manner of doing or execution of such other things as can be,  or may be, prescribed 
for giving effect to the provisions of this chapter.   
(3) All rules made under this Act shall, as soon as may be after they  are made, be laid before each 
House of the State Legislature while it is in  sessi on, for a total period of fourteen days extending in its 
one session or more  than one successive sessions and shall, unless some later date is appointed,  take 
effect, from the date of their publication in the Gazette, subject to such  modifications or annul ments 
as the two Houses of the Legislature may agree  to make ; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be  without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done thereunder.”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act V of 1963, s. 5] 
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 75. —In section 75 of 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 26]
Vide Uttar Pradesh Act V of 1963, s. 5] 
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 75. —In section 75 of the principal Act, in sub -section (1), for clause (4), the 
following clause shall be substituted,  namely : — 
“(4) the amount of any charges made under this Act and the manner in which they shall be 
realized ; and”  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 22 of 1979, s. 3]  
 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 12 of 1891.  
2. The words “subject to the like control” omitted by Act 38 of 1920.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA CANAL AND DRAINAGE ACT, 1873.pdf - page 27]
27 
 SCHEDULE. —[Rep. by the Repealing Act, 1873 (12 of 1873),  s. 1 and Schedule. ] 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA FERRIES ACT, 1878.pdf - page 1]
1 THE NORTHERN INDIA FERRIES ACT, 1878  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
PREAMBLE  
I.—PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
Local extent.  
Commencement  
2. [Repealed .]. 
3. Interpretation -clause.  
II.—PUBLIC  FERRIES  
4. Power to declare establish , define and discontinue public ferries.  
5. Claims for compensation.  
6. Superintendence of public ferries.  
7. Management may be vested in municipality.  
7A. Management may be vested in District Council or District or Local Board.  
8. Letting ferry tolls by auction.  
9. Recovery of arrears from lessee.  
10. Power to cancel lease.  
11. Surrender of lease.  
12. Power to make rules . 
13. Private ferry not to ply within two miles of public ferry without sanction.  
14. Person using approaches, etc., liable to pay toll.  
15. Tolls.  
16. Table of tolls.  
List of tolls.  
17. Tolls, rents, compensation and fines are to form part of revenues of State.  
18. Compounding for tolls.  
III.—PRIVATE  FERRIES  
19. Power to make rules.  
20. Tolls.  
IV.—PENALTIES AND CRIMINAL  PROCEDURE  
21. Penal ty for breach of provisions as to table of tolls, list of tolls and return of traffic.  
22. Penalty for taking unauthorised toll, and for causing delay.  
23. Penalty for breach of rules made under section s 12 and 19.  
24. C ancelment  of lease on default or breach of rules.  
25. Penalties on passengers offending.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA FERRIES ACT, 1878.pdf - page 2]
2 SECTIONS  
26. Penalty for maintaining private ferry within prohibited limits.  
27. Fines payable to lessee.  
28. Penalty for rash navigation and stacking of timber.  
29. Power to a rrest without warrant.  
30. Power to try summarily.  
31. Magistrate may assess damage done by offender.  
V.—MISCELLANEOUS  
32. Power to take possession of boats, etc., on surrender or cancellation of lease.  
33. Similar power in cases of emergency.  
34. Jurisdic tion of Civil Courts barred.  
35. Delegation of powers.  
36. [Repealed .]. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA FERRIES ACT, 1878.pdf - page 3]
3 THE NORTHERN INDIA FERRIES ACT, 1878  
ACT NO. 17 OF 18781 
[9th November , 1878 .] 
An Act to regulate Ferries in Northern India.  
Preamble. —WHEREAS  it is expedient to regulate ferries in 2[Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, the Central 
Provinces, Assam, Delhi and Ajmer]; It is hereby enacted as follows: — 
I.—PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Northern India Ferries Act, 1878.  
Local extent. —3[It extends only to Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, the Central Provinces,  Assam, Delhi and 
Ajmer.]  
Commencement .—It shall come into force in each of the said territories on such date as the State 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, fix in this behalf.  
2. [Repeal ].—Rep. by the Repealing Act , 1938 (1 of 1938),  s. 2 and the Schedule . 
3. Interpretation -clause .—In this Act the word “ferry ” includes also a bridge of boats, pontoons or 
rafts, a swing -bridge, a flying -bridge and a temporary bridge, and the approaches to, and landing -places 
of, a ferry 4[and “Punjab ” and “Ajmer ” mean the territories which, immediately before the 1st November, 
1956, were comprised in the States of Punjab and Ajmer respectively].  
II.—PUBLIC  FERRIES  
4. Power to declare , establish , define and discontinue public ferries .—The State Government may 
from time to time — 
(a) declare what ferries shall be deemed public ferries, and the respective districts in which, for 
the purposes of this Act, they shall be deemed to be situate;  
(b) take possession of a private ferry and declare it to be a public ferry;  
(c) establish new public ferries where, in its opinion, they are n eeded;  
(d) define the limits of any public ferry;  
(e) change the course of any public ferry; and  
(f) discontinue any public ferry which it deems unnecessary.  
Every such declaration , establishment , definition, change or discontinuance shall be made by 
notif ication in the Official Gazette:  
                                                           
1. This Act appl
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA FERRIES ACT, 1878.pdf - page 3]
the Official Gazette:  
                                                           
1. This Act applies to the Lakhimpur Frontier Tract, and to the Sadiya and Balipara Frontier Tracts in Assam, subject to cert ain 
modifications, see Assam G overnment notification No. 442 -GS & 443 -GS, dated 26th January, 1940.  
The Act has been extended to the whole of Madhya Pradesh by Madhya Pradesh Act 23 of 1958 (when notified).  
It has been amended in — 
C.P. by Acts 1 of 18 83, 12 of 1891, 4 of 1907, C.P. Acts 1 of 1931 and 23 of 1937;  
Punjab by Acts 20 of 1883 and 12 of 1891;  
U.P. by U.P. Acts 1 of 1914, 29 of 1948 and 8 of 1960 (w.e.f. 22 -5-1960).  
Sambalpur District by Acts 1 of 1883, 12 of 1891 , Ben. Act 1 of 1911 and Orissa Act 6 of 19 39; 15 of 1948.  
Coorg by Coorg Act 6 of 1940; and  
Ajmer by Act 6 of 1945.  
Orissa by Orissa Act 23 of 1950.  
2. Subs . by the A .O. 1950, for “the United Provinces, East Punjab, the Central Provinces, Assam, Delhi and Ajmer  Merwara”.  
3. Subs. by the A.O.1948.  
4. Added by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA FERRIES ACT, 1878.pdf - page 4]
4 1[Provided that when a river lies between two States , the powers conferred by this section shall, in 
respect of such river, be exercised jointly by the State Governments of those States by notifications in 
their respective Official Gazettes  2***:] 
Provided also that, when any alteration in the course or in the limits of a public ferry is rendered 
necessary by changes in the river, such alteration may be made, by an order under his hand, by the 
Commissioner of the Division in  which such ferry is situate, or by such other officer as the State 
Government may, from time to time, appoint by name or in virtue of his office in this behalf.  
5. Claims for compensation .—Claims for compensation for any loss sustained by any person in 
consequence of a private ferry being taken possession of under section 4, shall be inquired into by the 
Magistrate of the district in which such ferry is situate, or such officer as he appoint s in this behalf, and 
submitted for the consideration and orders of the State Government.  
6. Superintendence of public ferries .—The immediate superintendence of ever y public ferry shall, 
except as  provided in section 7 3[and section 7A] , be vested in the M agistrate of the district in which such 
ferry is situate, or in such other officer as the State Government may, from time to time, appoint by name 
or in virtue of his office in this behalf;  
and such Magistrate or officer shall, except when the tolls at suc h ferry are leased, make all necessary 
arrangements for the supply of boats for such ferry, and for the collection of the authorised tolls livable 
threat. 
7. Management may be vested in municipality .—The State Government may direct that any public 
ferry si tuate within the limits of a town be managed by the officer or public body charged with the 
superintendence of the municipal arrangements of such town;  
4[and thereupon that ferry shall be managed accordingly.]  
5[7A. Management may be vested in District Council or D
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA FERRIES ACT, 1878.pdf - page 4]
 that ferry shall be managed accordingly.]  
5[7A. Management may be vested in District Council or District or Local Board .—The State 
Government may direct that any public ferry wholly or partly within the area subject to the authority of a 
District Council or a District Board or a Local Board in the Stat e be managed by that Council or Board, 
and thereupon that ferry shall be managed accordingly.]  
6[8. Letting ferry tolls by auction .—The tolls of any public ferry may, from time to time , be let by 
public auction for a term not exceeding five years with the approval of the Commissioner, or by public 
auction, or otherwise than by public auction, for any term with the previous sanction of the State 
Government.  
The lessee shall conform to the  rules made under this Act for the management and control of the 
ferry, and may be called upon by the officer in whom the immediate superintendence of the ferry is 
vested, or, if the ferry is managed by a municipal or other public body under section 7 or section 7A, then 
by that body, to give such security for his good conduct and for the punctual payment of the rent as the 
officer or body, as the case may be, thinks fit.  
When the tolls are put up to public auction, the said officer or body, as the case may  be, or the officer 
conducting the sale on his or its behalf, may, for reasons recorded in writing, refuse to accept the offer of 
the highest bidder, and may accept any other bid, or may withdraw the tolls from auction.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 1920, s. 2 and the First Schedule, Pt. I,  for the proviso.  
2. The words “and in any case where the said Local Governments fail to agree as regards the exercise of any such power they 
shall exercise such power subject to the control of the G.G. in C.” omitted by the A.O. 1937.  
3. Ins. in the application of the Act to — 
The U.P. by the U.P. Local Boards Act, 1883 ( U.P Act 14 of 1883), s. 65.  
The Punja
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA FERRIES ACT, 1878.pdf - page 4]
 the Act to — 
The U.P. by the U.P. Local Boards Act, 1883 ( U.P Act 14 of 1883), s. 65.  
The Punjab  by the Punjab District Boards Act, 1883 ( Pun. Act 20 of 1883) , s. 79 . 
The C P.  by the C.P. Local Self -Government Act, 1883 (1 of 1 883), s. 44; an d 
Assam by the Assam Local Self -Government (Amendment) Act,  1926 (Assam  Act 8 of 1926), s. 43.  
4. Subs.  by the A.O.1937, for the following words: — 
“and may further direct that all or any part of the proceeds from such ferry be paid into the municipal fund of such town;  
and thereupon such ferry shall be managed, and such proceeds or part s  thereof shall be paid, accordingly.”  
5. Subs.  by the A.O.  1937 , for s. 7A. 
6. Subs.  by Act 3 of 1886, s. 1 for s . 8. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA FERRIES ACT, 1878.pdf - page 5]
5 9. Recovery of arrears from lessee .—All arrears due by the lessee of the tolls of a public ferry on 
account of his lease may be recovered from the lessee or his surety  (if any) by the Magistrate of the 
district in which such ferry is situate as if they were arrears of land -revenue.  
10. Powe r to cancel lease .—The State Government may cancel the lease of the tolls of any public 
ferry on the expiration of six months ’ notice in writing to the lessee of its intention to cancel such lease.  
When any lease is cancelled under this section, the Magist rate of the district in which such ferry is 
situate shall pay to the lessee such compensation as such Magistrate may, with the previous sanction of 
the State Government, award.  
11. Surrender of lease .—The lessee of the tolls of a public ferry may surrender  his lease on the 
expiration of 1one month ’s notice in writing to the State Government of his intention to surrender such 
lease, and on payment to the Magistrate of the district in which such ferry is situate of such compensation 
as such Magistrate , subject to the approval of the Commissioner, may in each case direct.  
12. Power to make rules .—2[(1)] Subject to the control of the State Government, the Commissioner 
of a division , or such other officer as the State Government may, from time to time, appo int in this behalf, 
by name or in virtue of his office, may, from time to time,  3[by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules] consistent with this Act — 
(a) for the control and the management of all public ferries within such division and for 
regulating the traffic at such ferries;  
4[(b) for regulating the time and manner at and in which, and the terms on which, the tolls of such 
ferries may be let by auction, and prescribing the persons by whom auctions may be conducted;]  
(c) for compensating persons who have compounded for tolls payable for the use of any such 
ferry when such ferry has been discontinued before the expiration of 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA FERRIES ACT, 1878.pdf - page 5]
yable for the use of any such 
ferry when such ferry has been discontinued before the expiration of the period compounded for ; and 
(d) generally to carry out the purposes of this Act;  
and, when the tolls of a ferry h ave been let under section 8, such Commissioner or  other officer may, 
from time to time (subject as aforesaid), make additional rules consistent with this Act — 
(e) for collecting the rents payable for the tolls of such ferries;  
(f) in cases in which the co mmunication is to be established by means of a bridge of boats, 
pontoons or rafts, or a swing -bridge, flying -bridge or temporary bridge , for regulating the time and 
manner at and in which such bridge shall be constructed and maintained and opened for the p assage 
of vessels and rafts through t he same; and  
(g) in cases in which the traffic is conveyed in boats,  for regulating ( 1) the number and kind of 
such boats and their dimensions and equipment; ( 2) the number of the crew to be kept by the lessee 
for each boat; ( 3) the maintenance of such boats continually in good condition s; (4) the hours during 
which, and the intervals with in which the lessee shall be bound to ply; and ( 5) the number of 
passengers, animals and vehicles  and the bulk and weight of other things, that may be carried in each 
kind of boat at one trip . 
The lessee shall make such returns of traffic as the Commissioner or other officer as aforesaid may, 
from time to time, require . 
5[(2) Every rule made under thi s Act by the Commissioner of a division or the officer appointed by 
the State Government shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,  before the State Legislature. ] 
 
                                                           
1. Read : ‘Three months ’ in U.P. —vide U.P. Act 29 of 1948, s. 2.  
2. Section 12 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 4 of 2005, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 11 -1-2005).  
3. Subs . by s. 2 and the Schedule, ibid., for the words “make rules ”. 
4. S
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA FERRIES ACT, 1878.pdf - page 5]
(w.e.f. 11 -1-2005).  
3. Subs . by s. 2 and the Schedule, ibid., for the words “make rules ”. 
4. Subs. by Act 3 of 1886, s. 1, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 29 -1-1886) . 
5. Ins. by Act 4 of 2005 , s. 2 and the Schedule . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA FERRIES ACT, 1878.pdf - page 6]
6 13. Private ferry not to ply within two miles of public ferry without sanction .—1[Except with the 
sanction of the Magistrate of the district or of such other officer as the State Government may, from time 
to time, appoint in this behalf, by name or in virtue of his office, no person shall establish, maintain or 
work a ferry to or from any point within a distance of two miles from the limits of a public ferry]:  
Provided that, in the case of any specified public ferry, the State Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, reduce or increase the said distance of two miles to s uch extent as it thinks fit:  
Provided also that nothing hereinbefore contained shall prevent persons plying between two places, 
one of which is without, and one within, the said limits, when the distance between such two places is not 
less than three miles , or apply to boats 2[which do not ply for hire or] which the State Government 
expressly exempts fro m the operation of this section3. 
14. Person using approaches, etc., liable to pay toll .—Whoever uses the approach to, or landing -
place of, a public ferry is liable to pay the toll payable for crossing such ferry.  
15. Tolls .—4Tolls, according to such rates as are, from time to time, fixed by the State Government, 
shall be levied on all persons, animals, vehicles and other things crossing any river by a public ferry and 
not employed or transmitted on the public service:  
Provided that the State Government may, from time to time, declare that any persons, animals, 
vehicles or other things shall be exempt from payment of such tolls.  
Where the tolls of a ferr y have been let under section 8, any such declaration, if made after the date of 
the 5[lease], shall entitle the lessee to such abatement of the rent payable in respect of the tolls as may be 
fixed by the Commissioner of the division or such other officer as the State Government may, from time 
to time, appoint in this behalf by name or in virtue of his
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA FERRIES ACT, 1878.pdf - page 6]
 as the State Government may, from time 
to time, appoint in this behalf by name or in virtue of his office.  
16. Table of tolls .—The lessee or other person authorised to collect the tolls of any public ferry shall 
affix a table of such tolls , legibly written  or printed in the vernacular language and also, if the 
Commissioner of the division so directs, in English, in some conspicuous place near the ferry.  
List of tolls. —and shall be bound to produce, on demand, a list of the tolls, signed by the Magistrate 
of the district or such other officer as he appoints in this behalf.  
6[17. Tolls, rents, compensation and fines are to form part of revenues of State .—All tolls, rents, 
compensation and fines under this Act (other than tools received by any lessee) shall form part of the 
revenues of the State.]  
18. Compounding for tolls .—The State Government may, if it thinks fit, from time to time, fix rates 
at which any person may compound for the tolls payable for the use of a public ferry.  
III.—PRIVATE  FERRIES  
 19. Power to make rules .—The Commissioner of the division may, with the previous sanction of 
the State Government, from time to time, make rules for the maintenance of order and for the safety of 
passengers and property at ferries other than public ferries.  
20. Tolls.—The tolls charged at such ferries shall not exceed the highest rates for the time being fixed 
under section 15 for similar public ferries.  
                                                           
1. Subs.  by Act 3 of 1886, s. 2, for the first paragraph  (w.e.f. 29 -1-1886) . 
2. Ins. by  s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 29 -1-1886).  
3. An explanation has been added to section  13 in the C.P.  by the  Northern India Ferries (C.P.  Amendment) Act, 1937 (C.P.  23          
of 1937).  
4. So much of section 15 is repealed as provides for the exemption from payment of tolls of any persons, animals, vehicles or 
other things exempted by  s. 3 of the Indian Tolls (Army and Air Force) Act
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA FERRIES ACT, 1878.pdf - page 6]
s, animals, vehicles or 
other things exempted by  s. 3 of the Indian Tolls (Army and Air Force) Act , 1901 (2 of 1901); see s. 8 of that Act.  
5. Subs.  by Act 3 of 1886, s. 1, for “auction”  (w.e.f. 29 -1-1886) . 
6. Subs.  by the A.O.  1937 for s. 17. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA FERRIES ACT, 1878.pdf - page 7]
7 IV.—PENALTIES AND CRIMINAL  PROCEDURE  
21. Penalty for breach of provisions as to table of tolls, list of tolls and return s of traffic .—Every 
lessee or other person authorised to collect the tolls of a public ferry , who neglects to affix and keep in 
good order and repair the table of tolls mention ed in section 16,   
or who willfully removes, alters or defaces such table or allows . 
 it to become illegible,  
or who fails to produce on demand the list of the tolls mentioned in section 16,  
and every lessee who neglects to furnish any return required under section 12,  
shall be punished with fine which may extend to fifty rupees.  
22. Penalty for taking unauthorised toll, and for causing delay .—Every such lessee or other 
person as aforesaid and  any person in p ossession of a private ferry asking or taking more than the lawful 
toll, or without due cause delaying any person, animal, vehicle or other thing, shall be punished with fine 
which may extend to one hundred rupees.  
23. Penalty for breach of  rules made under section s 12 and 19 .—Every person breaking any rule 
made under section 12 or section 19 shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
six months, or with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, or with both.  
24. Concelment of lease on default or breach of rules .—When any lessee of the tolls of a public 
ferry makes default in the payment of the rent payable in respect of such tolls or has been convicted of an 
offence under section 23, or, having been convicted of a n offence under section 21 or section 22  is again 
convicted of an offence under either of those sections,  
the Magistrate of the district may, with the sanction of the Commissioner of the division, cancel the 
lease of the tolls of such ferry, and make other  arrangements for its management during the whole or any 
part of the term for which the tolls were let.  
 25. Penalties on passengers offending .—Every person crossing by any public fe
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA FERRIES ACT, 1878.pdf - page 7]
he tolls were let.  
 25. Penalties on passengers offending .—Every person crossing by any public ferry, or using the 
approach to, or landing place thereof, who refuses to pa y the proper toll, and every person — 
who, with intent to avoid payment of such toll, fraudulently or forcibly crosses by any such ferry 
without paying the toll, or  
who obstructs any toll -collector or lessee of the tolls of a public ferry, or any of his assistants, in any 
way in the execution of their duty under this Act, or  
who, after being warned by any such toll -collector, lessee or assistant not to do so, goes or takes any 
animals, vehicles or other things into any ferry -boat, or upon any bridge, at s uch a ferry, which is in such 
a state or so loaded as to endanger human life or property, or  
who refuses or neglects to leave, or remove any animals, vehicles or goods from, any such ferry -boat 
or bridge, on being requested by such toll -collector, lessee or assistant to do so,  
shall be punished with fine which may extend to fifty rupees.  
1[26. Penalty for maintaining private ferry within prohibited limits .—Whoever establishes, 
maintains or works a ferry in contravention of the provisions of section 13 shall be punished with fine 
which may extend to five hundred rupees, and with a further fine, whi ch may extend to one hundred 
rupees for every day during which the ferry is maintained or worked in contravention of those 
provisions. ] 
27. Fines payable to lessee .—Where the tolls of any public ferry have been let under the provisions 
hereinbefore contain ed, the whole or any portion of any fine realised under section 25 or section 26 may, 
                                                           
1. Subs.  by Act 3 of 1886, s. 2, for section 26.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA FERRIES ACT, 1878.pdf - page 8]
8 notwithstanding anything contained in section 17, be at the discretion of the convicting Magistrate or 
Bench of Magistrates, paid to the lessee.  
28. Penalty for rash navi gation and stacking of timber .—Whoever navigates, anchors, moors or 
fastens any vessel or raft, or stacks any timber, in a manner so rash or negligent as to damage a public 
ferry, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three mon ths, or with fine 
which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both; and the toll -collector or lessee of the tolls of such 
ferry or any of his assistants, may seize and detain such vessel, raft or timber pending the inquiry and 
assessment hereinafter m entioned.  
29. Power to arrest without warrant .—The police may arrest without warrant any person 
committing an offence against section 25 or section 28.  
30. Power to try summarily .—Any Magistrate or Bench of Magistrates having summary jurisdiction 
under Chapter XVIII of the 1Code of Criminal Procedure may try any offence against this Act in manner 
provided by that Chapter.  
31. Magistrate may assess damage done by offender .—Every Magi strate or Bench of Magistrates 
trying any offence under this Act may enquire into and assess the value of the damage (if any) done or 
caused by the offender to the ferry concerned, and shall order the amount of such value to be paid by him 
in addition to a ny fine imposed upon him under this Act; and the amount so ordered to be paid shall be 
leviable as if it were a fine, or when the offence is one under section 28, by the sale of the vessel, ra ft or 
timber causing the damage and of any thing  found in or upon such vessel or raft.  
The Commissioner of the division may, on the appeal of any person deeming himself aggrieved by an 
order under this section , reduce or remit the amount payable under such order.  
V.—MISCELLANEOUS  
32. Power to take possession of boats, etc., on surrender or cancellation of lease .—When the 
lease of the t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA FERRIES ACT, 1878.pdf - page 8]
 to take possession of boats, etc., on surrender or cancellation of lease .—When the 
lease of the tolls of any ferry is surrendered under section 11 or cancelled under section 24, the Magistrate 
of the district may take possession of all boats and their equipment, and all other material and appliances, 
used by the lessee for the purposes of such ferry, and use the same (paying such compensation for the use 
thereof as the State Government may in each case direct) until such Magistrate can convenientl y procure 
proper substitu tes therefor . 
33. Similar power in cases of emergency .—When any boats or their equipment, or any materials or 
appliances suitable for setting up a ferry, are emergently required for facilitating the transport of officers 
or troops of 2[the Government of India] on duty, or of any other persons on the business of Government, 
or of any animals, vehicles or baggage belonging to such officers, troops or persons, or of any property of 
Government, the Magistrate of the district may take po ssession of and use the same (paying such 
comp ensation for the use thereof as  3[the Central Government (where the transport is in connection with 
the affairs of the Central Government) and the State Government in other cases] may in each case direct) 
until such transport is completed.  
34. Jurisdiction of Civil Courts barred .—No suit to ascertain the amount of any compensation 
payable,  or abatement of rent allowable  under this Act shall be cognizable by any Civil Court.  
35. Delegation of powers .—The State Go vernment may, from time to time, delegate, under suc h 
restrictions as it thinks fit  any of the powers conferred on it by this Act to any Commissioner of a division 
or Magistrate of a district, or to such other officer as it thinks fit, by name or by virtue  of his office.  
36. [Validation of proceedings since repeal of Regulation VI of 1819 in Punjab ].—Rep. by the 
Repealing and Amending Act , 1891 (12 of 1891),  s. 2 and the First 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE NORTHERN INDIA FERRIES ACT, 1878.pdf - page 8]
 1819 in Punjab ].—Rep. by the 
Repealing and Amending Act , 1891 (12 of 1891),  s. 2 and the First Schedule , Pt. I. 
 
                                                           
1. See now the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1 898 (5 of 1974), Ch. 2 2. 
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “Her Majesty” . 
3. Subs by the A.O.  1937 for “the L . G.”. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH ESTATE’S ACT, 1869.pdf - page 1]
1  THE OUDH ESTATE ’S ACT, 1869  
___________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
  
Preamble . 
SECTIONS.  
I.— Preliminary.  
1. Short title.  
Extent of Act.  
2. Interpretation  – clause . 
II.— Rights and liabilities of Taluqdár s and Grantees.  
3. Taluqdár s to have heritable and transferable rights in their estates.  
Subject to certain conditions.  
4. Rights and liabilities of persons named in second schedule.  
5. Grantees’ rights and liabilities.  
6. Saving of certain redemption -suits.  
7. Heirlooms.  
III.— Lists of Taluqdár s and Grantees.  
8. Preparation of lists of Taluqdár s and Grantees.  
9. Publication of lists.  
Supplementary list.  
10. None but persons named in lists to be deemed Taluqdár s or Grantees.  
IV.— Powers of Taluqdár s and Grantees to transfer and bequeath . 
11. Taluqdár s and Grantees may transfer and bequeath.  
12. Rule against perpetuity.  
13. Restric tion as to donees and legatees.  
V.— Transfers and Bequests.  
14. Transfers and bequests to Taluqdár s or heirs.  
15. Transfers and bequests to persons out of line of succession . 
16. Transfers to be in writing, signed and attested.  
17. Further requisites to validity of gifts inter vivos.  
18. Gifts to religious or charitable uses.  
VI.— Testamentary S uccession.  
19. Sections of Succession Act applied to wills of Taluqdár s. 
20. Bequests to religious and charitable uses.  
VII.— Intestate S uccession.  
21. ‘Son,’ ‘descendants,’ ‘daughter,’ ‘brother,’ ‘widow,’ defined.  
22. Special rules of succession to intestate Taluqdár s and Grantees .  
23. General rule of succession to intestate Taluqdár s and Grantees.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH ESTATE’S ACT, 1869.pdf - page 2]
2  SECTIONS . 
VIII. —Maintenance.  
24. Maintenance of surviving relatives of Taluqdár s and Grantees.  
25. Grandpa rents, parents, and senior widows.  
Junior widows.  
26. Brothers and minor sons.  
Nephews.  
27. Unma rried daughters, widows of sons and brothers and inferior widows.  
28. Continuance of annuities.  
IX.—Miscellaneous.  
29. Muhammadan Taluqdár s and Grantees empowered to adopt.  
30. Alteration of rules of intestate succession in cases of Taluqdár s and Grantees named in       
list 3 or  list 5.  
31. Reverter to ordinary law of succession.  
32. Saving of rights of creditors.  
33. Awards as to compensation and maintenance.  
         Schedules.  
First Schedule (Orders of the 10 th and 19 th October 1859).  
Second Schedule (Names of persons referred to in section 4).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH ESTATE’S ACT, 1869.pdf - page 3]
3  THE OUDH ESTATES ACT, 1869 . 
ACT NO. 1 OF 1869.  
_________  
PASSED  BY THE  GOVERNOR  GENERAL  OF INDIA  IN COUNCIL.  
(Received the assent of the Governor General on the 12th January 1869 ). 
__________  
An Act to define the rights of Taluqdár s and others in certain estates in Oudh,  
 and to regulate the succession thereto.  
Preamble. —WHEREAS , after the re -occupation of Oudh by the British Government in the year 1858, 
the proprietary right in divers estates in that province was, under certain conditio ns, conferred by the 
British Government upon certain Taluqdár s and others; and whereas doubts may arise as to the nature of 
the rights of the said Taluqdár s and others in such estates, and as to the course of suc cession thereto; and 
whereas it is expedient to prevent such doubts, and to regulate such course, and to provide for such other 
matters connected therewith as are hereinafter mentioned; It  is hereby enacted as follows: — 
I.— Preliminary.  
1. Short title, Ext ent of Act. —This Act may be cited as “The Oudh Estates’ Act, 1869,” and shall 
extent only to the estates hereinafter referred to.  
2. Interpretation –clause .—In this Act, unless there be something repugnant in the subject or 
context — 
“Transfer .”—“Transfer” m eans an alienation inter vivos ; 
“Will”.—“Will” means the legal declaration of the intentions of the testator with respect to his 
property affected by this Act, which he desires to be carried into effect after his death ;  
“Codicil ”.—“Codicil ” means an instrument made in relation to a Will , and explaining, altering, or 
adding to its dispositions: It is considered as forming an additional part of the Will;  
“Signed.” —“Signed ” applies to the affixing of a mark ;  
“Registered .”—“Registered ” means registered according to the  provisions of the rules relating to the 
registration of assurances for the time being in force in Oudh ;  
“Minor .” “Minority .”—“Minor ” means any person who shall not have completed the
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH ESTATE’S ACT, 1869.pdf - page 3]
 force in Oudh ;  
“Minor .” “Minority .”—“Minor ” means any person who shall not have completed the age of 
eighteen  
years, and “minority” means the status of such person ;  
“Taluqdár .”—“Taluqdár ” means any person whose name is entered in the first of the lists mentioned 
in section eight ;  
“Grantee .”—“Grantee” means any person upon whom the proprietary right in an estat e has been 
conferred by a special grant of the British Government, and whose name is entered in the fifth or sixth of 
the lists mentioned in section eight ;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH ESTATE’S ACT, 1869.pdf - page 4]
4  “Estate .”—“Estate” means the taluqa or immov eable property acquired or held by a Taluqdár  or 
Grante e in the manner mentioned in section three, section four, or section five, or the immoveable 
property conferred by a special grant of the British Government upon a Grantee ;  
“Heir .” “Legatee .”—“Heir” means a person who inherits property otherwise than as a widow, under 
the special provisions of this Act ; and “legatee” means a person to whom property  is bequeathed under 
the same provisions ;  
Words expressing relationshi p.—Words expressing relationship denote only legitimate relatives, but  
apply to children in the womb who are afterwards born alive.  
II.—Rights and liabilities of Taluqdár s and Grantees.  
3. Taluqdár s to have heritable and transferable rights in their estates .—Every Taluqdár  with 
whom a summary settlement of the Government re venue was made between the first day of April 1858 
and the tenth day of October 1859, or to whom, before the passing of this Act and subsequently to the 
first day of April 1858, a Taluqdár i sanad has been  granted,  
 shall be deemed to have thereby acquired a permanent, heritable and transferable right in the estate 
comprising the villages and lands named in the list attached to the agreement or kabuliyat executed by 
such Taluqdár  when such settlement was made,  
or which may have been or may be decreed to him  by the Court of an officer engaged in making the 
first regular settlement of the provinces of Oudh, such decree not having been appealed from within the 
time limited for appealing against it, or, if appealed from, having been affirmed,  
Subject to certain  conditions. —subject to all the conditions affecting the Taluqdár  contained in the 
orders passed by the Governor General of India on the tenth and nineteenth days of October 1859 and                             
re-published in the first schedule hereto anne xed, and subject also to all the conditions contained in the 
sanad under whi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH ESTATE’S ACT, 1869.pdf - page 4]
t schedule hereto anne xed, and subject also to all the conditions contained in the 
sanad under which the estate is held.  
4. Rights and liabilities of persons named in second schedule .—Every person whose lands the 
proclamation issued in Oudh in the month of March 1858 by order of the Governor General of India 
specially exempted from confiscation, and whose names are contained in the second schedule hereto 
annexed, shall be deemed to po ssess in the lands for which such person executed a kabuliyat between the 
first day of April 1858 and the first day of April 1860 the same right and title which he would have 
possessed thereto if he had acquired the same in the manner mentioned in section three; and he shall be 
deemed to hold the same subject to all the conditions affecting Taluqdár s which are re ferred to in the said 
section, and to be a Taluqdár  for all the purposes of this Act.  
5. Grantees’ rights and liabilities .—Every Grantee shall poss ess the same rights and be subject to the 
same conditions in respect of the estate comprised in his grant as a Taluqdár  possesses and is subject to, 
under section three, in respect of his estate.  
6. Saving of certain redemption –suits .—Nothing in sections t hree, four and five, or in the said 
orders, or in any sanad, shall be deemed to bar a suit for redemption,  
(a) where the instrument of mortgage was executed on or after the thirteenth day of February 
1844 and fixed no term within which the property compri sed therein might be redeemed, or  
(b) where the instrument of mortgage fixed a term within which the property comprised therein 
might be redeemed, and such term did not expire before the thirteenth day of February 1856.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH ESTATE’S ACT, 1869.pdf - page 5]
5  7. Heirlooms .—If a Taluqdár  or Gran tee, or any heir or legatee of a Taluqdár  or Grantee, desire that 
any elephants, jewels, arms or other articles of moveable property belonging to him shall devolve along 
with his estate, he shall take an inventory of such articles. Such inventory shall be signed by him and 
deposited in the office of the Deputy Commissioner of the District wherein such estate or the greater part 
thereof is situate; and thereupon such of the said articles as shall not have been tran sferred shall (so far as 
may be possible) be  used and enjoyed by the person who, under or by virtue of this Act, is for the time 
being in actual possession or in receipt of the rents and profits of the said estate or the greater part         
thereof, otherwise than as mortgagee or lessee.  
III.—Lists of Taluqdár s and Grantees . 
8. Preparation of lists of Taluqdár s and Grantees. —Within six months after the passing of this 
Act, the Chief Commissioner of Oudh, subject to such instructions as he may receive from the Governor 
General of India in Counci l, shall cause to be prepared six lists, namely : — 
First. —A list of all persons who are to be considered Taluqdár s within the meaning of this Act ;  
Second. —A list of the Taluqdár s whose estates, according to the custom of the family on and before 
the thir teenth day of February 1856, ordinarily devolved upon a single heir ;  
Third. —A list of the Taluqdár s, not included in the second of such lists, to whom sanads or grants 
have been or may be given or made by the British Government up to the date fixed for th e closing of such 
lists, declaring that the succession to the estates comprised in such sanads or grants shall thereafter be 
regulated by the rule of primogeniture;  
Fourth .—A list of the Taluqdár s to whom the provisions of section twenty -three are applica ble ;  
Fifth .—A list of the Grantees to whom sanads or grants have been or may be given or made by the 
British Government, up t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH ESTATE’S ACT, 1869.pdf - page 5]
Grantees to whom sanads or grants have been or may be given or made by the 
British Government, up to the date  fixed  for the closing of such list, declaring that the succession to the 
estates comprised in such sanads or grants sh all thereafter be regulated by the rule of primogeniture ;  
Sixth .—A list of the Grantees to whom the provisions of section twenty -three are applicable.  
9. Publication of lists. —When the lists mentioned in section eight shall have been approved by the 
Chief Commissioner of Oudh, they shall be published in the Gazette of India.  After such publication, the 
first and second of the said lists  shall  not, except in the manner provided by section thirty or section 
thirty -one, as the case may be, be liable to any alteration in respect of any names entered therein.  
Supplementary list. —If, at any time after the publication of the said lists, it appears to the Governor  
General of India in Co uncil that the name of any person has been wrongly omitted from or wrongly 
entered in any of the said lists, the said Governor General in Council may order the name to be inserted in 
the proper list, and such name shall be published in the Gazette of India  in a supplementary list, and such 
person shall be treated in all respects as if his name had been from the first inserted in the proper list.  
10. None but persons named in lists to be deemed Taluqdár s or Grantees. — No persons shall be 
considered Taluqdár s or Grantees within the meaning of this Act, other than the person s named in such 
original or supplementary lists as aforesaid. The Courts shall take judicial notice of the said lists and shall 
regard them as conclusive evidence that the persons named the rein are such Taluqdár s or Grantees.  
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH ESTATE’S ACT, 1869.pdf - page 6]
6  IV.—Powers of Taluqdár s and Grantees to transfer and bequeath.  
11. Taluqdár s and Grantees may transfer and bequeath. —Subject to the Provisions of this Act, 
and to all the conditions under which the estate was conferred by the British Government, every Taluqdár  
and Grantee, and every heir and legatee of a Taluqdár  and Grantee, of sound mind and not a minor, shall 
be comp etent to transfer the whole or any portion of his estate, or of his right and interest therein, during 
his life -time, by sale, exchange, mortgage, lease or gift, and to bequeath by his will to any person the 
whole or any portion of such estate, right and i nterest.  
A married woman may make a bequest under this Act of any property  which she could alienate by her 
own act during her life.  
Persons who are deaf or dumb or blind are not thereby incapacitated for  making a transfer or bequest 
under this Act, if the y are able to know what  they do by it.  
One who is ordinarily insane may make a transfer or bequest under this  Act during an interval in 
which he is of sound mind.  
No person can make a transfer or bequest under this Act while he is in  such a state of mind, whether 
from drunkenness, or from illness, or from any  other cause, that he does not know what he is doing.  
A transfer and a will, or any part of a will, the making of which has been  caused  by fraud or coercion 
or by such importunity as takes away the free  agency of the tran sferor or testator, is void.  
12. Rule against perpetuity. —No tran sfer or bequest under this Act shall be valid whereby 
the vesting of the thing transferred or bequeathed may be  delayed beyond the life -time of one or  
more persons living at  the decease of the tran sferee or testator  and the minority of some person 
who shall be in existence at the expiration of that period, and to whom, if he  attains full age, the 
thing transferred or bequeathed is to belong.  
13. Restric tion as to donees and legatees .—No Taluqdár  or Gran
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH ESTATE’S ACT, 1869.pdf - page 6]
rred or bequeathed is to belong.  
13. Restric tion as to donees and legatees .—No Taluqdár  or Grantee, and no heir or legatee of a 
Taluqdár  or Grantee, shall have power to give or bequeath his estate, or  any portion thereof, or any 
interest therein, to any person  not being either .— 
(1.)—a pers on who, under the provis ions of thi s Act, or under the ordinary  law to which person  of 
the donor' s or testator 's tribe and religion are  subject, would hav e succeeded to such estate or to a 
portion thereof, or to an  interest therein, if such Taluqdár  or Grantee, he ir or legatee, had died 
intestate,  or 
(2.)—a younger son of the Taluqdár  or Grantee, heir or legatee, in case  the name of such Taluqdár  
or Grantee appears in the third or the fifth of the  lists mentioned in section eight,  
except  by an instrument of gift or a will executed and attested, not less  than three months before the 
death of the donor or testator, in manner herein  provided in the case of a gift or will, as the case may 
be, and registered within  one month fr om the date of i ts execution.  
V.—Transfer s and Bequests.  
14. Transfers and bequest to Taluqdár s or heirs. —If any Taluqdár  or Grantee shall heretofore 
have transferred or  bequeathed, or if any Taluqdár  or Grantee, or his heir or  legatee, shall 
hereafter transfer or bequeath, the whole or any  portion of his estate to another Taluqdár  or 
Grantee, or to  such younger son as is referred to in section thirteen, clause two, or to a person  
who would have succeeded according to the provisions of this Act to the  estate or to a  portion 
thereof if the transferor or testator had died without  having made the transfer and intestate, the 
transferee or legatee and his heirs  and legatees shall have the same rights and powers in regard to 
the property  to which he or they may have become  entitled under or by virtue of such  transfer or 
bequest, and shall hold the same subject to the same conditions and  to the s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH ESTATE’S ACT, 1869.pdf - page 6]
 of such  transfer or 
bequest, and shall hold the same subject to the same conditions and  to the same rules of 
succession as the transferor or testator.  
15. Transfers and bequests to persons out of line of succession. —If any Taluqdár  or Grantee 
shall heretofore have transferred or  bequeathed, or if any Taluqdár  or Grantee or his heir or 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH ESTATE’S ACT, 1869.pdf - page 7]
7  legatee  shall hereafter transfer or bequeath to any person not being  a Taluqdár  or Grantee the 
whole or any portion of his estate, and such person would  not have  succeeded  according  to the 
provisions  of this Act to the es tate or to a portion thereof if the trans feror or testator had died  
without having made the transfer and intestate, the transfer of and succession  to the property so 
transferred  or bequeathed shall be regulated by the rules  which would have governed the transfer 
of and succession to such property  if the transferee or legatee had bought the same from a person 
not being a  Taluqdár  or Grantee.  
16. Transfers to be in writing, signed and attested. —No transfer of any estate, or of any portion 
thereof, or of any  interest therein, made by a Taluqdár  or Grantee or by his heir  or legatee under 
the provisions of this Act, shall be valid  unless made by an instrument in writing signed by the  
transferor and attested by two or more witnesses.  
17. Further requisites to validity of gifts inter vivos .—If any such transfer be made by gift, the gift 
shall not be valid u nless, within six months after the execution of the instrument of gift , the gift b e 
followed by delivery by the donor, or his representative in interest, of possession of the property 
comprised therein, nor unless the instrument shall have been registered within one  month from t he 
date of its execution.  
18. Gifts to religious or charita ble uses. —No Taluqdár  or Grante e, and no heir or legatee of a 
Taluqdár  or Grantee, shall have power to give his estate, or any portion  thereof or interest therein, to 
religious or charitable uses,  except by an instrument of gift executed not less than three months 
before his  death, and subject to the provisions contained in section seventeen.  
VI.—Testa mentary Succession.  
 19. Sections of Succession Act applied to wills of Taluqdár s.—Sections 49, 50, 51, 54, 55, 
and 57 to 77 (both inclusive), and sec tions
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH ESTATE’S ACT, 1869.pdf - page 7]
d to wills of Taluqdár s.—Sections 49, 50, 51, 54, 55, 
and 57 to 77 (both inclusive), and sec tions 82, 83, 85, and 88 to 98 (both inclusive) of the Indian  
Succession Act (No. X of 1865), shall apply to all wills and  codicils made by any Taluqdár  or 
Grantee, or by his heir  or legatee , under the provisions of this Act, for the pur pose of bequeathing  to 
any person his estate, or any portion thereof, or any interest therein: Provided  that marriage shall not 
revoke any such will or codicil : Provided also that  nothing herein contained shall affect wills made 
before the passing of this  Act. 
In applying t he said sections to wills and codicils made under this Act,  all words hereinbefore 
defined, and occurring in such sections, shall (unless  there be something repugnant in the subject or 
context) be deemed to have the  same meaning a s this Act has attached to such wo rds respectively.  
20. Bequests to religious and charitable uses. —No Taluqdár  or Grant ee, and no heir or  
legatee  of a Taluqdár  or Grantee, having a Child , parent, brother, unmarried sister, or   a nephew,  
being the naturally born son of a  brother of such  Taluqdár  or Grantee, heir or legatee, shall have 
power to bequeath his estate  or any part thereof or any interes t therein exceeding in amount or value 
the sum of two thousand rupees to religious or charitable uses, except by a will  execute d not less than 
three months before his death, and registered within  one month from the date of its execution.  
VII.—Intestate Succession.  
21. ‘Son,’ ‘descendants, ’ ‘daughter, ’ ‘brother, ’ ‘widow, ’ ‘defined .—In the next following 
section, unless where there is something  repugnant in the context, the words ‘son,’ ‘descendants, ’ 
‘daugh ter’ and ‘brother ’ apply only to najib -ul-tarfain , and the word ‘widow’ applies only to a 
woman belonging to the  ahl-i-bradari  of her deceased husband.  
22. Special rules of succession to intestate Taluqdár s and Grantees .—If any Talu
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH ESTATE’S ACT, 1869.pdf - page 7]
ceased husband.  
22. Special rules of succession to intestate Taluqdár s and Grantees .—If any Taluqdár  or 
Grantee whose name shall be inserted in the  second, third, or fifth of the lists mentioned in 
section eight,  or his heir or leg atee, shall die intestate as to his es tate, such estate shall descend as 
follows , viz :— 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH ESTATE’S ACT, 1869.pdf - page 8]
8  (l).—To the eldest son of such Taluqdár  or Grantee, heir or legatee, and  his male lineal 
descendants, subject to the same conditions and in the same  manner as the estate was held by 
the decease d; 
(2).—Or if such eldest son of such Taluqdár  or Grantee, heir or legatee,  shall have died in 
his life -time, leaving male lineal descendants, then to the  eldest and every other son of such 
eldest son successively, according to their  respective seniorities, and th eir respective male 
lineal descendants, subject as  aforesaid;  
(3).—Or if such eldest son of such Taluqdár  or Grantee, heir or legatee,  shall have died in 
his life-time without leavin g male lineal descendants,  then to the second and every other son 
of the aid Taluqdár  or Grantee, heir  or legatee, successively, ac cording to their respective 
seniorities, and their respective  male lineal descendants, subject as aforesaid;  
(4).—Or in default of such son or descendants, then to such son (if any)  of a d aughter of 
such Taluqdár  or Grantee, heir  or legatee, as has been treated  by him in all respects as his own 
son, and to the male lineal descendants of  such son, subject as aforesaid;  
(5).—Or in default of such son or descendants, then to such person as the  said Taluqdár  or 
Grantee, heir or legatee, shall have adopted by a writing  executed and attested in manner 
required in case of a will and registered, subject  as aforesaid;  
(6).—Or in default of such adopted son, then to the eldest and every other  brother of such 
Taluqdár  or Grantee, heir or legatee, successively, according  to their respective seniorities, 
and their respective male lineal descendants,  subject as aforesaid;  
(7).—Or in default of any such brother, then to the widow of the deceased  Taluqdár  or 
Grantee, heir or legatee; or, if there be more widows than one, to  the widow first married to 
such Taluqdár  or Grantee, heir or legatee, for her  life-time only;  
(8).—And upon the death of such widow, the
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH ESTATE’S ACT, 1869.pdf - page 8]
  or Grantee, heir or legatee, for her  life-time only;  
(8).—And upon the death of such widow, then to such son as the said widow shall, with 
the c onsent in writing of her deceased husband, have adopted  by a writing executed and 
attested in manner required in case of a will and  registered, subject as aforesaid;  
(9).—Or on the death of such first married widow and in default of a son  adopted by her 
with such consent and in such manner as aforesaid, then to the  other widow, if any, of such 
Taluqdár  or Grantee, heir or legatee, next in  order of marriage, for her life, and on the death of 
such other widow, to a son  adopted by her with such consent and in such manner  as aforesaid; 
or in  default of such adopted son, then to the other sur viving  widows according  to their 
respective seniorities as widows, for their respective lives, and on their  respective deaths, to 
the sons so adopted by them respectively, and to the male  lineal descendants of such sons 
respectively, subject as aforesaid;  
(10).—Or in default of any such widow or of any son so adopted by her , or of any such 
descendant, then to the male lineal descendants,  not being  najib-ul-tarfain, of such Taluqdár  or 
Grantee, heir or legatee, successively,  according to their respective seniorities and their                            
respecti ve male lineal  descendant , whether najib-ul-tarfai n or not;  
(11). —Or in default of any such descendant, then to such persons as  would have been entitled to 
succeed to the estate under the ordinary law to  which per sons of the religion and tribe of such 
Taluqdár  or Grantee, heir or  legatee, are subject.   
Nothing contained in the former part of this section shall be construed to  limit the power of 
alienation conferred by section eleven.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH ESTATE’S ACT, 1869.pdf - page 9]
9  23. General rule of succession to intestate Taluqdár s and Grantees .—Except in the cases provided 
for by section twenty -two, the succession  to all property left by Taluqdár s and Grantees, and  their heirs 
and legatee s, dying intestate, shall be regulated  by the ordinary law to which members of the intestate's  
tribe and religion are subject.  
 
VIII.—Maintenance.  
24. Maintenance of surviving relatives of Taluqdár s and Grantees .—When any Taluqdár  or 
Grantee, or his heir or legatee, dies leaving  him surviv ing such relatives as are hereinafter mentioned,  the 
person for the time being in the possession of his estate  or the  rents and profits thereof shall be liable to 
pay to each  of such relati ves during his or her life, or for such other period as is hereinafter  menti oned,  by 
twelve equal monthly payments, an annuity in accordance with  the custom  of the country not exceedin g 
such amount as is hereinafter mentioned  : Provided that such relative was at the date of the death of the 
deceased  living together with him: Provided also that such relative is and continues  to be without any 
other adequate means of maintenance.  
If any p art of such estate shall have been transferred or bequeathed by  the deceased, th e person for the 
time being in possession of such part, or of the  rents and profi ts thereof, shall be liable to pay 
proportionate parts of the said  annuities during the continu ance thereof respectively.  
25. Grandparents, parents, and senior widows. —In the case of the grandparents, parents, and senior 
widows of the deceased, the maximum amount of the annuity shall be as follows : — 
(a.) where the annual revenue payable to Government in respect of the estate is or exceeds                  
1,50,000 rupees ⸻a sum not exceeding 6,000 rupees :  
(b.) where such revenue is or exceeds 100,000 rupees, but is less than 1,50,000 rupees ⸻ a sum not  
exceeding 2,400 rupees :  
(c.) where such revenue is or exceeds 50,000 rupee
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH ESTATE’S ACT, 1869.pdf - page 9]
0 rupees ⸻ a sum not  
exceeding 2,400 rupees :  
(c.) where such revenue is or exceeds 50,000 rupees, but is less than 100,000 rupees ⸻ a sum not 
exceeding 1,200 rupees :  
(d.) where such revenue is or exceeds 25,000 rupees, but is less than 50,000 rupees ⸻ a sum not 
exceeding 60 0 rupees :  
(e.) where such revenue is or exceeds 15,000 rupees, but is less than 25,000 rupees ⸻ a sum not 
exceeding 360 rupees :  
(f.) where such revenue is or exceeds 7,000 rupees, but is less than 15,000 rupees ⸻ a sum not 
exceeding 240 rupees ; and  
(g.) where such revenue is less than 7,000 rupees ⸻ a sum not exceeding 180 rupees.  
Junior widows. —In the case of a junior widow of the deceased, the maximum amount of the 
annuity shall be one -half of the maximum amount to which a senior widow of the decea sed would be 
entitled under the former part of this section.  
26. Brothers and minor sons. —In the case of brothers and minor sons of the deceased, the 
maximum amount of the annuity shall be a  sum not more than 1,200 rupees.  
Nephews. —In the case of nephews of the deceased, being fatherless  minors, the maximum amount 
of the annuity shall be a  sum not more than 600 rupees.  
27. Unmarried daughters, widows of sons and brothers and inferior widows .—In the case of 
unmarried daughters of the deceased,  widows of hi s sons and brothers, and his widows  not of his                   
ahl-i·brada ri, the maximum amount of the annuity  shall be a sum not more than 360 rupees.  
28. Continuance of annuities .—Subject to the provisions hereinbefore contained , the said 
annuities  hall continue,  
(a) in the case of a minor son or a minor nephew,  till he ceases to be a  minor;   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH ESTATE’S ACT, 1869.pdf - page 10]
10  (b) in the c ase of a daug hter or widow, till she voluntarily leaves the  household of the heir or 
legatee of the deceased, or would, according to the  custom of  the country, cea se to be entitled to 
maintenance, and  
(c) in all other cases, till the annuitant dies.  
IX.—Miscellaneous.  
29. Muhammadan Taluqdárs and Grantees empowered to adopt .—Every Muhammadan 
Taluqdár , Grantee, heir or legatee, and every widow of a Muhammadan Taluqdár or Grantee, heir or 
legatee, with the consent in writing of her deceased husband, shall, for the purposes of this Act, have 
power to adopt a son whenever, if he or she were a Hind u, he or  she might adopt a son.  
Such, power shall be exercisable only by writing executed and attested in manner required by section 
nineteen in case of a will and registered.  
30. Alteration of rules of intestate succession in cases of Taluqdárs and Grantees named  in                     
list 3 or list 5 .—Any Taluqdár  or Grantee whose name has been entered in the third or fifth of the lists 
mentioned in section eight, or his heir or legatee, may, at any time hereafter, present to the Chief 
Commissioner of Oudh a declaration in writing, executed and registered in the ma nner required by this 
Act for the execution and registration of an instrument of gift, that he is desirous that the succession to his 
estate shall, in case of his intestacy, cease to be regulated in the manner described in section twenty -two, 
and that it s hall in future be regulated by the ordinary law to which members of his tribe and religion are 
subject.  
On receiving such declaration, the said Chief Commissioner shall cause to be inserted the name of 
such Taluqdár or Grantee, heir or legatee, in the four th or sixth (as the case may be) of the lists mentioned 
in section eight, and shall cause a note thereof to be made in the proper place in the third or fifth (as the 
case may be) of the said lists, and the succession to such estate shall thenceforward, 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH ESTATE’S ACT, 1869.pdf - page 10]
fth (as the 
case may be) of the said lists, and the succession to such estate shall thenceforward, in case of intestacy, 
be regulated in the manner provided by section twenty -three.  
31. Reverter to ordinary law of succession .—Any Taluqdár or Grantee, heir or legatee, may, at any 
time hereafter, present to the Chief Commissioner of Oudh a declaration in wri ting, executed and 
registered in the manner required by this Act for the execution and registration of instruments of gift, that 
he is desirous that his estate should in future be held subject to the ordinary law of succession to which 
members of his tribe  and religion are subject.  
On receiving such declaration, the Chief Commissioner shall cause a note thereof to be made in the 
proper places in each of the lists mentioned in section eight in which the name of such Taluqdár or 
Grantee, heir or legatee, has been entered, and thenceforward none of the provisions of this Act shall 
apply to such estate, which shall thenceforward be held subject in all respects to the ordinary law of 
succession to which members of his tribe and religion are subject.  
32. Saving of  rights of creditors .—Nothing hereinbefore contained shall affect any right which the 
creditors of any person making a transfer or bequest under the provisions of this Act, would have 
possessed as against the property comprised in such transfer or bequest if this Act had not been passed.  
33. Awards as to compensation and maintenance .—And whereas bodies of Taluqdárs have in 
several cases made awards respecting the provision to be made for certain relatives of Taluqdárs, and it is 
expedient to render such awa rds legally enforceable; it is hereby further enacted that every such award 
shall, if approved by the Financial Commissioner of Oudh and filed in his Court within six months after 
the passing of this Act, he enforceable as if a Court of competent jurisdict ion had passed judgment 
according to the award and a decree had followed
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH ESTATE’S ACT, 1869.pdf - page 10]
urt of competent jurisdict ion had passed judgment 
according to the award and a decree had followed upon such judgment.  
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH ESTATE’S ACT, 1869.pdf - page 11]
11  SCHEDULES.  
FIRST  SCHEDULE . 
(See section 3.) 
I. 
From C. BEADON , ESQ., Secretary to the Government of India, Foreign Department, to                                      
C.J. WINGFIELD , ESQ., Chief Commissioner of Oudh,  (No. 6268, dated 10th October 1859.)  
No. 1091, dated the 4 th June . No. 1377, dated the 15 th July.—I AM directed by the Governor 
General in Council to acknowledge the receipt of your Secretary's letters noted in the margin, relative to 
the Taluqdárí settlement of Oudh.  
2. His Excellency in Council, agreeing with you as to the expediency of removing all doub ts as to the 
intention of the Government to maintain the Taluqdárs in possession of the taluqas for which they have 
been permitted to engage, is pleased to declare that every Taluqdár with whom a summary settlement has 
been made since the re -occupation of the province, has thereby acquired a permanent hereditary and 
transferable proprietary right,  viz., in the taluqa for which he has engaged, including the perpetual 
privilege of engaging with the Government for the revenue of the taluqa.  
3. This right is, h owever, conceded, subject to any measure which the Government may think proper 
to take for the purpose of protecting the inferior Zamíndárs and village occupants from extortion, and of 
upholding their rights in the soi l in subordination to the Taluqdárs.  
4. The Governor General in Council desires that you will have ready, by His Excellency's arrival at 
Lucknow, a list of the Taluqdárs upon whom a permanent proprietary right has now been conferred; and 
that you will prepare sanads to be issued to these Taluq dárs at that time. The sanads will be  given by, and 
will r un in the name of, the Chief Commissioner, acting under the authority of the Governor General.  
5. I am directed to add that, as regards Zamíndárs and others, not being Taluqdárs, with whom a 
summary  settlement has been made, the orders conveyed in the limitation Circular No. 31 of the 28 th  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH ESTATE’S ACT, 1869.pdf - page 11]
mary  settlement has been made, the orders conveyed in the limitation Circular No. 31 of the 28 th  of 
January 1859, must not be strictly observed. Opportunity must be allowed at the next settlement to all 
disappointed claimants to bring forward their claims, and all such claims must be heard and disposed of in 
the usual manner.  
___________  
II. 
From C. BEADON , ESQ., Secretary to the Government of India, Foreign Department, with the Governor 
General, to Chief Commissioner, Oudh,  (No. 23, dated 19 th October 1859) . 
I am directed by His Excellency the Governor General to acknowledge the receipt of your                         
demi -official letter of the 15 th instant, enclosing a form of sanad to be given to the Taluqdárs of Oudh, 
granting them a full and permanent pr oprietary right in the taluqas for which they have severally been 
permitted to engage at the summary settlement.  
2. This form of sanad is generally approved, and a revised copy, with some few alterations, is herewith 
enclosed for adoption and for careful t ranslation into the Hindustani lang uage, in which the sanads will b e 
prepared.  
3. The sanads declare that while, on the one hand, the Government has conferred on the Taluqdárs and 
on their heirs for ever the full proprietary right in their respective estat es, subject only to the payment of 
the annual revenue that may be imposed from time to time, and  to certain conditions of loyalt y and good 
service, on the other hand, all persons holding an interest in the land under the Taluqdárs will be secured 
in the po ssession of the subordinate rights which they have heretofore enjoyed.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH ESTATE’S ACT, 1869.pdf - page 12]
12  4. The meaning of this is that, when a regular settlement of the province is made, wherever it is found 
that Zamíndárs or other persons have held an interest in the soil intermediate be tween the ryot and the 
Taluqdár, the amount or proportion payable by the intermediate holder to the Taluqdár , and the net jama 
finally payable by the Taluqdár to the Government, will be fixed and recorded after careful and detailed 
survey and inquiry into each case, and will remain unchanged during the currency of the settlement, the 
Taluqdár being, of course, free to improve his income and the value of his property by the reclamation of 
waste lands (unless in cases where usage has given the liberty of recl amation to the Zamindar), and by 
other measures of which he will receive the full benefit at the end of the settlement. Where leases (pattás) 
are given to the subordinate Zamíndárs, they will be given by the Taluqdár, not by the Government.  
5. This being t he position in which the Taluqdárs will be placed, they cannot, with any show of reason, 
complain if the Government takes effectual steps to re -establish and maintain in subordination to them the 
former rights, as those existed in 1855, of other persons wh ose connexion with the soil is in many cases 
more intimate and more ancient than theirs; and it is obvious that the only effectual protection which the 
Government can extend to these inferior holders, is to define and record their rights and to limit the 
demand of the Taluqdár as against such person during the currency of the settlement to the amount fixed 
by the Government as the basis of its own revenue demand.  
6. What the duration of the settlement shall be, and what proportion of the rent shall be allow ed in 
each case to Zamíndárs and Taluqdárs, are questions to be determined at the time of settlement.  
The Governor General agrees in your observation that it is a bad principle to create two classes of 
recognized proprietors in one estate, and it
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH ESTATE’S ACT, 1869.pdf - page 12]
on that it is a bad principle to create two classes of 
recognized proprietors in one estate, and it is likely  to lead to the alienation of a larger proportion of the 
land revenue than if there were only one such class. But whilst the taluqdárí tenure, notwithstanding this 
drawback, is about to be recognized and re -established, because it is consonant with the fee lings and 
traditions of the whole people of Oudh, the zamíndári tenure intermediate between the tenures of the 
Taluqdár and the ryot is not a new creation, and it is a tenure which, in the opinion of the Governor 
General, must be protected.  
 
____________  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH ESTATE’S ACT, 1869.pdf - page 13]
13   
SECOND  SCHEDULE  
 (See section 4.) 
(1).— Dig-Bijay Singh, Rájá of Balrámpúr.  
(2). — Rao Hardeo Bakhsh Singh, of Katíari.  
(3). — Káshí Parshád, Taluqdár of Sisséndi.  
(4). — Jhabba Singh, Zamíndár of Gopál Khéra.  
(5). — Chandan Lál, Zamíndár  of Moraon (Baiswára).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH LAWS ACT, 1876.pdf - page 1]
1 
  
THE OUDH LAWS ACT, 1876  
———  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
————  
 
PREAMBLE . 
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
 
SECTIONS . 
 
 1.  Short title.  
      Local extent.  
      Commencement.  
 2.  [Repealed .]. 
 
PART II  
GENERAL  LAWS TO BE ADMINISTERED IN OUDH 
 
 3.  Statutory law to be administered in Oudh.  
 4.  Validity of local customs and mercantile usages.  
 
PART III  
CHAPTER  I 
DOWER AMONG MUHAMMADANS  
 
5.   Muhammadan dower contracts how to be enforced Rule applicable after husband's           
death.  
 
              CHAPTER  II 
            PRE-EMPTION  
 
 6.    Right of pre -emption.  
 7.    as to its existence.  
 8.    Its existence in towns to be proved.  
 9.    Devolution of right when property to be sold or foreclosed is a proprietary or  under   
        proprietary tenure  
 9A. When a suit for pre -emption lies.  
 10.  Notice to pre -emptors.  
 11.  Loss of right of pre -emption.  
 12.  Right of pre -emptor on foreclosure.  
 13.  Suit to enforce right of pre -emption.  
 14.  Decree to fix time for payment.  
 15.  Effect of non -payment of purchas e-money.  
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH LAWS ACT, 1876.pdf - page 2]
2 
 CHAPTER  III 
PROCEDURE OF THE COURTS  
 
 16. Rule of limitation.  
 17. [Repealed .] 
18. [Repealed .] 
 19. Rules for taking evidence.  
 20. Execution -sale of ancestral and acquired property in land.  
 21. [Repealed .] 
 22. Service of process within jurisdiction of Luck Court.  
 23. [Repealed .]  
24. [Repealed .] 
25. [Repealed .] 
 26. Revenue -agents authorized to appear, etc.,  in rent -suits.  
 27. Power to make rules for custody and sale of a  property.  
 28. [Repealed .] 
 
CHAP TER IV 
VILLAGE AND ROAD -POLICE  
 
 29. Right to nominate village -policemen.  
 30. Obligation to nominate.  
 31. Discretion to appoint or reject nominee.  
 32.  Power to Government to appoint. Procedure in case of rejection of nominee.  
 33. Appointment of road-police.  
 34. Duties of village and road -policemen.  
 35. Procedure on arrest by village or road -policeman  
 36. Dismissal of village or road -policeman.  
 37. Acts punishable. Penalty.  
 38. Fines to be credited to such fund as Government appoints.  
 
CHAPTER  V 
SUBSIDIARY  RULES  
 39. Power to make rules  
 40. Publication of rules.  
 41. [Repealed .] 
 42. Penalty for breach of rules.  
CHAPTER  VI 
MISCELLANEOUS  
Honorary Civil Jurisdiction  
 43. [Repealed .] 
Honorary police -officers  
 44. Honorary police -officers.  
     
   Creation and alteration of districts and sub -divisions  
  45. [Repealed .]  
 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE —[Repealed .] 
 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH LAWS ACT, 1876.pdf - page 3]
3 
 THE OUDH LAWS ACT, 1876  
 
ACT NO. 18 OF 1876  
          [10th October , 1876 .] 
 
An Act to declare and amend the laws to be administered in Oudh.  
   Preamble. —WHEREAS  it is expedient to declare and amend the laws to be administered in 
Oudh; It is hereby enacted as follows: — 
 
         PART  I  
              PRELIMINRY  
1.  Short title .—This Act may be called the Oudh Laws Act, 1876.            
     Local extent .— It extends only to  1*  *  * Oudh  ;          
     Commencement .—and it shall come into force on the passing thereof.  
2. [Repeal of enactments .]—Rep. by the R epealing Act , 1938 (1 of 1938),  s. 2 and Sch . 
 
PART   II  
GENERAL  LAWS TO BE ADMINISTERED IN OUDH  
 23.   Statutory law to be administered in Oudh. —The law to b e administered by the Courts of 
Oudh shall be as follows:   
(a) The laws for the time being in force regulating the assessment and collection of land-revenue.  
(b) In questions  regarding  succession,  special  property  of female betrothal,  marriage,  divorce,  
dower , adopti on, guard ianship, minority,  bastardy, family relations,  wills,  legacies,  gifts, partitions 
or any religious  usage or institution, the rule  of decision shall be —               
(l)  any custom applicable to the parties concerned which is not contrary to justice  equity or 
good conscience, and has not been, by this or any other enactment,  altered or abolished, and has 
not been declared to be void by any competent authority;  
 
(2)  the Muhammadan law in cases where the parties are Muhammadans , and the Hindu law 
in cases where the parties are Hindus, except in so far as such  law has been, by this or any other 
enactment, altered or abolished, or has been modi fied by any such  custom as is above referred 
to: 
 
(c) the rules contained in this Act:  
 
(d) the rules published in the Official Gazette as provided by section 40, or made under any 
other  Act for the time being in force in Oudh:  
      
(e) the Regulation
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH LAWS ACT, 1876.pdf - page 3]
n 40, or made under any 
other  Act for the time being in force in Oudh:  
      
(e) the Regulations and Acts specified in the second schedule hereto annexed, subject to  the 
provisions of section 4, and to the modifications mentioned in the third column  of the same schedule:
 (f) subject to the modifications hereinafter mentioned, all enactments for the ti me being in force  
                                                           
1. The words “the territories for the time being administered by the Chief Commissioner of ” rep.  by the A.O. 1937.  
2. The provisions of this section have been rep.  in so far as they are inconsistent with the Muslim Personal Law  (Shariat) 
Application Act, 1937 (26 of 1937); see s. 6 of that Act.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH LAWS ACT, 1876.pdf - page 4]
4 
 and expressly, or by necessary implication, applying to  1[the territories which,  immediat ely before 
the 1st November, 1956 , were comprised in Part A States and Part C States] or Oudh,  or some part 
of Oudh:   
(g) In cases not provided for by the former part of this section, or by any other law for the  time 
being in force, the Courts shall act accord ing to justice, equity and good  conscience.  
 
4.  Validit y of local customs and mercanti le usage .—All local customs and mercantile usages 
shall b e regarded as valid, unless they are contrary to justice, equity or good conscience, or have, before 
the passing of this Act, been declared to be void by and competent authority.  
 
PART III  
 
CHAPTER   I 
 
DOWER AMONG MUHAMMADANS  
 
5.  Muhammadan dower contracts how to be enforced .—Where the amount of dower stipulated 
for in any contract of dower by a Muhammadan is excessive with reference to the means of the 
husband, the entire sum provided in the contract shall not be awarded in any s uit by decree in favour 
of the plaintiff, or by allowing it by way of set -off, lien or otherwise to the defendant; but the amount 
of the dower to be allowed by the Court shall be reasonable with reference to the means of the husband 
and the status of the w ife. 
 
Rule applicable after husband ’s death .—This rule shall be applicable whether the suit to enforce 
the contract be brought in the husband's life time or after his death .  
 
CHAPTER  II 
 
PRE-EMPTON  
 
6. Right of pre -emption .—The right of pre -emption is a right of the persons hereinafter in 
mentioned  or referred to, to acquire, in the cases hereinafter specified, immovabl e property in preference 
to all  other  persons.  
                                                                                                                                  
7. Presumption as to its existence .—Unless the existence of any custom  or contract to the contrary 
is proved, such right shall, whe ther re
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH LAWS ACT, 1876.pdf - page 4]
s the existence of any custom  or contract to the contrary 
is proved, such right shall, whe ther recorded in the settlement -record or not, be presumed — 
  
(a)  to exist in all village -communities, however constituted, and whether proprietary or       
under -proprietary, and in  the cases referred to in section 40 of  the Oudh Land -revenue Act,                        
2(17 of 1876) , and   
       
(b)  to extend to the village -site, to the houses built upon it, to all lands and shares of lands within 
the village -boundary, and to all transferable rights affecting such lands.  
 
8. Its existence in towns to be proved .—The right of pre -emption shall not be pre sumed to exist in 
any town or city, or any sub -division thereof, but may be whom to exist therein and to be exercisable 
therein by such persons and under such circumstances as the local custom prescribes.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by the Adaptation o f Laws (No.2) Order, 1956, for “ Part A States and  Part C States ”. 
2. See now the U.P. Land Revenue Act, 1901 (U.P. 3 of 1901).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH LAWS ACT, 1876.pdf - page 5]
5 
  9. Devolution of right when property to property t o be sold or for eclosed is a proprietary or 
under proprietary tenure .—If  the  property  to be  sold or foreclosed is a proprietary or under -
proprietary tenure, or a share of such a tenure, the right to buy or redeem such property belongs, in the 
absence of a custom to the contrary,  — 
 1st,  to co -sharers of the sub -division (if any) of the tenure in  which the property is  
  comprised, in order of their relationship to the vendor or mortgagor;  
 2ndly,     to co -sharers of the whole mahal in the same order;  
 3rdly,    to any member of the village -community; and  
 4thly,   if  the property be an under -proprietary tenure, to the proprietor.  
     
Where two or more persons are equally entitled to such right , the person to exercise the same shall 
be determined by lot.  
 
1[9A. When a suit for pre -emption lies .—No suit shall lie for enforcing a right of pre-emption 
under this Act in respect of a portion only of the property sold or foreclosed:  
 
Provided that, where the plaintiff has a right of pre -emption in respect of only a portion of the 
property sold or foreclosed, then notwithstanding anything to the  contrary contained in any enactment a 
suit for the pre -emption of that portion only shall lie and the plaintiff shall have to pay the proportionate 
price or the proportionate amount due in respect of such mortgage for such portion of the property , as 
the case may be.]  
10.  Notice to pre -emptors .—When any person proposes to sell any property, or when he forecloses 
a mortgage upon any property, in respect of which any persons have a right of pre -emption, he shall give 
notice to the persons concerned of the p rice at which he is willing to sell such property, or of the amount 
due in respect of such mortgage, as the case may be:  
 2[Provided that, where a person has a right of pre -emption in respect of a portion only of the property 
proposed to be sold or foreclo sed, th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH LAWS ACT, 1876.pdf - page 5]
of pre -emption in respect of a portion only of the property 
proposed to be sold or foreclo sed, the notice to such person shall specify the proportionate amount of 
the price or the proportionate amount due in respect of such mortgage at which the person proposing to 
sell or foreclose is willing to sell or redeem such portion of the property, as the case may be.]  
Such notice shall be given through the Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the property 
or any part thereof is situate, and shall be deemed sufficiently given if it be stuck up on the chaupal or 
other public place of the v illage or city in which the property is situate.  
11. Loss of right of pre -emption .—Any person having a right of pre -emption in respect of any 
property proposed to be sold shall lose such right, unless within three months from the date of such 
notice he or his agent pays or tenders the price 3[specified in the notice given under the preceding section] 
to the person so proposing to sell.  
12.  Right of preemptor on foreclosure .—When the right of pre -emption arises in respect of the 
foreclosure of a mortgage 4[or a portion of the mortgage], any person entitled to such right may, at any 
time within three months after the  giving of the notice required by section 10, pay or tender to the 
                                                           
1.   Ins. by  U.P. Act 15 of 1939, s. 2.  
2.   Ins. by s. 3, ibid. 
3.   Subs.  by s. 4,  ibid., for “aforesaid”.  
4.   Ins.  by s. 5, ibid. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH LAWS ACT, 1876.pdf - page 6]
6 
 mortgagee or his successor in title the amount specified in such notice, and shall thereupon acquire a 
right to purchase the property,  1[or a porti on thereof, as the case may be].  
On completion of the purchase the person exercising the right of re -emption shall be bound to pay 
to the mortgagee or his successor in title the amount specified in such notice, together with interest on 
the principal sum secured by the mortgage 1[or the proportionate amount of such principal sum in respect 
of the portion of the property in which he possesses the right of pre -emption, as the case may be],  at the 
rate specified by the instrument of mortgage, for any time which has elapsed since the date of the notice, 
and any additional costs which may have been properly incurred by the mortgagee or his successor in 
title. 
13.  Suit to enforce right of pre -emption .—Any person entitled to a right of pre -emption may 
bring a suit to enforce such right on any of the following grounds (namely) :  — 
(a)  that no due notice was given as required by section 10;  
(b)  that tender was made under section 11 or section 12  and refused;  
(c)  in the case of a sale, that the price stated in the notice was not fixed in good faith;  
(d)  in the case of a mortgage, that the amount claimed by the mortgagee was not really due on 
the footing of the mortgage and was not claimed in goo d faith, and that it exceeds the fair          
market -value of the property mortgaged, 2[or the portion of the property mortgaged in respect of 
which he possesses the right of pre -emption, as the case may be].  
If, in the case of a sale, the Court finds tha t the price was not fixed in good faith, the «ours shall fix 
such price as appears to it to be the fair mar ket-value of the property sold,  2[or the portion of the property 
sold in respect of which he possesses the right of pre -emption, as the case may be].  
If, in the case of a mortgage , the Court finds that the amount claimed by the mort
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH LAWS ACT, 1876.pdf - page 6]
 case may be].  
If, in the case of a mortgage , the Court finds that the amount claimed by the mortgagee was not 
really due on the footing of the mortgage, and that it was not claimed in good faith and that it exceeds 
the fair market -value of the property mortgaged 2[or the portion of the property mortgaged in respect of 
which he possesses the right of  pre-emption, as the case may be], the amount to be paid to the mortgagee 
shall not exceed what the Court finds to be such market -value.  
14.  Decree to fix time for payment .—If the Court find for the plaintiff, the decree shall specify a 
day on or before which the purchase -money or the amount to be paid to the mortgagee shall be paid.  
15.  Effect of non -payment of purchase -money .—If such purchase -money or amount is not paid 
into Court before it rises on that day, the decree shall become void, and the plaintiff shall , so far only as 
relates to such sale or mortgage, lose his right of pre -emption over the property to which the decree 
relates.  
      
 
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by U.P.  Act 15 of 1939, s.  5.  
2. Ins.  by s.  6, ibid.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH LAWS ACT, 1876.pdf - page 7]
7 
  
CHAPTER  III 
PROCEDURE OF THE  COURTS  
16.  Rule of limitation .—The Judicial Commissioner's Circular No.104 of July, 1860, shall be held 
to have been a notification within the meaning of section 24 of Act 14 of 1859,1 and such Act shall be 
deemed to have been in force in Oudh from the fourth day of July, 1862; and all orders and decrees 
passed under the rules contained in the said Circular or under the said Act, shall be deem ed to have been 
passed under a l aw m force f or the time being.  
Nothing in this section affects the provisions of sections 109, 104 , 105, 106, 107 and 108 of the 
Oudh Rent Act (XIX of 1868)2 with regard to the limitation of suits under that Act.  
17. [Act 32 of 1871, s.  28, to cease in any district fr om date of notification that it is no longer          
under settlement ].—Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act , 1891 (12 of 1891).  
18.  [Recognized agents .]—Rep. by  the Repealing and Amending Act , 1891 (12 of 1891).  
19.  Rules of taking evidence .—3Section  172 of Act No.8of 1859 is hereby repealed, so far as the 
province of Oudh is concerned, and the following section is substituted therefore: — 
“On the day appointed for the hearing of the suit, or on some other day to which the hearing may be 
adjourned, the  evidence of the witnesses in attendance shall be taken orally in open Court in the presence 
and hearing and under the personal direction and superintendence of the Judge.  
“A note of the essential points of the evidence of each witness is to be taken at th e time, and in the 
course of oral examination, by the officer who tries the case, in his own language, or in English if  he is 
sufficiently acquainted with that language, and such note shall be filed, and shall form part of the record 
of the case.  
“If the e vidence be taken down in a different language from that in which it has been given, and the 
witness does not understand the language in which it is taken down, the witness may require his 
depos
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH LAWS ACT, 1876.pdf - page 7]
tness does not understand the language in which it is taken down, the witness may require his 
deposition as taken down to be interpreted to him in the language in  which it was given.  
“It shall be in the discretion of the Court to take down, or cause to be taken down, any particular 
question and answer, if there appear any special reason for so doing, or any party or his pleader requires 
it. 
“If any question put to a witness be objected to by either of the parties or their pleaders, and the 
Court allow the same to be put, the question and the answer shall be taken down, and the objection and 
the name of the party making it shall be noticed in taking down the depositi ons, together with the 
decision of the Court upon the objection.  
“The Court shall record such remarks as it may think material respecting the demeanour of the 
witness while under examination.  
4[“The note as above required may be written and signed by the J udge with his own hand or typed 
to his dictation in open Court and signed by him within his own hand, and such note shall form part of 
the record. ”] 
                                                           
1. See now the Limitation Act, 1908 (9 of 1908).  
2. Act 19 of 1868 was rep. by the Oudh Rent Act, 1886 (22 of 1886), s.  2.  Act 22 of 1886 has been rep.  
     By the U.P. Tenancy Act, 1939 (U.P. 17 of 1939).  
3. See now ss.  181 to 190 , both inclusive, of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908).  
4. Subs. by U.P.  Act 24 of 1954, s. 2 and Sch., for the former paragraph.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH LAWS ACT, 1876.pdf - page 8]
8 
  1[20.  Execution -sale of ancestral and acquired property in land .—So much of  section  60 of the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, (5 of 1908) as renders land liable to sale in execution of a decree shall 
be subject to the following restriction: —No ancestral land shall be sold in satisfaction of a decree without 
the permission of the State Government.  
 
Explanati on.—In this section th e words “ ancestral land “ mean — 
 
(a) land forming a mahal or share in or portion of a mahal, which has been owned    continuously 
from the conclusion of the first regular settlement by the proprietor,  which term shall include a n 
unde r-proprietor as defined  in section 4, clause (15), of the United Provinces Land -revenue Act, 
1901, (U.P.3 of 1901) or by the person or persons from whom such proprietor has directly or 
indirectly inherited such land;  
 
(b) land forming an estate or part of an estate as defined in the Oudh Estates Act, 1869                             
(1 of 1869) ; 
 
(c) land conferred by the British Government as a reward for services rendered to the State on 
the owner or on a person from whom such owner has directly or directly inherited such land; or  
 
(d) the interest of the holder of a grant of land revenue conferred by the British or any former 
Government on him or on a person from whom he has directly or indirectly inherited such interest.]  
 
21. [Appointment of manager of land attache d.]—Rep. by the Oudh Civil Courts Act , 1879               (13 
of 1879).  
  
22.  Service of process within jurisdiction of Lucknow civil court .—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in the said Code, any Civil Court sitting within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the on 
Lucknow Civil Court, but exercising jurisdiction beyond such limits, may cause summonses, warrants, 
notices and other processes to be served within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Lucknow Civil 
Court w ithout causing the same processes to be served through such Co
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH LAWS ACT, 1876.pdf - page 8]
diction of the Lucknow Civil 
Court w ithout causing the same processes to be served through such Court.  
 
23. [Section substituted for Act  19 of 1868, s. 109.] — Rep. by the Oudh Rent Act , 1886 (22 of 1886).  
 
24. [Section substituted for Act  19 of 1868, section  118.]—Rep. by the Oudh Rent Act , 1886 (22 of 
1886).  
 
25.  [Right of occupancy in judgment -debtor's sir -land.]—Rep. by the Oudh Rent Act , 1886, 
Amendment Act , 1901 ( U.P. 4 of 1901).  
 
26. Revenue -agents authorized to appear, etc., in rent -suits .—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in Act No. XX of 18652 , all persons duly admitted and enrolled as Revenue -agents under that 
Act in  3*** Oudh may appear, plead and act in suits under the Oudh Rent Act4 (19 of 1868) in the Courts 
of officers exercising the powers of Assistant Collectors, Deputy Collectors, Collectors and 
Commissioners under the same Act.  
 
                                                           
1. Subs.  by U.P.  Act 3 of 1912, s. 2, for the original section  
2.  See now the Legal Practitioners Act, 1879 (18 of 1879).  
3. The words “the territories for the time being under the administration of the Chief Commissioner of” Rep. by the A.O.  
1937.  
4. See now the U.P. Tenancy Act, 1939 (U.P.  Act 17 of 1939).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH LAWS ACT, 1876.pdf - page 9]
9 
 27. Power to make rules for custody and sale of attached property .—With the sanction of the 
State Go vernment, the 1[High Court] may from time to time make rules consistent with this Act and with 
the Code of Civil Procedure2 — 
(a) for the custody and sale of movable property attached in execution of decrees;  
(b) for the levy of a fee or commission on the sale of attached property and the disposal of the 
funds accruing from such fees;  
(c) as to the appointment and remuneration of persons 3[(not being persons in the service of the 
Government)] by whom property is to be attached, kept in custody and sold;  
(d) as to the appointment and remuneration of persons 3[(not being persons in the service of the 
Government)] by whom local investigations under section 180, and investigations and adjustments 
of accounts under section 181,  of the Code of Civil Procedure4  are to be made.  
28. [Power to revise decrees and orders of subordinate Courts .]—Rep. by the Oudh Civil Courts  
Act, 1879 (13 of 1879).  
CHAPTER    IV 
 
VILLAGE   AND   ROAD-POLICE  
29.  Right to nominate village -policemen .—The nomination to the post of village -policeman shall 
be made by the zamindar of the village, or, where there are more zamindars than one, by the lambardar 
as their representative; and, where there poll are more lambardars than one, the opinion of the majo rity 
(unless there is some special provision to the contrary in the village administration -paper) shall prevail.  
30. Obligation to nominate .—Every person authorized to nominate to the office of village - 
policeman shall, within fifteen days after the occurr ence of a vacancy such office, nominate a proper 
person to the vacant post, and communicate the nomination to the Magistrate of the district.  
31. Discretion to appoint or reject nominee .—The person so nominated shall, after due enquiry 
into his age, character and ability, be appointed or rejected by the State Government.  
32. Power to Government to a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH LAWS ACT, 1876.pdf - page 9]
racter and ability, be appointed or rejected by the State Government.  
32. Power to Government to appoint . Procedure in case of rejection of nominee .—In default of 
such nomination within the said fifteen days, the State Government shall appoint such pers on as it thinks 
fit to the vacancy.  
If the nomination has been made within the said fifteen days, but the nominee is rejected, the person 
authorized to nominate shall, within fifteen days from the date of such rejection, nominate another person 
to the vaca nt post; and in default of such nomination, or if such nomination has been made but the 
nominee is again rejected, the State Government shall appoint such person as it thinks fit to the vacancy.  
33.  Appointment of road police .—Subject to the rules to be f ramed under section 39 and for the 
time being in force, the State Government may from time to time appoint persons to be 5[road police].  
34.  Duties of village and road police -man .—Every village -policeman and every road -policeman 
shall perform the following duties: — 
(a) he shall give immediate intermission to the officer in charge of the police -station appointed 
for his village or beat — 
                                                           
1.  Subs. by the A.O. 1950 , for “Chief Court”.  
2.  See now the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908).  
3.  Ins. by the A.O.  1937.  
4.  See now the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), Sch. I, Order 26, rules 9 to 12.  
5.  Subs. by the A.O. 1937 , for “the road -police of his district”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH LAWS ACT, 1876.pdf - page 10]
10 
 (1) of every unnatural, suspicious or sudden death occurring in the village of which he is 
chaukidar, or within hi s beat;  
(2) of each of the following offences occurring in such village or on such beat (that is to  
say), murder, culpable homicide, rape, dacoity, theft, robbery, mischief by fire,  house -breaking, 
counterfeiting coin, causing grievous hurt, riot, harbour ing a proclaimed offender, exposure of 
a child, concealment of birth, administering stupefying drugs, kidnapping, lurking                         
house -trespass; and  
    (3)  of all attempts and preparations to commit, and abetments of, any of the said                      
 offences:  
(b) he shall keep the police informed of all disputes which are likely to lead to any riot or  serious 
affray:  
(c) he shall arrest all proclaimed offenders, and all persons whom he may find in the act of      
committing any offence specified in paragraph ( a), clause ( 2), of this section:  
(d) he shall observe and from time to time report to the officer in charge of the police -station 
within the jurisdiction of which his village or beat may be situate, the movements of all bad 
characters in or on such village or beat:  
(e) he shall report to the officer in charge of such police -station the arrival of suspicious  
characters in the neighbourhood:  
(f) he shall supply to the best of his ability any local intermission which a Magistrate or any 
officer of police may re ” quire, and shall promptly execute all orders issued to him: by      competent 
authority.  
35.  Procedure on arrest by village or road police -man .—Whenever a village -policeman or road -
policeman arrests any person, he shall take him as soon as possible to the police -station within the 
jurisdiction of which his village or beat is situated.  
36.  Dismissal of village or road police -man .—The Magistrate of the district may dismiss any 
village -police man or road -policeman for any misconduct or neglect of duty.  
Where 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH LAWS ACT, 1876.pdf - page 10]
 dismiss any 
village -police man or road -policeman for any misconduct or neglect of duty.  
Where any village -policeman is guilty of neglect of duty or other misconduct, the person authorized 
to nominate to his office may report him for dismissal to the Magistrate of the district; and such 
Magistrate shall d ismiss him accordingly, unless the Magistrate has reason the think that such dismissal 
would be improper.  
37.  Acts punishable .—Every village -policeman and road -policeman guilty of any willful 
misconduct in his office, or of neglect of duty, such misconduc t o neglect not being an offence within 
the meaning of the Indian Penal Code, (45 of 1860).  
or withdrawing from the duties of his office without permission and without having given at least 
two months , notice of his intention withdraw from such duties to t he persons authorized to nominate 
appoint under sections 29, 32 and 33 (as the case may be),   
or offering any unnecessary personal violence to any person in his custody,  
Penalty. shall be liable, on conviction before a Magistrate, to a penalty not exceedin g three months ’ 
pay, or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding three months, or to both.  
38.  Fines to be credited to such fund as Government appoints .—All fines levied under this Act 
on village -policemen or road policemen shall be credited to such fund as the State Government from 
time to time appoints.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH LAWS ACT, 1876.pdf - page 11]
11 
 CHAPTER   V 
SUBSIDIARY  RULES  
39.  Power to make rule .—The State Government may, from time to time, 1* * *  make rules 
consistent with this Act as to — 
(a) the discipline and remuneration of the village  and road police and the regulation of their 
number, location an d duties;  
(b) the disposal of unclaimed property under Act No.5 of 1861 (for the regulation of       police), 
sections 25, 26 and 27;  
(c) public health and conservancy at fairs and other large public assemblies, and the     
maintenance of a proper watch and ward at such fairs and assemblies;  
 (d) imposing  2* * * taxes for those purposes only;  
 3 [(e) the keeping and custody of civil, criminal and revenue records.]  
 4*    *   *   * 
40.  Publication of rules . — All rules made by the State Government under section 39, and all rules 
made by the 5[High Court] under section 27, shall be published in th e Official Gazette, and shall 
thereupon have the force of law.  
41.  Continuance of prior rules as to matters for which rules may be made under the Act .] 
Rep.by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1891 (12 of 1891).  
42.  Penalty for breach of rules .—Whoever bre aks any rule made or continued under this Act, not 
being a rule made by the 5[High Court], shall, on conviction before a Magistrate , be punishable with fine 
which may extend to fifty rupees, or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or 
with both.  
CHAPTER    VI 
MISCELLANEOUS  
Honorary civil jurisdiction  
43.  [Power to invest taluqdars with civil jurisdiction .]—Rep. by the Oudh Civil Courts Acts , 1879 
(13 of 1879.)      
Honorary police -officer  
44. Honorary police -officers .—The State Government may -, from time to time, confer on any 
person whom it thinks fit any power which may be exercised by a police -officer under any  Act for the 
time being in force, and withdraw any power so conferred.  
   
Creation and alteration of districts and sub -divisions  
 
45. [Power to create new dis
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH LAWS ACT, 1876.pdf - page 11]
rred.  
   
Creation and alteration of districts and sub -divisions  
 
45. [Power to create new districts.  Power to form sub -divisions of districts .]—Rep .by the United 
Provinces  Act, 1890 (20 of 1890), s. 35. 
 
 
                                                           
1. The words “with the previous sanction of the G.G. in C,” rep. by Act 14 of 1878, s. 5.  
2. The words “with the previous sanction of the G.G. in C,” rep.  by the A. O. 1937.  
3. Subs. ibid., for the original cl. (e).  
4. Clause (f) was  omitted by the A.O. 1937, CL. (G) RELATING TO S. 25 OF THIS At was omitted by the Oudh Rent Act, 
1836, Amendment Act, 1901 (U.P. 4 of 1901). The proviso was omitted by the A.O. 1937.  
5. Subs. by the A.O. 1950 for “Chief Court”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH LAWS ACT, 1876.pdf - page 12]
12 
  THE FIRST SCHEDULE.  — Rep. by the Repealing Act , 1938 (1 of 1938 ), s. 2 and Sch . 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH LAWS ACT, 1876.pdf - page 13]
13 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 3)  
PART  1.— BENGAL  REGULATIONS  
 
 Number and year                   Subject                 Modifications  
   XXIII of 1803.  
  Embezzlement by Native             
Officers  In section 1 and in section 2, clause 
First , before “sezawals, ” insert  
“tahsildars ”. 
  In section 2, after the first clause, insert 
“Second .—The responsibility of the 
sureties of tahsildars extends to the several 
cases provided for in this Regulation. ”  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  In section 3, for “Dewanny Adawlut of 
the Zillah, the Judge of which Court shall 
detain him, ” read “ District where he shall 
be detained; ” for “ real or personal, ” read               
“ movable or immovable  ;” 1* * * and omit the 
words and figures “and the rules in 
Regulation XXVIII, 1803, regarding suits so 
carried on by the Collectors are to be held 
applicable to it. ” 2 * * *  
Omit section 8.  
3X of 1804  
 Punishment by Courts - 
martial of certain State offences  Omit section 1.  
In section 2, for “the British territories 
subject to the  Government of the Presidency 
of Fort William”  read “the territories under 
the administration of t he Chief 
Commissioner of Oudh ”. 
In section 3, for “real and personal ”         
read “movable or immovable ”. 
XI of 1806  
 Assistance to troops and travellers 
passing through districts.  Omit sections 1, 7, 9 to 20 (both inclusive) , 
and so much of the rest of the Regulation as 
authorizes Collectors and their Native officers, or 
Magis trates and their police -officers, to give their 
Official aid in procuring coolies for the purpose 
of facilitating the march of troops or the progress 
of travel lers. 
For “Collectors of Revenue ” and “Collector ” 
read” Deputy.  commi ssioner ” throughout the 
Regulation.  
In sections 2 and 3, for “ the Company's 
territories “ read “ Oudh “. 
In section 2, omit the  last sentence.  
In section 4 , clause Third, for “Central 
Government ” read “ State Government .” 
In section
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH LAWS ACT, 1876.pdf - page 13]
ce.  
In section 4 , clause Third, for “Central 
Government ” read “ State Government .” 
In section 5, omit “the Companys ; 4* * * 
In section 6, for “ Magistrate “ read “ Deputy 
Commissioner, ” and for “ on the part of the 
Collector ” read “by the  Deputy Commissioner ”. 
 
 
                                                           
1. The words “for ‘city’ re ad ‘jurisdiction’  “ were rep. by Act 12 of 1891; and the words “for ‘Board of Revenue’ read ‘Chief 
Commissioner’  ” were rep. by Act 20 of 1890, s.35.  
2. The words “In section 4, omit the word or in either of the cities of Patna, Dacca and Moorshedabad ,” were rep. by Act 12 of 1891.  
3. Rep. by Act 4 of 1922, s.  3 and Sch.  
4. The words “and for ‘Board of Revenue’ read ‘Chief Commissioner’ ” were rep. by Act 20 of 1890, s. 35 .  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH LAWS ACT, 1876.pdf - page 14]
14 
 Number and year                    Subject                    Modifications  
  In section 8, for “the Company’s 
provinces ” read “Oudh ” 1 * * *. .  
       2 *       *        *           *           *            *    *           *          *             *  
  3 III  of 1818       State Prisoners  In section 1, omit “situated within the 
territories dependent on the Presidency 
of Fort William, ” and from “which are 
to take effect to the end of the section.  
In section 2, clause Third, omit 
“within the territories subject to the 
Presidency of Fort William “. 
In section 4, omit clause First.  
In the same section, clause Second, 
for” Zillah or City Magistrate “read 
“Deputy Commissioner, ” and for                         
“ Judge of Circuit ” read “ Commissioner 
of Division ”. 
In section 9, for “ to the Provincial 
Court of Appeal and Circuit and to the 
Sudder Dewanny Adawlut And Nizamut 
Adawlut “ read “ and to the Judicial 
Commissioner “. 
Omit section 10.  
     4*   *    * *        *        *  *             *            *  
    XI  of   1822                               Non-liability of Government 
for errors  of a Court of Justice.   Omit  the whole except section 38.  
    VI  of   1825   Supply of troops on the 
march.   In the preamble, omit the last twenty 
words.  
 In section 2, omit “in pursuance of 
section III, Regulation XI, 1806, ” and omit 
“sicca ”. 
In section 4, for “Board of Revenue in 
whose jurisdiction the district may be 
situate “and “Board ” read “Commissioner  “. 
In section 5, omit “on the stamped paper 
prescribed for other appeals to the Revenue 
Boards ” and for “the proper Board ” and 
“the Board ” read “the Commissioner ”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1. The words and figures “and omit the words and figures ‘(under the rules prescribed by Regulation 5 of 1804.)’ and ‘in          
Regulation 27 of 1803 ,” were rep. by Act 12 of 1891.  
2. The entries relating to Bengal Re
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH LAWS ACT, 1876.pdf - page 14]
       
Regulation 27 of 1803 ,” were rep. by Act 12 of 1891.  
2. The entries relating to Bengal Regulations 17 of 1806, 20 of 1810 and 5 o f 1817 were rep. by Acts 4 of 1882, 13 of 1889 and        
6 of 1878, respectively.  
3. This Regulation was rep. by Act 48 of 1952, s. 2 and Sch. I.  
4.  The entry relating to Bengal Regulation 6 of 1819 was rep. by Act 12 of 1891.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH LAWS ACT, 1876.pdf - page 15]
15 
 Number and year           Subject                Modifications  
XI of 1825  Alluvion and Diluvion  Omit section  1. 
In section 3, omit “ either “ and “ or 
the sea “. 
In section 4, clause First , Omit  
“whether ” and “or of the sea, ” and for      
“ the provisions of Regulation II, 1819, 
or of any other Regulation in force, ” 
read “ any law in force for the time 
being; ” clause Third , omit “ or in the sea 
“ and “ or sea; ” clause Fifth , omit “ or 
the sea ”. 
In section  5, for “Zillah and City 
Magis trates “read “Deputy 
Commissioners ”. 
  1*       *         *             *          *           *                *                 *              *  
 
 
PART  II.--ACTS OF THE GOVERNOR  GENERAL IN COUNCIL  
 
  2*       *        *            *            *          *              *                 *              *  
   3XX of 1856  Chaukidars  In the preamble, after  “Bengal ” add   
“and the territories under the 
administration of the Chief 
Commissioner of Oudh ”. 
Omit  the words “of circuit ”                       
wherever they occur after                                       
“Commissioner ”. 
Omit  section 40.  
  XIII of 1857  Opium  In the title, after  “the Presidency of 
Fort William in Bengal, ” read “and the 
territories under the administration of 
the Chief Commissioner of Oudh .” 4*** 
In section 3, omit “being 
covenanted servants of the Company .” 
   5*      *       * *       *       *             *               *                *  
   6XXII of 1871.  Chaukidars  In section 1, after  “Presidency ” 
inser t “or territories “. 
In section 3, omit the words “  of 
circuit ”. 
Omit  section 6.  
 
 
 
                                                           
1. The entry relating to Be ngal Regulation 20 of 1825 was rep. by Act 10 of 1882.  
2. The entry relating to Act 19 of 1853 was rep. by Act 1 of 1903.  
3. Act 20 of 1856 has been repealed in the U.P. by the U.P. Town Area Act, 1914 (U.P.  2 of 1914).  
4. The modification re
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH LAWS ACT, 1876.pdf - page 15]
een repealed in the U.P. by the U.P. Town Area Act, 1914 (U.P.  2 of 1914).  
4. The modification relating to s. 2 was rep. by Act 12 of 1891.  
5. The entry relating to the Minors Act, 1858 (40 of 1858), was rep. by Act 3 of 1890 . 
6. Act 22 of 1871 was rep. in the U.P. by Act 18 of 1919 and generally by Act 1 of 1938.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH TALUQDARS’ RELIEF ACT, 1870.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE OUDH TALUQDARS’ RELIEF ACT, 1870  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT SECTION S 
_________  
SECTIONS.  
  
I. — PRELIMINARY . 
1. Short title . 
2. Interpretation -clause . 
II. — VESTING ORDER . 
3. Power to vest management of taluqdár's  property in an officer appointed by Chief  
Commissioner . 
4. Effect of order . 
III. — DUTIES OF  MANAGER . 
5. Manag er to receive rents and profits.  
IV. — SETTLEMENT OF DEBTS . 
6. Notice to claimants against taluqdár . 
7. Claim to contain full particulars . 
8. Debt or liability not duty notified, to be barred . 
9. Determination of debts and liabilities . 
10. Appeal . 
11. Scheme for settlement of debts and liabilities . 
12. Restoration of taluqdár to his property . 
V. — POWERS OF  MANAGER . 
13. Power to call for further  particulars . 
14. Power to summon witnesses and compel production of documents . 
15. Power to administer oaths . 
16. Investigation to be deemed a judicial proceeding . 
17. Manager to have powers of a taluqdar . 
18. Power to lease . 
19. Power to raise money by mortgage or sale . 
VI. — MISCELLANEOUS . 
20. Power to make rules . 
21. Power to appoint new Managers . 
22. Managers to be public servants . 
23. Bar of suits. 
24. Petitions, &c., under Act exempt from Court fees . 
25. Saving of jurisdiction of Courts in Oudh in respect of certain suits . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH TALUQDARS’ RELIEF ACT, 1870.pdf - page 2]
2 
 THE OUDH TALUQDARS’ RELIEF ACT, 1870  
ACT NO. 24 OF 1870    
[7th September, 1870 .] 
PASSED  BY THE  GOVERNOR  GENERAL  OF INDIA IN  COUNCIL . 
(Received the assent of the Governor General on the 7th September  1870.)  
An Act to relieve from incumbrances the estates of Taluqdárs in Oudh . 
PREAMBLE .— WHEREAS  many of the taluqdárs  of Oudh are in debt, and their immoveable 
property is subject to mortgages, charges and liens; and whereas it is expedient to provide for their 
relief in manner hereinafter appearing; It is hereby enacted as follows: — 
 I.— PRELIMINARY . 
1. Short title .— This Act may be called “ The Oudh Taluqdárs' Relief Act. ” 
2. Interpretation -clause .— In this Act — 
‘Chief Commissioner’ means the Chief Commissioner of Oudh:  
‘taluqdár’ means a person whose name is entered in the first of the lists mentioned in the Oudh 
Estates’ Act, 1869, section eight:  
‘heir’ means the person for the time being entitled under the same Act as heir to a taluqdár.  
II.—VESTING  ORDER . 
3. Power to vest management of taluqdár's property in an officer appointed by Chief 
Commissioner .—Whenever, within twelve months after the passing of this Act, any taluqdár,  
or (when such taluqdár is an infant, or of unsound mind, or an idiot) his guardian, committee, or 
other legal curator,  
or the person who would be heir to such taluqdár if he died intestate,  
or (when such person is an infant, or of unsound mind, or an idiot) his guardian, committee, or 
other legal curator,  
applies in writing to the Chief Commissioner , stating that the taluqdár is subject to, or that his 
immoveable property is charged with, deb ts of liabilities other than debts due, or liabilities incurred , 
to Government, and requesting that the provisions of this Act be applied to his case,  
the Chief Commissioner may, with the previous  consent of the Governor General of India in 
Council by order published in the local official Gazette, appoint  an officer (hereinafter called t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH TALUQDARS’ RELIEF ACT, 1870.pdf - page 2]

Council by order published in the local official Gazette, appoint  an officer (hereinafter called the 
Manager), and vest in him the management of the immoveable property of or to which the taluqdár is 
then posses sed or entitled in his own right, or which he is entitled to redeem , or which may be 
acquired by or devolve on the taluqdár or his heir during the continuance of such management.  
4. Effect of order .— On such publication, the following consequences shall en sue:— 
Bar of suits against taluqdár .— first, all proceedings in respect to such debts of liabilities which 
may then be pending in any Civil Court in British India, shall be barred; and all processes , executions 
and attachments for or in respect of such deb ts and liabilities shall become null and void  ; 
Talu qdár freed from arrest .— secondly , so long as such management continues, the taluqdár and  
his heir shall not be liable to  arrest for or in respect of the debts and liabilities to  which the taluqdá r 
was im mediately before the said  publication subject, or with which his immoveabl e property or any 
part thereof was then charged, other than debts due, or liabilities incurred, to Government  ; 
and his mov eable property from attachment for prior debts .— nor shall their moveable 
property be liable to attachment or sale, unde r process of any Civil Court in  British India, for or in 
respect of such debts and l iabilities other than as aforesaid; and  
Cessation of his power to alienate .— thirdly , so long as such management continue s, 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH TALUQDARS’ RELIEF ACT, 1870.pdf - page 3]
3 
 (a) the taluqdár and his heir shall be incompetent  to mortgage, charge, lease or alienate their 
immoveable  property or any part thereof, or to grant valid receipts  for the rents and profits arising or 
accruing  therefrom,  
Immoveable pr operty freed from attachment .— and ( b) such property shall be exempt from 
attachment or sale under such process as aforesaid , except for or in respect of debts due, or liabilities 
incurred, to Government.  
III.—DUTIES OF MANAGER . 
5. Manager to receive rents  and profits ,—The Manager shall, during his management of the 
said property, receive and recover all rents and profits due in respect thereof; and shall, upon 
receiving such rents and profits, give receipts for the same.  
From the sums so received, he shall  pay— 
and pay therefrom the Government demand ,— first, the Government revenue, and all debts or 
liabilities for the time being due or incurred to Government in respect of the said property:  
an annual sum for m aintenance of the taluqdár and h is heir ,— secon dly, such annual sum as 
appears to the Chief Commissioner requisite for the maintenance of the taluqdár, his heir and their 
families:  
costs of repairs and improvements ,— thirdly , the costs of such repairs and improvements of the 
property as appear necessary to the Manager and are approved by the Chief Commissioner:  
costs of management, and the debts and liabilities .— and the residue shall be applied in 
discharge of the costs of the management, and in settlement of such debts and liabilities of the 
taluqdár and his heir and their immoveable property, as may be established under the provisions 
hereinafter contained.  
 IV.—SETTLEMENT OF DEBTS . 
6. Notice to claimants against taluqdár .— On the publication of the order vesting in him the 
management of the s aid property, the Manager shall publish in the local official Gazette a notice in 
English and Urdú, calling upon all persons having claims against the taluqdár or his immoveable 

<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH TALUQDARS’ RELIEF ACT, 1870.pdf - page 3]
n 
English and Urdú, calling upon all persons having claims against the taluqdár or his immoveable 
property to notify the same in writing to such Manager within three months fro m the date of the 
publication.  
Copies of notice to be exhibited .—He shall also cause copies of such notice to be exhibited at 
the Tahsildárs’ Kachahrís  in the District or Districts in which the said property lies and at such other 
places as the Manager thinks fit.  
7. Claim to contain full particulars .—Every such claimant shall, along with his claim, present 
full particulars thereof.  
Documents to be given  up.—Every document on which the claimant founds his claim, or on 
which he relies in support thereof, shall be delivered to the Manager along with the claim.  
Entries in books .—If the document b e an entry in any book, the claimant shall produce the book 
to the Manager, together with a copy of the entry on which he relies. The Manager shall mark the 
book for the purpose of identification, and, after examining and comparing the copy with the original, 
shall return the book to the claimant.  
Exclusion of documen ts not produced .— If any document in the possession or under the control 
of the claimant is not delivered or produced by him to the Manager along with the claim, the Manager 
may refuse to receive such document in evidence on the claimant's behalf at the in vestigation of the 
case.  
8. Debt or liability not duty notified, to be barred .—Every debt or liability (other than debts 
due, or liabilities incurred, to Government) to which the taluqdár is subject, or with which his 
immoveable property or any part thereo f is charged, and which is not duty notified to the Manager 
within the time and in hereinbefore mentioned, shall be barred:  
Provision for admission of claim within further period of nine months .—Provided that, when 
proof is made to the Manager that the cla imant was unable to comply with the provisions of sections 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH TALUQDARS’ RELIEF ACT, 1870.pdf - page 3]
the cla imant was unable to comply with the provisions of sections 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH TALUQDARS’ RELIEF ACT, 1870.pdf - page 4]
4 
 six and seven, the Manager may admit such claim within the further period of nine months from the 
expiration of the said period of three months.  
9. Determination of debts and liabilities .—The Manag er shall, in accordance with the rules to 
be made under this Act, determine the amount of the debts and liabilities due to the several creditors 
of the taluqdár and persons holding mortgages, charges or liens on the said property or any part 
thereof.  
10. A ppeal .—An appeal against any refusal, admission or determination under sections seven, 
eight or nine shall lie, if preferred within six weeks from the date of such determination, to the 
Commissioner of Division to whom the Manager is subordinate, and the d ecision of such 
Commissioner, or of the Manager if no such appeal has been so preferred, shall be final.  
11. Scheme for settlement of debts and liabilities .—When the total amount of such debts and 
liabilities has been finally determined, the Manager shall prepare and submit to the Chief 
Commissioner a schedule of such debts and liabilities, and a scheme for the settlement thereof; and 
such scheme, when approved by the Chief Commissioner, shall be carried into effect.  
Power to return scheme for revision .—Until such approval is given, the Chief Commissioner 
may, as often as he thinks fit, send back such scheme to the Manager for revision, and direct him to 
make such further enquiry as may be requisite for the proper preparation of the scheme.  
12. Restoration of taluqdár to his property .—When all such debts and liabilities have been 
discharged,  
or if, within six months after the publication of the order mentioned in section three, the Chief 
Commissioner thinks that the provisions of this Act should not continue to apply to the case of the 
taluqdár or his heir,  
the taluqdár or his heir shall be re stored to the possession and enjoyment of his immoveable 
property, or of such part thereof as has not been sold by the Manager under the p
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH TALUQDARS’ RELIEF ACT, 1870.pdf - page 4]
of his immoveable 
property, or of such part thereof as has not been sold by the Manager under the power contained in 
section nineteen, but subject to the leases and mortgages (if any) granted and made by the Manager 
under the powers hereinafter contained.  
Revival of barred proceedings and debts .—Where the taluqdár or his heir is so restored under 
the circumstances mentioned in the second clause of this section, the proceedings, processes, 
executions and attachments men tioned in section three (so far as they relate to debts and liabilities not 
settled by the Manager), and the debts and liabilities barred by section eight, shall be revived, and any 
mortgagee dispossessed under section seventeen shall be reinstated unless his claim under the 
mortgage has been satisfied;  
and in calculating the periods of limitation applicable to such revived proceedings and to suits to 
recover and enforce such revived debts and liabilities, the time intervening between such restoration 
and t he publication of the order mentioned in section three shall be excluded.  
V.—POWERS OF  MANAGER . 
13. Power to call for further particulars .—The Manager may, from time to time, call for further 
and more detailed particulars of  any claim preferred before, him under this Act, and may at his 
discretion refuse to proceed with the investigation of the claim until such particulars are supplied.  
14. Power to summon witnesses and compel production of documents .— For the purposes of 
this Act, the Manager may summon and enforce the attendance of witnesses and compel them to give 
evidence, and compel the production of documents by the same means, and, as far as possible, in the 
same manner, as is provided in the case of a Civil Court by th e Code of Civil Procedure.  
15. Power to administer oaths .— The Manager may administer an oath in such form as he 
thinks fit to any person examined before him touching the matters to be enquired into under this Act.  
16. Investigation to be d
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH TALUQDARS’ RELIEF ACT, 1870.pdf - page 4]
ined before him touching the matters to be enquired into under this Act.  
16. Investigation to be deemed a judicial  proceeding .— Every investigation conducted by the 
Manager with reference to any claim preferred before him under this Act, or to any matter connected 
with any such claim, shall be taken to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of the Indian Penal 
Code. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH TALUQDARS’ RELIEF ACT, 1870.pdf - page 5]
5 
 Statements of persons examined, to be evidence .—And every statement made by any person 
examined by or before the Manager with reference to such investigation, whether upon oath or 
otherwise, shall be taken to be evidence within the meaning of the same Code  (45 of 1860) . 
17. Manager to have powers of a taluqdar .—The Manager shall have, for the purpose of 
realizing and recovering the rents and profits of the said immoveable property, the same powers as the 
taluqdár would have had for such purpose if this Act had not been passed.  
Power to remove mortgagee in possession .—And if such property, or any part thereof, be in the 
possession of any mortgagee, the Manager may apply to the Court of the Deputy Commissioner 
within whose jurisdiction the property is situ ate, and such Court shall cause the same to be delivered 
to the Manager as if a decree therefor had been made in his favour; but without prejudice to the 
mortgagee preferring his claim under the provisions hereinbefore contained.  
18. Power to lease .—Subjec t to the rules made under section twenty, the Manager shall have 
power to demise all or any part of the said property, for any term of years not exceeding twenty years 
absolute, to take effect in possession, in consdieration of any fine or fines, or withou t fine, and 
reserving such rents and under such  conditions as may be agreed upon.  
19. Power to raise money by mortgage or sale .—The Manager, with the previous assent of the 
Chief Commissioner, shall have power to raise any money which may be required for t he settlement 
of the debts and liabilities (other than as aforesaid) to which the taluqdár is subject, or with which his 
immoveable property or any part thereof is charged,  
by demising by way of mortgage the whole or any part of such property for a term no t exceeding 
twenty years from the said publication,  
or by selling, with the previous consent of the taluqdár and of the person (being of full age) who 
would be his heir
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH TALUQDARS’ RELIEF ACT, 1870.pdf - page 5]
th the previous consent of the taluqdár and of the person (being of full age) who 
would be his heir if he died intestate, by public auction or by private contract, and upon such terms as 
the Manager thinks fit, such portion of the same property as may appear expedient.  
And no mortgagee advancing money upon any mortgage made under this section, shall be bound 
to see that such money is wanted or that no more than is wanted is raised.  
Manager 's receipts .—And the receipt of the Manager for any monies paid to him upon any 
mortgage or sale made under this section, or for any rents or profits received by him under section 
five, shall discharge the person paying the same therefrom and from being co ncerned to see to the 
application thereof.  
The power to mortgage conferred by this section shall not be exercisable until six months have 
elapsed from the publication of the order mentioned in section three.  
VI.—MISCELLANEOUS . 
20. Power to make rules .—The Chief Commissioner may, from time to time, make rules 
consistent with this Act in all matters connected with its enforcement.  
Such rules , when approved by the Governor General of India in Council, and published in the 
local official Gazette, shall have the  force of law.  
21. Power to appoint new Managers .—Whenever the Chief Commissioner thinks fit, he may 
appoint any officer to be a Manager in the stead of any Manager appointed under this Act; and 
thereupon the management then vested under this Act in the fo rmer Manager shall become vested in 
the new Manager.  
Every such new Manager shall have the same powers as if he had been originally appointed.  
22. Managers to be public servants .— Every Manager appointed under this Act shall be deemed 
a public servant within the meaning of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
23. Bar of suits.— No suit or other proceeding shall be maintained against any person in respect 
of anything done by him  bonâ fide  pursuant to this Act.  
24. Petitions, &c., un
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH TALUQDARS’ RELIEF ACT, 1870.pdf - page 5]
erson in respect 
of anything done by him  bonâ fide  pursuant to this Act.  
24. Petitions, &c., under Act exempt from Cou rt fees .—No petition, application, memorandum 
of appeal or other proceeding under this Act, shall be chargeable under the Court Fees Act, 1870                     
(7 of 1870) . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE OUDH TALUQDARS’ RELIEF ACT, 1870.pdf - page 6]
6 
 25. Saving of jurisdiction of Courts in Oudh in respect of certain suits .— Nothin g in this Act 
precludes the Courts of the Province of Oudh, having jurisdiction in suits relating to the succession to 
or rights of persons claiming maintenance from any immoveable property brought under the operation 
of this Act, from entertaining and dis posing of such suits; but to all such suits the Manager of such 
property shall be made a party.  
 
________  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PARTITION ACT, 1893.pdf - page 1]
1 THE PARTITION ACT, 1893  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Title, extent and saving.  
2. Power to court to order sale instead of division in partition suits.  
3. Procedure when sharer undertakes to buy.  
4. Partition suit by transferee of  share in dwelling -house.  
5. Representation of parties under disability.  
6. Reserved bidding and bidding by shareholders.  
7. Procedure to be followed in case of sales.  
8. Orders for sale to be deemed decrees.  
9. Saving of power to order partly partition an d partly sale.  
10. Application of Act to pending suits.   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PARTITION ACT, 1893.pdf - page 2]
2 THE PARTITION ACT, 1893  
ACT NO. 4 OF 18931 
[9th March , 1893 .] 
An Act to amend the Law relating to Partition . 
WHEREAS  it is expedient to amend the law relating to partition; It  is hereby enacted as follows: — 
1. Title, extent and saving .—(1) This Act may be called the Partition Act, 1893.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India  2*** 3***. 
4*   *   *   *   * 
(4) But nothing herein contained shall be deemed to affect any local law providing for the partition of 
immoveable property paying revenue to Government.  
2. Power to court to order sale instead of division in partition s uits.—Whenever in any suit for 
partition in which, if instituted prior to the commencement of this Act, a decree for partition might have 
been made, it appears to the court that, by reason of the nature of the properly to which the suit relates, or 
of the number of the shareholders therein, or of any other special circumstance, a division of the property 
cannot reasonably or conveniently be made, and that a sale of the property and distribution of the 
proceeds would be more beneficial for all the shareholde rs, the court may, if it thinks fit, on the request of 
any of such shareholders interested individually or collectively to the extent of one moiety or upwards, 
direct a sale of the property and a distribution of the proceeds.  
3. Procedure when sharer undertakes to buy .—(1) If, in any case in which the court is requested 
under the last foregoing section to direct a sale, any other shareholder applies for leave to buy at a 
valuation the share or shares of the party or parties askin g for a sale, the court shall order a valuation of 
the share or shares in such manner as it may think fit and offer to sell the same to such shareholder at the 
price so ascertained, and may give all necessary and proper directions in that behalf.  
(2) If tw o or more shareholders severally apply for leave to buy as provided in sub -section ( 1), the 
court shall order a sale of the sha
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PARTITION ACT, 1893.pdf - page 2]
ly apply for leave to buy as provided in sub -section ( 1), the 
court shall order a sale of the share or shares to the shareholder who offers to pay the highest price above 
the valuation made by the court.  
(3) If no such shareho lder is willing to buy such share or shares at the price so ascertained, the 
applicant or applicants shall be liable to pay all costs of or incident to the application or applications.  
4. Partition suit by transferee of share in dwelling -house.—(1) Where a  share of a dwelling -house 
belonging to an undivided family has been transferred to a person who is not a member of such family 
and such transferee sues for partition, the court shall, if any member of the family being a shareholder 
shall undertake to buy the share of such transferee, make a valuation of such share in such manner as it 
thinks fit and direct the sale of such share to such shareholder, and may give all necessary and proper 
directions in that behalf.  
(2) If in any case described in sub -section  (1) two or more members of the family being such 
shareholders severally undertake to buy such share, the court shall follow the procedure prescribed by 
sub-section ( 2) of the last foregoing section.  
                                                           
1. The Act has been extended to — 
(1) Dadra and Nagar Haveli (w.e.f. 1 -7-1965) by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and the First Schedule.  
(2) Pondicherry by Act 26 of 1968, s. 3 and the Schedule.  
(3) Sikkim (w.e.f. 1 -9-1984) vide Notification No. S. O. 651 (E), dated 24 -8-1984, Gazette  of India , Extraordinary, Part II,   
s. 3(ii). 
2. The words  “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule  
(w.e.f. 31 -10-2019). . 
3. The word  “and ” rep. by Act 10 of 1914, s. 3 and the Second Schedule.  
4. Sub -section ( 3) rep. by s. 3 and the Second Schedule , ibid. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PARTITION ACT, 1893.pdf - page 3]
3 5. Representation of parties under disability .—In any su it for partition a request for sale may be 
made or an undertaking, or application for leave, to buy may be given or made on behalf of any party 
under disability by any person authorised to act on behalf of such party in such suit, but the court shall not 
be bound to comply with any such request, undertaking or application unless it is of opinion that the sale 
or purchase will be for the benefit of the party under such disability.  
6. Reserved bidding and bidding by shareholders .—(1) Every sale under section 2 shall be subject 
to a reserved bidding, and the amount of such bidding shall be fixed by the court in such manner as it may 
think fit and may be varied from time to time.  
(2) On any such sale any of the shareholders shall be at liberty to bid at the sale  on such terms as to 
non-payment of deposit or as to setting off or accounting for the purchase -money or any part thereof 
instead of paying the same as to the court may seem reasonable.  
(3) If two or more persons, of whom one is a shareholder in the proper ty, respectively advance the 
same sum at any bidding at such sale, such bidding shall be deemed to be the bidding of the shareholder.  
7. Procedure to be followed in case of sales .—Save as hereinbefore provided, when any property is 
directed to be sold unde r this Act, the following procedure shall, as far as practicable, be adopted, 
namel y:— 
(a) if the property be sold under a decree or order of the High Court of Calcutta, Madras or 
Bombay, in the exercise of its original jurisdiction,  1*** the procedure of such court in its original 
civil jurisdiction for the sale of property by the Registrar;  
(b) if the property be sold under a decree or order of any other court, such procedure as the High 
Court may from time to time by rules prescribe in this behalf, and u ntil such rules -art made the 
procedure prescribed in the Code of Civil Procedure  in respect of sales in executi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PARTITION ACT, 1893.pdf - page 3]
s -art made the 
procedure prescribed in the Code of Civil Procedure  in respect of sales in execution of decrees.  
8. Orders for sale to be deemed decrees .—Any order for sale made by the court under section 2, 3 
or 4 shall be deemed to be a decr ee within the meaning of section 2 of the 2Code of Civil Procedure (14 of 
1882).  
9. Saving of power to order partly partition and partly sale .—In any suit for partition the court 
may, if it shall think fit, make a decree for a partition of part of the prop erty to which the suit relates and a 
sale of the remainder under this Act.  
10. Application of Act to pending suits .—This Act shall apply to suits instituted before the 
commencement thereof, in which no scheme for the partition of the partition has been fin ally approved by 
the court.  
 
———————  
                                                           
1. The words “or of the Court of the Recorder of Rangoon” omitted by the A.O. 1937.  
2. See now the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PARTITION OF REVENUE-PAYING ESTATES ACT, 1863.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE PARTITION OF  REVENUE -PAYING ESTATES ACT , 1863  
______________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______________  
SECTIONS . 
1. [Repealed ]. 
2. Future partitions to be made under provisions of Act.  
3. What parties entitled to partition.  
4. Parties desirous of partition to apply to Collector in writing.  
5. Application to be signed, and certain particulars specified.  
Otherwise may be rejected.  
6. Procedure of Collector on receipt of application . 
Notice to proprietors who have not joined therein.  
Proclamation in case of service of notice being impracticable.  
7. In case of valid objection being made within time allowed, application may be refused.   
8. Procedure if question of title, or of proprietary right, be raised.  
Reference to arbitrators.  
9. Decision of Collector equivalent to decision of civ il Court, and open to appeal . 
Appellate Court may, on appeal, stay partition.  
10. Special appeal to Sadr Court.  
11. Civil Court to entertain suits only on appeal from decision of Collector . 
12. Notification on partition being ordered . 
13. Partition by whom carried out . 
14. Assessment and levy of costs incurred in making partition . 
15. Partition may be stayed, and proceedings quashed, by Commissioner . 
Decision not open to revision by civil Court.  
16. Procedure after lapse of period mentioned in notification under section XII . 
17. Examination of parties and their papers . 
18. Options of settlement by private agreement.  
Procedure in case of refusal or default.  
19. If parties cannot agree as to arbitrators, latter may be appointed by Collector.  
In case of equality of votes, Collector to act as  umpire.         
20. Appointment in place of arbitrator refusing, or being unable, to act . 
21. Powers of Collector with regard to arbitrators . 
22. Particulars to be specified in partition paper . 
23. Remuneration of arbitrators . 
24. In default of award by first arbitrators, partition may be referred to others . 
25. In default o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PARTITION OF REVENUE-PAYING ESTATES ACT, 1863.pdf - page 1]
4. In default of award by first arbitrators, partition may be referred to others . 
25. In default of Private agreement, or settlement by arbitration, officer may be appointed to 
make  partition.  
26. Who shall summon proprietors by proclamation to attend proceedings.  
27. Estate may be attached and brought under khas management under superintendence of     
officer .  
28. Procedure in case of arrears of revenue accruing during course of partition of estate . 
29. Power of officer charged with partition, in respect of measurement, & c. 
30. Division of lands held in common . 
Proviso.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PARTITION OF REVENUE-PAYING ESTATES ACT, 1863.pdf - page 2]
2 
  
SECTIONS  
31. Collector may refuse to separate lands in certain cases . 
32. Where no lands held in common, lands in severalty may be declared separate estate.  
Proviso as to transfers.  
33. Sharer failing to attend after proclamation, liable to forfeit right of objection.  
34. Partition may be stayed if parties so desire.  
Recovery of costs.  
35. Estates formed in course of partition to be as compact as possible.  
36. Revenue to be assessed on each divided estate  
37. Circumstances to be considered in making partition . 
38. Rule when dwelling house belonging to one sharer, is situate on ground to be allotted to      
another sharer . 
39. Rule as to tanks, wells, water -courses, and embankments . 
40. Rule as to places of worship.  
41. Particulars to be contained in paper of partition  to be submitted by officer making same.  
Map to be also submitted.  
42. Procedure of Collector thereupon.  
43. Commissioner may confirm or modify partition, subject to appeal to Board of Revenue ; 
and may direct division by lot, under certain circumstances.  
44. Procedur e by Collector on receipt of order of Commissioner, or of Board of Revenue on 
appeal.  
45. Government may order new allotment of public revenue among estates formed by 
partition, in case of fraud or error in original allotment being proved.  
46. Consequence to part y having interest in estate, if he neglect to affirm or establish such 
interest  while estate under attachment with a view to partition.  
47. Holder of decree of civil Court, awarding right to portion of estate, may apply for 
partition, and Collector may procee d thereon under Act.  
48. Union in certain cases of severed portions of estates originally undivided.  
49. Application for such union how made, and how dealt with.  
50. [Repealed .] 
51. Provisions of Act applied to partition of estates held free from payment of revenue.  
52. Contr ol of Collector’s proceedings under Act.  
53. Orders of Collector when open to revisio
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PARTITION OF REVENUE-PAYING ESTATES ACT, 1863.pdf - page 2]
  
52. Contr ol of Collector’s proceedings under Act.  
53. Orders of Collector when open to revision by superior Revenue -authorities.  
54. What other officers may exercise power s vested in Collector.  
55. Power to be exercised by Collector, or officer appointed to make partition.  
56. Power of officers exercising jurisdiction under Act, with regard to false evidence.  
57. Board of Revenue to be guided by instruction s of Local Government.  
58. Interpretation.  
59. Territorial scope of Act.  
  
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PARTITION OF REVENUE-PAYING ESTATES ACT, 1863.pdf - page 3]
3 
 THE PARTITION OF  REVENUE -PAYING ESTATES ACT , 1863  
ACT NO. XIX OF 1863 . 
As affected by Acts No. XIV of 1870, No. XIX of 1873, and No. XVIII of 1876 . 
____________  
PASSED  BY THE  GOVERNER  GENERAL  OF INDIA  IN COUNCIL.  
(Received the assent of the Governor General on the 10th March, 1863 .) 
____________  
An Act to Consolidate and amend the Law relating to the Partition of Estates paying Revenue 
to Government in the North -Western Provinces of the Presidency of Fort William in 
Bengal1. 
Preamble. —WHEREAS it is expedient to consolidate and amend the law relating to the partition of 
estates paying revenue to Government in the North -Western Provinces of the Presidency of Fort 
William in Bengal1 ; It is enacted as follows : — 
I. [Repealed by Act No. XIV of 1870. ] 
II. Future partitions to be made under provisions of Act .—All partitions of estates which shall 
be ordered to be made by the officers of Government after the passing of this Act, shall be made 
under the provisions of this Act, whatever may be the tenure of the estate ordered to be divided.  
III. What parties entitled to partition .—Every recorded proprietor of a joint undivided estate 
paving Revenue to Government, or of any portion thereof, whether such estate is held in common 
tenancy or otherwise, is entitled to claim partition under this Ac t.   
IV. Parties desirous of partition to apply to Collector in writing. —When any one or more of 
the recorded proprietors of an estate, as described in the last preceding section, shall desire to have his 
or their shares of the estate separated, in order t hat he or they may hold the same as a separate 
property, or as separate properties, such proprietor or proprietors shall make a written application for 
the purpose to the Collector of the District.  
 Any two or more proprietors may apply to have their share s separated, and to hold the same as a 
joint estate.  
V. Application to be signed, and certain particular specified .—The app
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PARTITION OF REVENUE-PAYING ESTATES ACT, 1863.pdf - page 3]
e same as a 
joint estate.  
V. Application to be signed, and certain particular specified .—The application shall be signed 
by the party or parties applying for the partition, and  shall specify the nature of the tenure of the estate 
sought to be divided.  
The names of all the co -sharers in the estate, the nature and extent of their respective shares so far 
as the same may be known to the applicant or applicants, or can be ascertain ed by him or them, and 
the mode of partition desired, shall also be stated.  
Otherwise may be rejected .—If the application does not contain the particulars above -mentioned, 
the Collector may reject it.  
VI. Procedure of Collector  or on receipt of application .—The Collector, on the receipt of an 
application for partition, shall, if the application be in order, and not open to objection on the face of 
it, publish a notification of the same at his office, and at some conspicuous place on the estate to 
which the application relates, and shall invite any party in possession, who may not have joined in the 
application, and who may object to the partition applied for, to appear before him either in person or 
                                                           
 1. Repealed, so far as it relates to the North -Western Provinces, by  Act XIX of 1873, and, so far as it relates to Oudh, by Act 
XVIII of 1876.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PARTITION OF REVENUE-PAYING ESTATES ACT, 1863.pdf - page 4]
4 
 by a duly constituted agent, on a day to be specified in th e notification, not being less than fifteen, or 
more than thirty days from the date of the notification, and state his objection.  
Notice to proprietors who have not joined therein .—If the application for partition shall not 
have been made by all the recorded proprietors of the estate, notice of the application shall be served, 
in the manner usual in the district for serving notices of the revenue officers, on such of the recorded 
proprietors of the estate as shall not have joined in the application.  
Proclamation in case of service of notice being impracticable .—Provided that, if from any 
cause such service cannot take place, a proclamation notifying such application shall be publish ed, by 
affixing it at the Mal - kachahri  of such estate, or other conspicuous place thereon, or at the village 
Chauri, Ch aupal,  or other conspicuous place in each village in such estate.  
VII. In case of valid objection being made within time allowed, appli cation may be                  
refused .—If any objection be made to the partition, by any party in possession, within the time 
allowed, and the Collector, on a consideration of such objection, be of opinion that there is any good 
and sufficient reason, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, why the partition should be 
absolutely disallowed, he may refuse the application, recording the grounds of his refusal.  
VIII . Procedure if question of title, or o f proprietary right, be raised. —If the objection raise 
any question of title, or of proprietary right, which shall not appear to have been already determined 
by a Court of competent Jurisdiction, the Collector may either  decline to grant the application until the 
question in dispute shall have been determined by a competent Court, or he may proceed to inquire 
into the merits of the objection.  
In the latter case the Collector, after making the necessary inquiry and taking  such evide
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PARTITION OF REVENUE-PAYING ESTATES ACT, 1863.pdf - page 4]
ction.  
In the latter case the Collector, after making the necessary inquiry and taking  such evidence as 
may be adduced, shall record a proceeding declaring the nature and extent of the interests in the actual 
possession of the party or parties applying for the partition, and any other party or parties who may be 
affected thereby.  
Reference to arbitrators .—The procedure to be observed by the Collector in trying such cases 
shall be that laid down in Act XIV  of 18 82 (to consolidate and amend the laws relating to the 
procedure of the  Courts of Civil Judicature ) for the trial of original suits, a nd the Collector shall have 
power to refer any question that may arise in such case to arbitration, and the provisions of                  
Chapter XXXVII (reference  to arbitration ) of the Code of Civil Procedure shall apply to so  cases 
referred by a Collector.  
IX. Decision of Collector equivalent to decision of civil Court, and open to appeal. —All 
orders and decisions passed by the Collector under the last preceding Section, for declaring the rights 
of parties, shall be held to be decisions of a Court  of Civil Judicature of first instance, and shall be 
open to  appeal to the District or Sad r Court, according to the value of the claim, under the rules 
applicable to regular appeals to those Courts.  
Appellate Court may, on appeal, stay partition .—Upon such  appeal b eing made, the District or 
Sadr Court, as the case may be, may issue a precept to the Collector, desiring him to stay the partition 
pending the decision of the appeal.  
X. Special Appeal to Sad r Court .—From every decision passed under the last preceding section 
by a District Court, a special appeal shall lie to the Sadr Court, under the rules for the time being in 
force relating to special appeals to that Court.  
XI. Civil Court to entertain suits only on appeal from decision of Collector .—It shall not be 
competent to the civil Court to entertain a suit, or application for the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PARTITION OF REVENUE-PAYING ESTATES ACT, 1863.pdf - page 4]
llector .—It shall not be 
competent to the civil Court to entertain a suit, or application for the partition of an estate, except on 
appeal from the decision of the Collector as herein  before provided, anything contained in                        
Section 2 65 Act XIV  of 18 82 (to consolidate and amend the laws relating to the Procedure of the  
Courts of Civil Judicatur e) to the contrary notwithstanding.  
XII. Notification on partition being ordered .—When the Collector, after disposing of the 
objections (if any) taken to the partition, shall order a partition to be made, he shall cause a 
Notification to be published in his own Office, in the District Court, and at some conspicuous place on 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PARTITION OF REVENUE-PAYING ESTATES ACT, 1863.pdf - page 5]
5 
 the estate which is to be divided, intimating his intention to proceed with the partition after thirty days 
from the date of the notification.  
XIII . Partition by whom carried out .—The partition shall be made by the Collector in whose 
district the estate is situate, or, if the estate be situate in two or more districts, then by the Collector of 
any one of such Districts, who may be specially ordered by the Commissioner of the Divis ion, to 
superintend the partition.  
If the estate be situated in two or more divisions, the partition shall be made by such Collector as 
the Board of Revenue shall order.  
XIV. Assessment and levy of costs incurred in making partition .—The expense of making the 
partition, and the allowances of the establishment necessary for the measurement and survey of the 
lands, the preparation of papers, and any other charges, shall be fixed by the Collector.  
The amount shall be paid under such rules as may from time to time be laid down by the Board of 
Revenue with the sanction of the Local Government, and, in default of payment, may be realized 
under the rules applicable to the recovery of arrears of rent or revenue.  
XV. Partition may be stayed, and proceedings quashed, by Commissioner .—At any stage of 
the proceedings after a partition shall have been ordered, if  it shall appear from information which 
was not before the Collector at the time the partition was ordered, or otherwise, that any reason not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act exists, why the partition should not be proceeded with, it 
shall be c ompetent to the Commissioner, on the report of the Collector, and subject to any orders that 
the Board of Revenue may pass in the case, to stay the partition, and to order the proceedings to be 
quashed.  
Decision not open to revision, by civil Court .—The de cision of the Revenue authorities under 
this Section shall not be open to revision by the civil Court.  
XVI. Procedure after lapse of period mentioned
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PARTITION OF REVENUE-PAYING ESTATES ACT, 1863.pdf - page 5]
n shall not be open to revision by the civil Court.  
XVI. Procedure after lapse of period mentioned in  notification under section XII .—After the 
expiration of the period mentioned in the Notification referred to in Section XII of this Act, the 
Collector shall, if necessary, cause a measurement of all the lands comprised in the estate to be made, 
and a rent -roll of the same to be prepared .  
The village -papers which are required to be prepared and periodically deposited in the office of the 
Collector, under the provisions of sections XI1and XII1, Regulation IX, 1833 ( to modify certain 
portions of Regulation VII, 1822, and Regulation IV, 182 8; to provide for the more speedy and 
satisfactory decision of Judicial Questions cognizable by Officers of Revenue employed in making 
Settlements under the above Regulations; for enforcing the production of the village accounts; for the 
more extensive emp loyment of Native Agency in the Revenue Department; and to declare the intent of 
Section V, Regulation VII, 1822, touching claims to Malikana ), may be used for the purposes of this 
Act.  
Provided that any of the proprietors shall be permitted to file a ren t-roll of the estate, which shall 
be accepted if acknowledged to be correct by all the proprietors.  
XVII . Examination of parties and their papers. —The Collector may examine the parties on 
solemn affirmation in regard to  the papers produced before him, whether by the officer appointed to 
make the partition, the proprietors, or otherwise.  
 He shall also allow any shareholder to examine the papers so produced, and to take a copy of the 
same, and after such examination he sh all hear any objections which any of the shareholders may 
make in respect to such papers.  
The Collector may direct any Deputy Collector or other officer subordinate to him to examine the 
papers produced before him, and to make a report upon the same.  
XVIII . Option of settlement by private agreement . procedure in case of re
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PARTITION OF REVENUE-PAYING ESTATES ACT, 1863.pdf - page 5]
 report upon the same.  
XVIII . Option of settlement by private agreement . procedure in case of refusal or        
default .—The Collector, on the completion of the enquiry allowed by the last preceding section, shall 
                                                           
1.  Repealed, so far as they relate to the North -Western Provinces, by Act XIX of 1873.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PARTITION OF REVENUE-PAYING ESTATES ACT, 1863.pdf - page 6]
6 
 allow the parties the option of making a private partition of the estat e and allotment of the public 
revenue amongst themselves, within such time as he may fix, or, if the parties shall not consent to 
make a private partition of the estate, or shall fail to make such partition within the time fixed by the 
Collector, the Colle ctor shall call upon them to state whether they are willing to refer the partition of 
the estate, and the apportionment of the public revenue, to an arbitrator or arbitrators to be appointed 
by them.  
The Collector may also offer the parties the option of referring any point arising in the course of a 
partition to arbitration.  
The partition and allotment of the public revenue made by the parties, or by arbitrators appointed 
by them, shall be subject to the confirmation of the Collector, and the orders of t he superior                    
Revenue -authorities.  
XIX. If Parties cannot agree as to arbitrators, later may be appointed by Collector. —If the 
parties consent to refer the partition of the estate, and the allotment of the public Revenue, or any 
point arising in the course of the partition, to arbitration, but they cannot agree amongst themselves as 
to the arbitrator or arbitrators to be appointed, the Collector may appoint two or more persons to be 
arbitrators in the case.  
In case of equality of votes,  Collector to act as umpire .—If the arbitrators are equally divided 
in opinion, the Collector shall act as umpire, and the partition made by the arbitrator or arbitrators 
with whom the Collector shall concur, shall be the partition in the case.  
The same r ule shall apply in respect of any point arising in the course of a partition, which shall 
be referred to arbitration.  
XX. Appointment in place of arbitrator refusing, or being unable, to act. —If any person, on 
being appointed an arbitrator, shall refuse to  act, or, after accepting the appointment, shall  or become 
incapable of acting, another person shall
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PARTITION OF REVENUE-PAYING ESTATES ACT, 1863.pdf - page 6]
ct, or, after accepting the appointment, shall  or become 
incapable of acting, another person shall be appointed arbitrator in his stead, in the same manner in 
which the first person was appointed.  
      XXI . Powers of Collector with regard to arbitrators .—After the arbitrators shall have 
accepted the appointment, the Collector shall transmit the whole of the papers to them, and it shall be 
competent to the Collector to exercise towards the arbitrators the sam e powers and authority for 
securing their attendance, and the due completion of their award, which he is competent to exercise 
towards witnesses summoned before him when acting judicially, for the purpose of compelling them 
to attend and give evidence.  
The Collector shall also fix a time within which the arbitrator or arbitrators shall deliver the paper 
of partition. On sufficient cause shown, the Collector may extend such period.  
XXII . Particulars to be specified in partition paper .—The arbitrators shall deliver a full and 
complete paper of partition, specifying the separate estates into which they propose that the estate 
shall be divided, the names of the parties to whom the several estates are proposed to be allotted, and 
the amount of public Revenue to be assessed on each of such estates.  
XXIII . Remuneration of arbitrators .—The arbitrators, on de livering the paper of partition as 
aforesaid, shall be entitled to reasonable fees for their services, the amount to be fixed by the 
Collector.  
XXIV . In default of award by fir st arbitrators, partition may be referred to others .— If the 
paper of partition be not delivered within the time fixed by the Collector, or within any further period 
to which the time may have been extended, the Collector may order that the partition shall  be referred 
to another arbitrator or arbitrators, to be chosen in the same manner and subject to the same rules as 
the first.  
XXV . In default of private agreemen t, or settleme nt by arbitration,  Of
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PARTITION OF REVENUE-PAYING ESTATES ACT, 1863.pdf - page 6]
me rules as 
the first.  
XXV . In default of private agreemen t, or settleme nt by arbitration,  Officer may be 
appointed to make partition .—If the partition of the estate cannot be made by the parties 
themselves, or by arbitration, under the foregoing rules, the Collector shall appoint an Officer to make 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PARTITION OF REVENUE-PAYING ESTATES ACT, 1863.pdf - page 7]
7 
 the partition, and shall fo rward the whole of the papers to such Officer, and shall direct him to 
proceed to the estate, and to make the partition within a time to be fixed by the Collector.  
XXVI . Who sh all summon proprietors by proclamation to attend proceedings .—The Officer 
appointed to make the partition shall issue a proclamation at the Mal -kachahari  of the estate, or other 
conspicuous plac e thereon, or at the village Cha unri, or Ch aupal, requiring the several proprietors of 
the estate to attend upon him in person, or by agent, during the time that the partition is being made.  
XXVII . Estate may be attached and brought und er khas management under 
superintendence of Officer .—At the commencement of the Revenue year current in the District, the 
Collector may direct the Officer appointed to make the partition, or some other person, to attach the 
estate, and to bring it under kh as management under the personal superintendence of such Officer.  
The collections of the estate, after defraying the expenses of management, and any other expenses 
with which the estate is chargeable, shall be applied to the payment of the Government Reve nue, and 
the residue shall be divided amongst the proprietors in proportion to their respective shares, at such 
periods as the Collector may see fit.  
XXVIII . Procedure in case of arrears of revenue accruing during course of partition of                     
estate .—If an arrear of public Revenue shall accrue on an estate ordered to be divided, while the 
partition of the estate is being made, any one or more of the proprietors may  tender to the Collector 
his or their quota of the balance, and the Collector shall receive the same, and credit the amount to the 
share or shares of such proprietor or proprietors.  
If a sale of any part of the estate shall ultimately become necessary for the liquidation of any part 
of such arrear which may remain due, only the share or shares of the proprietor or proprietors
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PARTITION OF REVENUE-PAYING ESTATES ACT, 1863.pdf - page 7]
part 
of such arrear which may remain due, only the share or shares of the proprietor or proprietors who 
shall not have contributed their quota of the balance shall be sold in the first instance, and the partition 
shall go on and be c ompleted, in the same manner as if no arrear of public Revenue had accrued.  
The purchaser or purchasers of the share or shares sold shall be entitled to separate possession of 
the estate or estates which, under the partition, would have been allotted to t he defaulting proprietor or 
proprietors.  
Provided always that, in all cases of a partition, the entire estate shall be considered responsible 
for the public Revenue assessed upon it, until the partition shall have been completed, and the several 
proprieto rs shall have been put into possession of the separate estates into which the estate may be 
ordered to be divided, according as the same may be allotted to them.  
XXIX . Powers o f Officer charged with partition, in respect of measurement, &c .—If the 
Officer appointed to make the partition shall consider it necessary, to assist him in making the same, 
to cause a detailed measurement to be made of all the lands comprised in the esta te, or a map of the 
estate to be prepared, he shall exercise the same powers for making such measurement and map as are 
vested in the Collector by any law for the time being in force.  
XXX . Division of lands held in common .—When some of the lands forming the estate are held 
in common, the Collector shall declare, by a proceeding to be held under the provisions of this Act, 
the principle and rule under which, in accordance with th e village custom, such lands shall be divided; 
and he shall cause the partition of such lands to be made in conformity to the provisions of this Act.  
The portion of the common land falling by such partition to the shares of the several co -sharers 
shall be  added to the lands held by them in severalty, and the several estates thus formed shall be 
assesse
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PARTITION OF REVENUE-PAYING ESTATES ACT, 1863.pdf - page 7]
 added to the lands held by them in severalty, and the several estates thus formed shall be 
assessed and declared separate estates.  
Proviso .—Provided that it shall be in the discretion of the Collector to cause any transfer of lands, 
agreed to by the parti es, to be made previous to such declaration, and the new estate shall be declared 
subject to the transfer so made.  
XXXI . Collector may refuse to separate lands in certain cases .—The Collector may refuse to 
declare any lands held in severalty, and not liable to re -distribution according to special village 
custom, a separate mehal, if the lands be so intermixed with other properties as to render the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PARTITION OF REVENUE-PAYING ESTATES ACT, 1863.pdf - page 8]
8 
 formation of a compact estate i mpossible, and if the parties affected by the partition decline to permit 
of the transfers necessary for curing such defect.  
XXXII . Where no lands held in common, lands in seve ralty may be declared a separate 
estate .—Where there may be no lands held in common, the lands in severalty, held by the applicant 
for partition, or assigned to him by the Collector under the provisions of this Act, shall be assessed 
and declared a separat e estate.  
Proviso as to transfer .—Provided that it shall be in the discretion of the Collector to cause any 
transfer of lands, agreed to, or directed by his order, as provided in section XXX, to be made previous 
to such declaration, and the new estate shal l be declared subject to the transfer so made.  
XXXIII . Sharer failing to attend after proclamation, liable to forfeit right of                         
objection .—If any sharer,  after the issue of the proclamation mentioned in Section XXVI of this Act, 
shall fail to attend the Officer appointed to make the partition during the time the partition is being 
made, no objection taken by such sharer to the partition shall be heard, unl ess such sharer can show 
that his absence was not wilful, or unless for any good and sufficient reason it shall appear just and 
proper to allow him to be heard against the partition.  
XXXIV . Partition may be stayed if parties so desire .—If, at any time after an order shall have 
been passed for making a partition, it shall appear, either from the report of the Officer appointed to 
make the partition, or from any other information,  that the parties are not desirous that the partition 
should proceed, it shall be competent to the Collector, with the sanction of the Commissioner, to stop 
the partition, and to strike the case off the file,  
Recovery of costs .—recovering from the sharers all costs and expenses incurred up to that time.  
XXXV . Estates formed in course of partition to be as compact as p
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PARTITION OF REVENUE-PAYING ESTATES ACT, 1863.pdf - page 8]
enses incurred up to that time.  
XXXV . Estates formed in course of partition to be as compact as possible .—It shall be the 
duty of the Officer appointed to make the partition, so far as circumstances will admit, to take care 
that the estates into which the estate is divided shall consist of contiguous m ehals or villages.  
Provided that, if the estate ordered to be divided shall not consist of a sufficient number of 
villages to admit of one or more entire village or villages being included in each estate, the partition of 
the village or villages of which the estate shall consist shall be made so as to render ea ch estate as 
compact as possible.  
XXXVI . Revenue to be assessed on each divided estate .—The public Revenue shall be 
assessed on each estate into which the property shall be ord ered to be divided, in conformity to the 
rules contained in any law for the time being in force.  
XXXVII . Circumstances to be considered in making partitions .—In selecting the v illages or 
lands to be included in each separate estate,  
the advantages or disadvantages arising from situation;  
the vicinity of roads, railways, navigable rivers, or canals;  
the nature and quality of the soil and produce;  
the quantity of culturable and  unculturable waste land;  
the depth at which water may be procurable;  
the number of tanks and wells;  
the state of the embankments and water -courses;  and 
 any other local circumstances affecting the present, or likely to influence the future, value of the 
lands, shall be duly considered:  
and the villages or lands to be included in each estate shall be fairly and impartially selected.  
So far as may be pract icable, and consistent with compactness of partition, lands held in  severalty 
shall be left in the possession of the parties holding the same.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PARTITION OF REVENUE-PAYING ESTATES ACT, 1863.pdf - page 9]
9 
 XXXVIII . Rule when dwelling -house  belonging to one sharer, is situate on ground to be 
allotted to another sharer .—If a dwelling -house belonging to one sharer shall be situate on any land, 
or in any village, which it may be necessary to include in the share of another sharer, the proprieto r of 
such house shall be at liberty to retain it, with the offices, buildings, and grounds, immediately 
attached thereto, upon agreeing to pay to the proprietor of the land or village in which the same is 
situate an equitable rent for the ground.  
The limi ts of the ground and the rent to be paid for it shall be fixed by the Officer making the 
partition, and shall be stated in the paper of partition.  
XXXIX . Rule as to tanks, well s, water -courses, and embankments .—Tanks, wells,           
water -courses, and embankments, shall be considered as attached to the land for the benefit of which 
they were originally made.  
In cases in which, from the extent, situation, or construction of su ch works, it shall be found 
necessary to continue them the joint property of the proprietors of two or more of the estates into 
which the estate may be divided, the paper of partition shall specify, as far as circumstances may 
admit, the extent to which th e proprietors of each of such estates may make use of the same, and the 
proportion of the charges for repairs to be borne by them respectively.  
XL. Rule as to places of worship .—Places of worship, which shall have been held in common 
previous to the partition of an estate, shall continue to be so held, unless the parties shall otherwise 
agree amongst themselves, in which case they shall state in writing the agreement into which they 
have entered, and the Officer making the partition shall enter a note of the agreement in the paper of 
partition.  
XLI. Particulars to be contained in the paper of partitio n to be submitted by Officer making 
same .—When the Officer appointed to make the partition shall have completed t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PARTITION OF REVENUE-PAYING ESTATES ACT, 1863.pdf - page 9]
ed by Officer making 
same .—When the Officer appointed to make the partition shall have completed the partition, and 
allotted the public Revenue on each of the estates into which it is proposed that the estate shall be 
divided, he shall prepa re and submit to the Collector a paper of partition, showing how he proposes to 
divide the estate, and to apportion the public Revenue.  
This paper shall specify  
the names of the Mehals or villages included in each separate estate;  
the gross produce of e ach Mehal and village for the three years immediately preceding the year in 
which the partition is ordered to be made;  
the names of the parties to whom the several estates are allotted, and the proportion of the public 
Revenue proposed to be assessed on each of such estates, with any remarks regarding the mode 
observed in selecting the lands included in each estate, and th e accounts upon which the 
apportionment of the public Revenue assessed thereon shall have been based, as may be necessary for 
the information of the Collector.  
The paper shall further contain a detail of the adjustments, if any, which shall have been made  in 
respect to any tanks, places of worship, or other matters, as specified in the preceding Sections.  
Map to be also submitted .—The Officer appointed to make the partition shall also submit a map, 
showing the several estates into which  the estate is proposed to be divided.  
XLII . Procedure of Collector thereupon .—The Collector shall take into consideration the 
partition proposed by the Officer appointed to ma ke the partition, and, after calling for any further 
information which he shall deem necessary, and disposing of any objections which shall be taken to 
the partition, and allotment of public Revenue, as proposed by such Officer, he shall submit a report 
to the Commissioner, together with such of the papers of the case as shall appear to him essential.  
He shall also forward a list of the papers not sent.  
The Collector 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PARTITION OF REVENUE-PAYING ESTATES ACT, 1863.pdf - page 9]
all appear to him essential.  
He shall also forward a list of the papers not sent.  
The Collector shall record his opinion whether the proposed partition should be confirmed or 
modified, an d in the latter case, he shall state the nature of the modification which, in his opinion, 
should be made.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PARTITION OF REVENUE-PAYING ESTATES ACT, 1863.pdf - page 10]
10 
 XLIII . Commissioner may confirm or modify partition,  subject to appea l to Board of 
Revenue ;—The Commissioner shall either uphold the partition proposed by the Collector, or modify 
the same. The decision of the Commissioner shall not be open to revision by the Civil Court, but shall 
be subject to appeal to the Board of Reven ue. 
The Commissioner, before coming to a decision, may call for any additional papers, or direct any 
further inquiry that he shall consider necessary.  
And may direct division by lot under certain circumstances .—He may also, if he think proper, 
direct that,  when two or more of the estates into which it is proposed to divide the estate shall consist 
of the same proportions of the entire estate, the parties entitled thereto shall draw lots for the same 
before the Collector.  
XLIV . Procedure by Collector on receipt of order of Commissioner, or of Board of Revenue 
on appeal .—On the receipt of the order of the Commissioner or if an appeal be preferred to the Board 
of Revenue, then, of t he order passed on the appeal, the Collector shall cause the same to be published 
in his Office, and in some conspicuous place in each of the estates separately constituted by such 
order.  
The Collector shall at the same time specify the date from which eac h of the estates shall be held 
to be a separate estate, and shall enter the several estates into which the estate has been divided in the 
Register of Estates paying Revenue to Government.  
The Collector shall give the several proprietors possession of the e states allotted to them, and, if 
necessary, may avail himself of the assistance of the Magistrate in giving possession.  
XLV . Government may order new allotment of public Revenu e among estates formed by 
partition, in case of fraud or error in original allotment being proved .—In order to prevent 
collusion or error in the distribution of the public Revenue assessed upon an estate which may ordered 
to be divided into two or mor
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PARTITION OF REVENUE-PAYING ESTATES ACT, 1863.pdf - page 10]
ution of the public Revenue assessed upon an estate which may ordered 
to be divided into two or more dis tinct estates, if it shall be proved to the satisfaction of the 
Government, within twelve years from and after the date of confirmation of the partition, that the 
public Revenue was fraudulently or erroneously apportioned at the time of the partition, the 
Government shall have power to order a new allotment of the public Revenue upon the several estates 
into which such estate may have been divided, conformably to the principles prescribed in this Act, on 
an estimate of the gross produce of each estate at th e time of the partition, to be made agreeably to the 
best evidence and information which may be procurable respecting the same.  
Such order shall not be liable to be contested in the Civil Court.  
The parties whose estates may be declared to have been under -assessed shall be -required to pay to 
the proprietors of the estates which shall have been over -assessed, the sum in which they shall be 
found to have been over -assessed, and in default of payment, the amount shall be leviable by the 
process prescribed for the recovery of arrears of rent or Revenue.  
XLVI . Consequence to party havin g interest in any estate, if he neglect to affirm or establish 
such interest while the estate is under attachment with a view to partition .—If, during the time an 
estate is under attachment with a view to the partition of the same, any party shall neglect or omit to 
claim, by a suit, any right or title he may then have to the ownership or occupancy, a t a fixed rent, of 
any land situated in such estate, or any other interest therein, such, neglect or omission shall be a valid 
plea in bar of any suit relating to such right, title, or interest, unless the party can satisfy the Court that 
there was good an d sufficient reason for his neglect or omission to institute the suit at or before such 
time.  
Provided that this Section shall not bar any action for a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PARTITION OF REVENUE-PAYING ESTATES ACT, 1863.pdf - page 10]
titute the suit at or before such 
time.  
Provided that this Section shall not bar any action for arrears of rent, or the enhancement or 
alteration of rent.  
XLVII . Holder of decree of Civil Court, awarding right to portion of an estate, may apply for 
partition, and Collector may proceed thereon under Act .—Whenever any Court of Civil 
Judicature shall pass a decree, awarding to any person the proprietary right in a portion of an estate 
paying Revenue to Government, whether the portion so awarded shall consist of a fractional share in 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PARTITION OF REVENUE-PAYING ESTATES ACT, 1863.pdf - page 11]
11 
 the whole, or a part, of the estate, or of specific l ands, the decree -holder may apply to the Collector for 
a partition of the estate;  
and on the receipt of such application, the Collector shall proceed thereupon under the provisions 
of this Act, which are hereby declared applicable to such applications.  
XLVIII . Union in certain cases of severed portions of estates originally undivided .—If two or 
more estates, which may have originally formed portions of the same estate, shall com e into the 
possession of one person, such person shall be entitled to have such estates united, and to hold them 
as a single estate;  
or if two or more persons shall have separate possession of their respective shares of an estate 
which was originally held as a joint undivided estate, such persons may apply to have their shares 
united, and to hold them as one estate.  
XLIX . Application for such union how to be made, and how to be dealt with .—The 
applications for the union of the estates, or of the shares of the estate, as the case may be, shall be 
made in writing to the Collector of the District in which the estates, or shares of the estate, are situate, 
and the Collector (provided  he see no objection) shall comply with the application, and cause the 
necessary entries to be made in the records of his Office, reporting the case to the superior Revenue 
Authorities.  
L. [Repealed by Act No. XIV of 1870.]  
LI. Provisions of Act  applied to partition of estates held free from payment of                      
Revenue .—The provisions of this Act may, in so far as the same are applicable be applied, by order 
of the Local Government to the partition of any estate held free from the payment of Government 
Revenue.  
LII. Control of Collector's proceedings under Act .—In the performance of his duties under this 
Act, the Collector shall be subject to the general direction and control of the Commissioner of the 
Division, and the Board of Revenue.  
LIII. Orders of Co
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PARTITION OF REVENUE-PAYING ESTATES ACT, 1863.pdf - page 11]
ion and control of the Commissioner of the 
Division, and the Board of Revenue.  
LIII. Orders of Collector, except in certain cases, open to revision by superior Revenue 
Authorities .— All orders passed by a Collector under this Act, unless otherwise provided, not being 
orders or d ecisions within the meaning of Section IX, shall be open to revision by the superior 
Revenue Authorities.  
LIV. What other Officers may exercise powers vested in Collector by th is Act .—The powers 
vested in a Collector by this Act may be exercised by a Deputy Collector, or other Officer, vested 
with the full powers of a Collector, subject to the control of the Collector of the District.  
LV. Powers to be exercised by Collector, or Officer appointed to make partition .—In carrying 
out the provisions of this Act, the Collector shall exercise the powers described in Regulation II, 1819, 
Regulation VII, 1822, and Regulations IX and XIV, 1825.  
Any Officer appointed to make a partition under this Act may also exercise the powers described 
in the foregoing Regulations, so far as the same may be applicable.  
LVI. Powers of Officers  exercising jurisdiction under Act, with regard to false                              
evidence .—If, in any case in which a Collector or other Officer shall exercise Jur isdiction under this 
Act, any person is guilty of the offence of giving or fabricating false evidence, or of forgery, as 
defined in the Indian Penal Code, or of abetting any of those offences, such Collector or other Officer 
shall have the same powers in r espect of such offence, and of the person charged with, committing the 
same, as are vested by the Code of Criminal Procedure in a Civil Court, when any such offence is 
committed before or against such Court, or when a document charged to be a forgery is gi ven in 
evidence in any proceedings in such Court.  
LVII . Board of Revenue to be guided by instructions of Local Government .—In the execution 
of the duties vested in the Bo
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PARTITION OF REVENUE-PAYING ESTATES ACT, 1863.pdf - page 11]
 to be guided by instructions of Local Government .—In the execution 
of the duties vested in the Board of  Revenue by this Act, the Board shall be guided by such orders or 
instructions as they may from time to time receive from the Local Government, to whom they shall 
apply in all cases which shall appear to the Board not to have been provided for by the exist ing law.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PARTITION OF REVENUE-PAYING ESTATES ACT, 1863.pdf - page 12]
12 
 LVIII . Interpretation .—Unless there be something in the subject or context repugnant to such 
construction, words importing the singular number shall include the plural  number, and words 
importing the plural number shall include the singular number; and  
words importing the masculine gender shall include females.  
LIX. Territorial scope of Act .—This Act shall extend only to such parts of the North -Western 
Provinces of the Presidency of Fort William in Bengal as are subject to the general Regulations of that 
Presidency; but the Act may be extended, by order of the Local Government, either wholly  or in part, 
to any Non -Regulation Province under such Government.  
 
_____________  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________ __ 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and application . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Establishments to include departments, undertakings and branches.  
4. Computation of gross profits.  
5. Computation of available surplus.  
6. Sums deductible from gross profits.  
7. Calculation of direct tax payable by the employer.  
8. Eligibility for bonus.  
9. Disqualification for bonus.  
10. Payment of minimum  bonus.  
11. Payment of maximum bonus.  
12. Calculation of bonus with respect to certain employees.  
13. Proportionate reduction in bonus in certain cases.  
14. Computation of number of working days.  
15. Set on and set off of allocable surplus.  
16. Special provisions with respect to certain establishments.  
17. Adjustment of customary or interim bonus against bonus payable under the Act.  
18. Deduction of certain amounts from bonus payable under the Act.  
19. Time -limit for payment of bonus.  
20. Application of Act to establishments in public sector in certain cases . 
21. Recovery of bonus due from an employer.  
22. Reference of disputes und er the Act.  
23. Presumption about accuracy of balance -sheet and profit and loss account of corporations and 
companies.  
24. Audited accounts of banking companies not to be questioned.  
25. Audit of accounts of employers, not being corporations or companies.  
26. Maintenance of registers, records, etc.  
27. Inspectors.  
28. Penalty.  
29. Offences by companies.  
30. Cognizance of offences.  
31. Protection of action taken under the Act.  
31A. Special provision with respect to payment of bonus linked with production or productivity.  
32. Act not to apply to certain classes of employees.  
33. [Repealed .] 
34. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with the Act.  
35. Saving.  
36. Power of exemption.  
37. [Repealed .] 
38. Power to make rules.  
39. Application of certain law not barred . 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 1]
Power to make rules.  
39. Application of certain law not barred . 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 2]
2 
 SECTIONS  
40. Repeal and saving . 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.  
THE THIRD SCHEDULE.  
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE.  
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 3]
3 
 THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965  
 ACT NO. 21 OF 19651 
[25th September , 1965 .] 
2[An Act to provide for the payment of bonus to persons employed in certain establishments 
and for matters connected therewith .] 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixteenth Year of the Republic of India as  follows:— 
1. Short title, extent and application .—(1) This Act may be called the Payment of  Bonus 
Act, 1965.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India  3***. 
(3) Save as otherwise provided  in this Act, it shall apply to — 
(a) every factory; and  
(b) every other establishment in which twenty or more persons are employed on any day 
during an accounting year:  
4[Provided  that the appropriate Government may, after giving not less  than two months ’ notice of 
its intention so to do, by notification in the Official Gazette, apply the provisions of this Act with 
effect from such accounting year as may be specified in the notification, to any establishment or class 
of establishment s [including an estab lishment being a factory within the  meaning of sub -clause ( ii) of 
clause ( m) of section  2 of the Factories Act,  1948  (63 of 1948)] employing such number of persons 
less than twenty as may be specified in the notification; so, however, th at the number of persons so 
specified shall in no case be less than ten.]  
(4) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of this Act shall, in relation to a factory 
or other establishment to which this Act applies, have effect in respect of the  accounting year 
commencing on any day in the year  1964  and in respect of every subsequent accounting year:  
5[Provided  that in relation to the State of Jammu and Kashmir *, the reference to the accounting 
year commencing on any day in the year  1964  and ever y subsequent accounting year shall be 
construed as reference to the accounting year commencing on any day in the year  1968  and every 
subsequent accounting year:]  
6[Provided  further that when the provisions
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 3]
e year  1968  and every 
subsequent accounting year:]  
6[Provided  further that when the provisions of this Act have been made applicable to any 
establishment or class of establishments by the issue of a notification under the proviso to               
sub-section ( 3), the reference to the accounting year commenc ing on any day in the year  1964  and 
every subsequent accounting year or, as the case may be, the reference to the accounting year 
commencing on any day in the year  1968  and every subsequent accounting year, shall, in relation to 
such establishment or class  of establishments, be construed as a reference to the accounting year 
specified in such notification and every subsequent accounting year.]  
(5) An establishment to which this Act applies  7*** shall continue to be governed by this Act 
notwithstanding that the number of person employed therein falls below twenty  8[or, as the case may 
be, the number specified in the notification issued under the proviso to sub -section ( 3)]. 
  
                                                           
1. The Act has been extended to Goa, Daman and Diu by Act 6 of 1977, s. 2 and the S chedule.  
2. Subs. by Act 43 of 1977 , s. 3, for the long title (w.e.f. 3-9-1977 ). 
3. The word s “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 51 of 1970, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 1 -9-1971).  
4. The proviso ad ded by Act 23 of 1976, s. 3 (w.e.f. 25 -9-1975).  
5. The proviso added by Act 51 of 19 70, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 1 -9-1971).  
6. The p roviso inserted by Act 23 of 1976, s. 3 (w.e.f. 25 -9-1975).  
7. The words, brackets, letter and figure “under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 3)” omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 25 -9-1975).  
8. Certain words, brackets and figure added  by s. 3, ibid. (w.e. f. 25-9-1975).  
*. Vide notification No . S.O. 3912(E), dated 30th October, 2019, this Act is made applicable to the Union territory of Jammu 
and Kashmir and the Union territory of Ladakh.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 3]
icable to the Union territory of Jammu 
and Kashmir and the Union territory of Ladakh.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 4]
4 
 2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(1) “accounting  year” means— 
(i) in relation to a corporation, the year ending on the day on which the books and 
accounts of the corporation are to be closed and balanced;  
(ii) in relation to a company, the period in respect of which any profit and loss account of 
the co mpany laid before it in annual general  meeting is made up, whether that period is a year 
or not;  
(iii) in any other case — 
(a) the year commencing on the  1st day of April; or  
(b) if the accounts of an establishment maintained by the employer thereof are clo sed 
and balanced on any day other than the  31st day of March, then, at the option of the 
employer, the year ending on the day on which its accounts are so closed and balanced:  
Provided that an option once exercised by the employer under paragraph ( b) of this           
sub-clause shall not again be exercised except with the previous permission in writing of the 
prescribed authority and upon such conditions as that authority may think fit;  
(2) “agricultural income ” shall have the same  meaning as in the  Income -tax Act;  
(3) “agricultural income -tax law ” means any law for the time being in force relating to the 
levy of tax on agricultural income;  
(4) “allocable surplus ” means— 
(a) in relation to an employer, being a company  1[(other than a banking company)] which 
has not made the arrangements prescribed under the  Income -tax Act for the declaration and 
payment within India of the dividends payable out of its profits in accordance with the 
provisions of section  194 of that Act, sixty -seven per cent . of the available surplus in an 
accounting year;  
(b) in any other case, sixty per cent . of such available surplus;  
2*  *   *   *   * 
(5) “appropriate Government ” means— 
(i) in relation to an establishment in respect of which the appropriate Government under 
the Industrial Disputes Act,1947  (14 of 1947), is the Central Government
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 4]
ropriate Government under 
the Industrial Disputes Act,1947  (14 of 1947), is the Central Government, the Central 
Government;  
(ii) in relation to any other establishment, the Government of the State in  which that other 
establishment is situate;  
(6) “available surplus ” means the available surplus computed under section  5; 
(7) “award ” means an interim or a final determination of any industrial dispute or of any 
question relating thereto by any Labour Cour t, Industrial Tribunal or National Tribunal 
constituted under the Industrial Disputes Act,  1947  (14 of 1947), or by any other authority 
constituted under any corresponding law relating to investigation and settlement of industrial 
disputes in force in a State and includes an arbitration award made under section  10A of that Act 
or under that law;  
(8) “banking company ” means a banking company as defined in section  5 of the  Banking 
Companies Act,  1949  (10 of 1949), and includes the State  Bank of India, any s ubsidiary bank as 
defined in the St ate Bank of India (Sub sidiary  Banks) Act,  1959  (38 of 1959),  3[any 
corresponding new bank specified in the First Schedule to the  Banking Companies (Acquisition 
and Transfer of Undertakings) Act,  1970  (5 of 1970),   1[any corresponding new bank constituted 
under section  3 of the  Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertaking s) 
Act, 1980  (40 of 1980),] any co-operative bank as defined in clause ( vii) of section  2 of the 
Reserve bank of India Act,  1934  (2 of 1934) ,] and any other banking institution which may be 
notified in this behalf by the Central Government;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 66 of 1980, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
2. The words, brackets and figures “and includes any amount treated as such under sub -section ( 2) of section 34” omitted by 
Act 23 of 1976, s. 4 (w.e.f. 25 -9-1975).  
3. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 25 -9-1975).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 4]
(w.e.f. 25 -9-1975).  
3. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 25 -9-1975).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 5]
5 
 (9) “company ” means any company as defined is  section  3 of the Companies 
Act, 1956  (1 of 1956), and includes a foreign company within the  meaning of section  591 of that 
Act; 
(10) “co-operative society ” means a society registered or deemed to be registered under the              
Co-operative Societies  Act, 1912  (2 of 1912), or any other law for the time being in force in any 
State relating to co -operating societies;  
(11) “corporation ” means any body corporate established by or under any Central, Provincial 
or State Act but does not include a company or  a co-operative society;  
(12) “direct tax ” means— 
(a) any lax chargeable under — 
(i) the Income -tax Act;  
(ii) the Super Profits Tax Act,  1963  (14 of 1963);  
(iii) the Companies (Profits) Surtax Act,  1964  (7 of 1964);  
(iv) the agricultural income -tax law; and  
(b) any other tax which, having regard to its nature or incidence, may be declared by the 
Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, to be a direct tax for the purposes 
of this Act;  
(13) “employee ” means any person (other than an apprentice) employed on a salary or wage 
not exceeding  1[twenty -one thousand rupees]  per mensem in any industry to do any skilled or 
unskilled manual, supervisory,  managerial, administrative, technical or clerical work for  hire or 
reward, whether the terms  of employment be express or implied;  
(14) “employer ” includes— 
(i) in relation to an establishment which is a factory, the owner or occupier of the factory, 
including the agent of such owner or occupier, the legal representative of a deceased owner or 
occupier and where a person has been named as a manager of the factor y under clause (f) of                 
sub-section ( 1) of section  7 of the Factories Act,  1948  (63 of 1948), the person so named; and  
(ii) in relation to any other establishment, the person who, or the authority which, has the 
ultimate control over the affa irs of the establishment and w
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 5]
 who, or the authority which, has the 
ultimate control over the affa irs of the establishment and where the said affairs are entrusted 
to a manager, managing director or managing agent, such manager, managing director or 
managing agent;  
(15) “establishment in private sector ” means any establishment other than an establishment in 
public sector;  
(16) “establishment in public sector ” means an establishment owne d, controlled or managed 
by— 
(a) a Government company as defined in section  617 of the Companies 
Act, 1956  (1 of 1956);  
(b) a corporation in which not less tha n forty per cent . of its capital is held (wheth er 
singly or taken together) by — 
(i) the Government; or  
(ii) the Reserve  Bank of India; or  
(iii) a corporation owned by the Government or the Reserve  Bank of India;  
(17) “factory ” shall have the same  meaning as in clause ( m) of section  2 of the Factories 
Act, 1948  (63 of 1948);  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 6 of 2016, s. 2, for “ten thousand rupees” (w .e.f. 1 -4-2014).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 6]
6 
 (18) “gross profits ” means the gross profits calculated under section  4; 
(19) “Income -tax Act ” means the Income -tax Act,  1961  (43 of 1961);  
(20) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(21) “salary or wage ” means all remuneration (other than remuneration in respect of over -
time work) capable of being expressed in terms of money, which would, if the terms of 
employment, express or implied, were fulfilled, be payable to an employee in respect of  his 
employment or of work done in such employment and includes dearness allowance (that is to say, 
all cash payments, by whatever name called, paid to an employee on account of a rise in the cost 
of living), but does not include — 
(i) any other allowance which the employee is for the time being entitled to;  
(ii) the value of any house accommodation or of supply of light, water,  medical 
attendance or other amenity or of any service or of any concessional supply of food grains or 
other articles;  
(iii) any travelling concession;  
(iv) any bonus (including incentive, production and attendance bonus);  
(v) any contribution paid or payable by the employer to any pension fund or provident 
fund or for t he benefit of the employee under any law for the time being in force;  
(vi) any retrenchment compensation or any gratuity or other retirement benefit payable to 
the employee or any  ex gratia  payment made to  him; 
(vii) any commission payable to the employee.  
Explanation. —Where an employee is given in lieu of the whole or part of the salary or wage 
payable to  him, free food allowance or free food by  his employer, such food allowance or the 
value of such food shall, for the purpose of this clause, be deemed to from part of the salary or 
wage of such employee;  
(22) words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the Industrial 
Disputes Act,  1947  (14 of 1947), shall have the  meanings respectively assigned to them in that 
Act. 
3. Establishment
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 6]
(14 of 1947), shall have the  meanings respectively assigned to them in that 
Act. 
3. Establishments to include departments, undertakings and branches .—Where an 
establishment consists of different department or undertakings or has branches, whether situated in 
the same place or in different places, all such departments or undertakings or br anches shall be treated 
as parts of the same establishment for the purpose of computation of bonus under this Act:  
Provided that where for any accounting year a separate balance -sheet and profit and loss account 
are prepared and maintained in respect of an y such department or undertaking or branch, then, such 
department or undertaking or branch shall be treated as a separate establishment for the purpose of 
computation of bonus, under this Act for that year, unless such department or undertaking or branch 
was, immediately before the commencement of that accounting year treated as part of the 
establishment for the purpose of computation of bonus.  
1[4. Computation of gross profits .—The gross profits derived by an employer from an 
establishment in respe ct of any accounting year shall — 
(a) in the case of a banking company, be calculated in the manner specified in the First 
Schedule;  
(b) in any other case, be calculated in the manner specified in the Second Schedule.]  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 66 of 1980, s. 3, for section 4 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 7]
7 
 5. Computation of available surplus .—The available surplus in respect of any accounting year 
shall be the gross profits for that year after deducting therefrom the sums referred to in section 6:  
1[Provided that the available surplus in respect of the accounting year commencing on any day in 
the year 1968 and in respect of every subsequent accounting  year shall be the aggregate of — 
(a) the gross profits for that accounting year after deducting therefrom the sums referred to in 
section 6; and  
(b) an amount equal to the difference between — 
(i) the d irect tax, calculated in accordance with the provisions of section 7, in respect of 
an amount equal to the gross profits of the employer for the immediately preceding 
accounting year; and  
(ii) the direct tax, calculated in accordance with the provisions of  section 7, in respect of 
an amount equal to the gross profits of the employer for such preceding accounting year after 
deducting therefrom the amount of bonus which the employer has paid or is liable to pay to 
his employees in accordance with the provisio ns of this Act for that year.]  
6. Sums deductible from gross profits .—The following sums shall be deducted from the gross 
profits as prior charges, namely: — 
(a) any amount by way of depreciation admissible in accordance with the provisions of                        
sub-section (1) of section 32 of the Income -tax Act, or in accordance with the provisions of the 
agricultural  income -tax law, as the case may be:  
Provided that where an emplo yer has been paying bonus to hi s employees under a settleme nt or 
an award or agreement made before the 29 the May, 1965 , and subsisting on that date after deducting 
from the gross profits notional normal depreciation, then, the amount of depreciation to be deducted 
under this clause shall, at the option of such emp loyer (such option to be exercised once and within 
one year from the date) continue to be such notional normal depreciation;  
(b) 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 7]
ed once and within 
one year from the date) continue to be such notional normal depreciation;  
(b) any amount by way of  2[development rebate or investment allowance or development 
allowance] which the employe r is entitled to deduct from hi s income under the income -tax Act;  
(c) subject  to the provisions of section 7 , any direct tax which the employer is liable to pay 
for the a ccounting year in respect of hi s income, profits and gains during that year;  
(d) such  further sums as are specified in respect of the employer in the  3[Third Schedule].  
7. Calculation of direct tax payable by the employer .—4[Any direct tax payable by the 
employer] for any accounting year shall, subject to the following provisions, be calculated at the rates 
applicable to the income of the employe r for that year, namely: — 
(a) in calculating such t ax no account shall be taken of — 
(i) any loss incurred by the employer in respect of any previous accounting year and 
carried forward under an y law for the time being in force relating to direct taxes;  
(ii) any arrears of depreciation which the employer is entitled to add to the amount of the 
allowance for depreciation for any following accounting year or years under sub -section ( 2) 
of section  32 of the Income -tax Act;  
(iii) any exemption conferred on the employer under section  84 of the Income -tax Act or 
of any deduction to which he is entitled under sub -section ( 1) of section  101 of that Act, as in 
force immediately before the commenc ement of the Finance Act,  1965  (10 of 1965);  
(b) where the employer is a religious or a charitable institution to which the provisions of 
section  32 do not apply and the whole or any part of its income is exempt from tax under the 
                                                           
1. The proviso a dded by Act 8 of 1969, s. 2 (w.e.f. 26 -3-1965).   
2. Subs. by Act 66 of 1980, s. 4 , for “development rebate or development allowance” (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
3. Su
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 7]
ct 66 of 1980, s. 4 , for “development rebate or development allowance” (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “ Second  Schedule” (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
4. Subs. by Act 8 of 1969, s. 3, for “For the purpose of clause ( c) of section 6, any direct tax payable by the employer”  
(w.e.f. 26 -3-1965).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 8]
8 
 Income -tax Act, then, with respect to the in come so exempted, such institution shall be treated as 
if it were a company in which the public are substantially interested within the  meaning of that 
Act; 
(c) where the employer is individual or a Hindu undivided family, the tax pa yable by such 
employer under the Income -tax Act shall be calculated on the basis that the income derived 
by him from the establishment is  his only income;  
(d) where the income of any employer includes any profits and gains derived from the export 
of any go ods or  merchandise out of India and any rebate on such income in allowed under any 
law for the time being in force relating to direct taxes, then, no account shall be taken of such 
rebate;  
(e) no account shall be taken of any rebate  1[(other than development rebate or investment 
allowance or development allowance)] or credit or relief or de duction (not herein 
before  mentioned in this section) in the payment of any direct tax allowed under any law for the 
time being in force relating to direct taxe s or under the relevant annual Finance Act, for the 
development of any industry.  
8. Eligibility for bonus .—Every employee shall be entitled to be paid by  his employer in an 
accounting year, bonus, in accordance with the provisions of this Act, provided he has worked in the 
establishment for not less than thirty working days in that year.  
9. Disqualification for bonus .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, an employee 
shall be disqualified from receiving bonus under this Act, if he is dismissed fro m service for — 
(a) fraud; or  
(b) riotous or violent behaviour while on the premises of the establishment; or  
(c) theft, misappropriation or sabotage of any property of the establishment.  
2[10. Payment of minimum bonus .—Subject to the other provisions of this Act, every employer 
shall be bound to pay to every employee in respect of the accounting year commencing on any day in 
the year 1979  and in
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 8]
 to every employee in respect of the accounting year commencing on any day in 
the year 1979  and in respect of every subsequent accounting year, a minimum bonus which shall 
be 8.33 per cent . of the salary of wage earned by the employee during the accoun ting year or one 
hundred rupees,  whichever is higher, whether or not the employer has any allocable  surplus in the 
accounting year : 
Provided that where an employee has not complet ed fifteen years of age at the beginning of the 
accounting year, the provisions of this section shall have effect in relation to such employees as if for 
the words “one hundred rupees ”, the words “sixty rupees ” were substituted.  
 11. Payment of maximum bon us.—(1) Where in respect of any accounting year referred to in 
section  10, the allocable surplus exceeds the amount of minimum bonus payable to the employees 
under that section, the employer shall, in lieu of such minimum bonus, be bound to pay to every 
employee in respect of that accounting year bonus which shall be an amoun t in proportion to the 
salary or wage earned by the employee during the accounting year subject to a maximum of twenty 
per cent.  of such salary or wage.  
(2) In computing the allocable surplus under this section, the amount set on or the amount set off 
unde r the provisions of section  15 shall be taken into account in accordance with the provisions of 
that section.]  
3[12. Calculation of bonus with  respect to certain employees. —Where the salary or wage of an 
employee exceeds  4[seven thousand rupees or the minimum wage for the scheduled employment, as 
fixed by the appropriate Government, whichever is higher]   per mensem, the bonus payable to such 
employee under section 10 or, as the case may be, under section 11, shall be calcul ated as if his salary 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 66 of 1980, s. 5, for “(other than development  rebate or development allowance )” (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
2. S
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 8]
, s. 5, for “(other than development  rebate or development allowance )” (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
2. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for section 10 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
3.  Ins. by Act 67 of 1985, s. 3 (w.e.f. 7-11-1985 ). 
4. Subs. by Act 6 of 2016, s. 3, for “three thousand and five hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -4-2014 ). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 9]
9 
 or wage were  1[seven thousand rupees or the minimum wage for the scheduled employment, as fixed 
by the appropriate Government, whichever is higher] per mensem.]  
2[Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the expression “scheduled employment ” shall 
have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( g) of section 2 of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948                     
(11 of 1948) .] 
3[13. Proportionate reduction in bonus in certain cases .—Where an employee has not worked 
for all the working days in an accounting year, the minimum bonus of one hundred rupees or, as the 
case may be, of sixty rupees, if such bonus is  higher than  8.33 per cent.  of his salary or wage for the 
days he has worked in that accounting year, shall be prop ortionately reduced.]  
14. Computation of number of working days .—For the purposes of section  13, an employee 
shall be deemed to have worked in an establishment in any accounting year also on the days on 
which — 
(a) he has been laid off under an agreement or  as permitted by standing orders under the 
Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act,  1946  (20 of 1946), or under the Industrial 
Disputes Act,  1947  (14 of 1947), or under any other law applicable to the establishment;  
(b) he has been on leave with salary  or wage;  
(c) he has been absent due to temporary disablement caused by accident arising out of and in 
the course of  his employment; and  
(d) the employee has been on maternity leave with salary or wage, during the accounting 
year.  
4[15. Set on and set off of allocable surplus .—(1) Where for any accounting year, the allocable 
surplus exceeds the amount of maximum bonus payable to the employees in the establishment under 
section  11, then, the excess shall, subjec t to a limit of twenty per cent.  of the total salary or wage of 
the employees employed in the establishment in that accounting year, be carried forward for being set 
on in the succeeding accounting year and so on up to and inclu
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 9]
ar, be carried forward for being set 
on in the succeeding accounting year and so on up to and inclusive of the fourth accounting year to be 
utilised for the pu rpose of payment of bonus in the manner illustrated in the Fourth Schedule.  
(2) Where for any accounting year, there is no available surplus or the allocable surplus in respect 
of that year falls short of the amount of minimum bonus payable to the employee s in the 
establishment under section  10, and there is no amount of sufficient amount carried forward and set 
on under sub -section ( 1) which could be utilised for the purpose of payment of the minimum bonus, 
then, such minimum amount or the deficiency, as t he case may be, shall be carried forward for being 
set off in the succeeding accounting year and so on up to and inclusive of the fourth accounting year 
in the manner illustrated in the Fourth Schedule.  
(3) The principle of set on and set off as illustrate d in the Fourth Schedule shall apply to all other 
cases not covered by sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) for the purpose of payment of bonus under this 
Act. 
(4) Where in any accounting year any amount has been carried forward and set on or set off under 
this section, then, in calculating bonus for the succeeding accounting year, the amount of set on or set 
off carried forward from the earliest accounting year shall first be taken into account.]  
16. Special provisions with respect to certain establishments .—5[(1) Where an establishments 
newly set up, whether before or after the commencement of this Act, the employees of such 
establishment shall be entitled to be paid bonus under this Act in accordance with t he provisions of 
sub-sections ( 1A), (1B) and ( 1C). 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 6 of 2016, s. 3, for “three thousand and five hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -4-2014).  
2. The Explanation  inserted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-2014).  
3. Subs. by Act 66 of 1980, s. 8, for sec
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 9]
Explanation  inserted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-2014).  
3. Subs. by Act 66 of 1980, s. 8, for section 13 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
4. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for  section 15  (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
5. Subs. by Act 23 of 1976, s. 12, for sub -section ( 1) and the Explanation  thereto  (w.e.f. 25 -9-1975).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 10]
10 
 (1A) In the first five accounting year s following the accounting year in which the employer s sells 
the goods  produced or manufactured by hi m or renders services, as the case may be, from such 
establishment, bonus shall be payable only in respect of the ac counting year in which the employer 
derives profit from such establishment and such bonus shall be calculated in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act in relation to that year, but without applyin g the provisions of section 15 . 
(1B) For the sixth and seventh accounting years following the accounting year in which the 
employer sells the goods  produced or manufactured by hi m or renders services, as the case may be, 
from such establishment, the provisions of section 15 shall apply subject to the f ollowing  
modifications, namely: — 
(i) for the sixth accounting year — 
set on or set off, as the case may be, shall be made in the manner illustrated in the  1[Fourth 
Schedule] taking into account the excess or deficiency, if any, as the case may be, of the 
allocable surplus set on or set off in respect of the fifth and sixth accounting years;  
(ii) for the seventh accounting year — 
set on or set off, as the case may be, shall be made in the manner illustrated in the  1[Fourth 
Schedule] taking into account the excess or d eficiency, if any, as the case may be, of the 
allocable surplus set on or set off in respect of the fifth, sixth and seventh accounting years.  
(1C) From the eighth accounting year following the accounting year in which the employer sells 
the goods produced  or manufactured b y him or renders services, as the case may be, from such 
establishment, the provisions of section 15 shall apply in relation to such establishment as they apply 
in relation to any other establishment.  
Explanation I.—For the purpose of sub-section ( 1), an establishment shall not be  deemed to be  
newly set up merely by reason of a change in its location, management, name or ownership.  
Explanat
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 10]
newly set up merely by reason of a change in its location, management, name or ownership.  
Explanation  II.—For the purpose of sub -section ( 1A), an employer shall not be deemed to be have 
derived pr ofit in any accounting year unless — 
(a) he has made provision for that year ’s depreciation to which he is entitled under the 
Income -tax Act or, as the case may be, under the agricultural income -tax law; and  
(b) the arrears of such depreci ation and losses i ncurred by hi m in respect of the 
establishment for the previous accounting years hav e been fully set off against hi s profits.  
Explanation  III.—For the purpos es of sub -sections ( 1A), (1B) and ( 1C), sale of the goods 
produced or manufactured during the course of the trial running of any factory or of the prospecting 
stage of any mine or an oil field shall not be taken into consideration and where any question arises 
with regard to such production or manufacture, the decision of the appropriate Government , made 
after giving the parties a reasonable opportunity of representing the case, shall be final and shall not 
be called in question by any court or other authority.]  
(2) The provisions of  2[sub-sections ( 1), (1A), (1B) and ( 1C)] shall, so far as may be, apply to new 
departments or undertakings or branches set up by existing establishments:  
Provided that if an employer in relation to an existing establishment consisting of different 
(departments or undertakings or branches (whether or not in the same indus try) set up at diffe rent 
periods has, before the 29 th May, 1965 , been paying bonus to the employees of all such departments 
or undertakings or branches irrespective of the date on which such departments or undertakings or 
branches were set up, on the basis  of the consolidated profits computed in respect of all such 
departments or undertakings or branches, then, such employer shall be liable to pay bonus in              
accor dance with the provisions of this Act to the em
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 10]
 shall be liable to pay bonus in              
accor dance with the provisions of this Act to the employees of all such departments or u ndertakings 
or branches (whether set up before or after that date) on the basis of the consolidated profits computed 
as aforesaid.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 66 of 1980 , s. 10, for “Third Schedule” (w.e.f. 21-8-1980). 
2. Subs. by Act 23 of 1976, s. 12, for “sub -section ( 1)” (w.e.f. 25 -9-1975).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 11]
11 
 17. Adjustment of customary or interim bonus against bonus payable under the                  
Act.—Where in any accounting year — 
(a) an employer has paid any puja bonus or other customary bonus to an employee; or  
(b) an employer has paid a part of the bonus payable under this Act to an employee before the 
date on which such bonus beco mes payable,  
then, the employer shall be entitled to deduct the amount of bonus so paid from the amount of bonus 
payable by  him to the employee under this Act in respect of that accounting year and the employee 
shall be entitled to receive only the balance.  
18. Deduction of cert ain amounts from bonus payable under the Act .—Where in any 
accounting year, an employee is found guilty of misconduct causing financial loss to the employer, 
then, it shall be lawful for the employer to deduct the amount of loss from the amount of bonus 
payable by  him to the employee under this Act in respect of that accounting year only and the 
employee shall be entitled to receive the balance, if any.  
19. Time -limit for payment of bonus .—1[All amounts] payable to an employee by way of bonus 
under this Act shall be paid in cash by  his employer — 
(a) where there is a dispute regarding payment of bonus pending before any authority under 
section  22, within a month from the date on which the award becomes enforceable or the 
settlement comes into operation, in respect of such dispute;  
(b) in any other case, within a period of eight months from the close of the accounting year:  
Provided that the appropriate Government or such authority as the ap propriate Government may 
specify in this behalf may, upon an application made to it by the employer and for sufficient reasons, 
by order, extend the said period of eight months to such further period or periods as it thinks fit; so, 
however, that the total  period so extended shall not in any case exceed two years.  
2*   *   *   *   *. 
3*   *   *   *   *. 
20. Application of Act to 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 11]
in any case exceed two years.  
2*   *   *   *   *. 
3*   *   *   *   *. 
20. Application of Act to establishments in public sector in certain cases .—4[(1)] If in any 
accounting year an establishment in public sector sells any goods produced or manufactured by it or 
renders any services, in competition with an establishment in private sector, and the income from 
such sale or services or both is not less than twenty per cent . of the gross income of the establishment 
in public sec tor for that year, then, the provisions of this Act shall apply in relation to such 
establishment in public sector as they apply in relation to a like establishment in private sector.  
5[(2) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 1), nothing in this Act  shall apply to the 
employees employed by any establishment in public sector.]  
21. Recovery of bonus due from an employer .—Where any money is due to an employee by 
way of bonus f rom hi s employer under a settlement or an award or agreement, the employee himself 
or an y other person authorised by hi m in writing in this behalf, or in the case o f the death of the 
employee, hi s assignee or heirs may, without prejudice to any other mode of recovery, make an 
application to the appropriate Government for the recovery of the money due to hi m, and if the 
appropriate Government or such authority as the appropriate Government may specify in this behalf 
is satisfied that any money is so due, it shall issue a certificate for that amount to the Collector who 
shall procee d to recover the same in the same manner as an arrear  of land revenue:  
Provided that every such application shall be made within one year from the date on which the 
money became due to the employee from the employer:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 23 of 1976, s. 13, for “( 1) Subject to this provisions of this section , all amou nts” (w.e.f. 25 -9-1975).  
2. Sub -section s (2) to (7) omitted by s. 13, ibid. (
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 11]
ection , all amou nts” (w.e.f. 25 -9-1975).  
2. Sub -section s (2) to (7) omitted by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 25 -9-1975).  
3. Sub-section ( 8) omitted by Act 55 of 1973, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -9-1973).  
4. Section 20 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 66 of 1980, s. 11 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
5. Ins. by s. 11,  ibid. (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 12]
12 
 Provided further that any such applicat ion may be entertained after the expiry of the said period 
of one year, if the appropriate Government is satisfied that the applicant had sufficient cause for not 
making the application within the said period.  
Explanation —In this section and in  1[sections 22, 23, 24 and 25 ], “employee ” includes a person 
who is entitled to the payment of bonus under this Act but who is no longer in employment.  
22. Reference of disputes under the Act .—Where any dispute arises between an employer 
and his employees with respect  to the bonus payable under this Act or with respect to the application 
of this Act to an establishment in public sector, then, such dispute shall be deemed to be an industrial 
dispute within the  meaning of the Industrial Disputes Act,  1947  (14 of 1947), o r of any corresponding 
law relating to investigation and settlement of industrial disputes in force in a State and the provisions 
of that Act or, as the case may be, such law, shall, save as otherwise expressly provided, apply 
accordingly.  
23. Presumption about accuracy of balance -sheet and profit and loss account of 
corporations and companies .—(1) Where, during the course of proceedings before any arbitrator or 
Tribunal under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947 ), or under any corresponding law 
relating to investigation and settlement of industrial dispu tes in force in a State (herein after in this 
section  2[and in  3[sections 24 and 25 ] referred to as the “said authority ”) to which any dispute of the 
nature specified in section 22 has been referre d, the balance -sheet and the profit and loss account of 
an employer, being a corporation or a company (other than a banking company), du ly audited by the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or by auditors duly qualified to act as auditors of 
companies  under sub -section ( 1) of section 226 of the Companies Act , 1956 (1 of 1956 ), are produced 
before it, then, the s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 12]
n ( 1) of section 226 of the Companies Act , 1956 (1 of 1956 ), are produced 
before it, then, the said authority may presume the statements and particulars contained in such 
balance -sheet and profit and loss account to be accurate and it shall not be necessary for the 
corporation or the company to prove the accuracy of such statements and particulars by the filing of 
an affidavit or by any other mode:  
Provided that where the said authority is satisfied that the statement and particulars contained in 
the balance -sheet or the profit and loss account of the corporation or the company  are not accurate, it 
may take such steps as it thinks necessary to find o ut the accuracy of such statement s and particulars.  
(2) When an application is made to the said authority by any trade union being a party to the 
dispute or where there is no trade union, by the employees being a party to the dispute, requiring any 
clarifi cation relating to any item in the balance -sheet or the profit and loss account, it may, after 
satisfying itself that such clarification is necessary, by order, direct the corporation or, as the case may 
be, the company, to furnish to the trade union or th e employees such clarification within such time as 
may be specified in the direction and the corporation or, as the case may be, the company, shall 
comply with such direction.  
4[24. Audited accounts of banking companies not to be questioned .—(1) Where any dispute of 
the nature specified in section 22 between an employer, being a banking company, and its employees 
has been referred to the said authority under that section and during the course of proceedings the 
accounts of the banking company duly audited a re produced before it, the said authority shall not 
permit any trade union or employees to question the correctness of such accounts, but the trade union 
or the employees may be permitted to obtain from the banking company such information as is 
necessary for verifying the amount 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 12]
itted to obtain from the banking company such information as is 
necessary for verifying the amount of bonus due under this Act.  
(2) Not hing contained in sub -section ( 1) shall enable the trade union on the employees to obtain 
any information which the banking company is not compelled to furnish under the provisions of 
section 34A  of the  Banking Regulation Act, 1949 ( 10 of 1949).]  
25. Audit of accounts of employers, not being corporations or companies .—(1) Where any 
dispute of the nature specified in section  22 between an employer, not being a corporation or a 
company, and  his empl oyees has been referred to the said authority under that section and the 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 66 of 1980, s. 12, for “sections 22, 23 and 25” (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
2. Subs. by Act 23 of 1976, s. 16, for “ and in sections 24 and 25” (w.e.f. 25 -9-1975).  
3. Subs. by Act 66 of 1980, s. 13, for “section 25” (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
4. Ins. by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 13]
13 
 accounts of such employer audited by any auditor duly qualified to act as auditor of companies under 
sub-section ( 1) of section  226 of the Companies Act,  1956  (1 of 1956), are produced before the said 
authority, the provisions of section  23, shall, so far as may be, apply to the accounts so audited.  
(2) When the said authority finds that the accounts of such employer have not been audited by 
any such auditor and it is of opinion  that an audit of the accounts of such employer is necessary for 
deciding the question referred to it, then, it may, by order , direct the employer to get  his accounts 
audited within such time as may be specified in the direction or within such further time  as it may 
allow by such auditor or auditors as it thinks fit and thereupon the employer shall comply with such 
direction.  
(3) Where an employer fails to get the accounts audited under sub -section ( 2) the said authority 
may, without prejudice to the provis ions of section  28, get the accounts audited by such auditor or 
auditors as it thinks fit.  
(4) When the accounts are audited under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) the provisions of 
section  23 shall, so far as may be, apply to the accounts so audited.  
(5) The expenses of, and incidental to, any audit under sub -section ( 3) (including the 
remuneration of the auditor or auditors) shall be determined by the said authority (which 
determination shall be final) and paid by the employer and in default of such payment shall be 
recoverable from the employer in the manner provided in section  21. 
 26. Maintenance of registers, records, etc .—Every employer shall prepare and maintain such 
registers, records and other documents in such form and in such manner as may b e prescribed.  
27. Inspectors .—(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
appoint such person as it thinks fit to be Inspectors for the purposes of this Act and may define the 
limits within which they s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 13]
nks fit to be Inspectors for the purposes of this Act and may define the 
limits within which they shall exercise jurisdi ction.  
(2) An Inspector appointed under sub -section ( 1) may, for the purpose of ascertaining whether 
any of the provisions of t his Act has been complied with — 
(a) require an employer to furnish such information as he may consider necessary;  
(b) at any reasonable time and with such assistance, if any, as he thinks fit, enter any 
establishment or any premises connected therewith and require any one found in charge thereof to 
produce before  him for examination any accounts, books, registers and other docum ents relating 
to the employment of persons or the payment of salary o f wage or bonus in the establishment;  
(c) examine with respect to any matter relevant to any of the purposes aforesaid, the 
employer,  his agent or servant or any other person found in cha rge of the establishment or any 
premises connected therewith or any person whom the Inspector has reasonable cause to believe 
to be or to have been an employee in the establishment;  
(d) make copies of, or take extracts from, any book, register or other doc ument maintained in 
relation to the establishment;  
(e) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed.  
(3) Every Inspector shall be deemed to be a public servant within the  meaning of the Indian penal 
Code (45  of 1860).  
(4) Any person required to produce  any accounts, book, register or other documents or to give 
information by an Inspector under sub -section ( 1) shall be legally bound to do so.  
1[(5) Nothing contained in this section shall enable an Inspector to require a banking company to 
furnish or disc lose any statement or information or to produce, or give inspection of , any of its books 
of account or other documents, which a banking company cannot be compelled to furnish, disclose, 
produce or give inspection of, under the provisions of section  34A of the Banking Regulation 
Act, 1949  (10 of 1
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 13]
e inspection of, under the provisions of section  34A of the Banking Regulation 
Act, 1949  (10 of 1949).]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 66 of 1980, s. 15 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 14]
14 
  28. Penalty .—If any pe rson— 
(a) contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or any rule made thereunder; or  
(b) to whom a direction is given or a requisition is made under this Act fails to comply with 
the direction or requisition,   
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine 
which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.  
29. Offences by companies .—(1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without  his knowledge or that he exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section  (1), where an offence under this Act has 
been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent 
or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or 
other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed 
to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to b e proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any  body corporate and includes a firm or other associa tion of 
individuals; and  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm,  means a partner in the  firm.  
30. Cognizance of offences .—(1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under 
this Act, save on complaint made by or under the authority of the appropriate Government  1[or an 
office
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 14]
Act, save on complaint made by or under the authority of the appropriate Government  1[or an 
officer of that Government (not below the rank of a Regional Labour Commissioner in the case of an 
officer of the Central Government, and not below the rank of a Labour Commissioner in the case of 
an officer of the State Government) specially author ised in this behalf by that Government].  
(2) No court inferior to that of a presidency magistrate or a magistrate of the first class shall try 
any offence punishable under this Act.  
31. Protection of action taken under the Act .—No suit, prosecution or othe r legal proceeding 
shall lie against the Government or any officer of the Government for anything which is in good faith 
done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rule made thereunder.  
2[31A. Special provision with respect to payment of bonus linked with production or 
productivity .—Notwithstanding a nything contained in this Act, — 
(i) where an agreement or a settlement has been entered into by the employees with their 
employer before the commencement of the Payment of  Bonus (Amendment) 
Act, 1976  (23 of 1976), or  
(ii) where the employees enter into any agreement or settlement with their em ployer after 
such commencement,  
for payment of an annual bonus linked with production or productivity in lieu of bonus based on 
profits payable under th is Act, then, such employees shall be entitled to receive bonus due to them 
under such agreement or settlement, as the case may be:  
3[Provided  that any such agreement or settlement whereby the employees relinquish their right to 
receive the minimum bonus u nder section  10 shall be null and void in so far as it purports to deprive 
them of such right:] ] 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 66 of 1980, s. 16 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).   
2. Ins. by Act 23 of 1976, s. 19 (w.e.f. 25 -9-1975).  
3. Ins. by Act 66 of 1980, s. 17 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 14]
 s. 19 (w.e.f. 25 -9-1975).  
3. Ins. by Act 66 of 1980, s. 17 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 15]
15 
 1[Provided  further that] such employees shall not be entitled to be paid such bon us in excess of 
twenty per cent.  of the salary or wage earned by them during the relevant accounting year.  
32. Act not to apply to certain classes of employees .—Nothing  in this Act shall apply to — 
(i) 2[employees employed by any insurer carrying on general insurance business and the ] 
employees employed by the Life Insurance Corporation of India;  
(ii) seamen as defined in clause ( 42) of section 3 of th e Merchant Shipping Act, 1958                 
(44 of 1958);  
(iii) employees  registered or listed under any scheme made under the Dock Workers 
(Regulation of Employment ) Act, 1948 ( 9 of 1948), and employed by registered or listed 
employers;  
(iv) employees employed by an establishment engaged in any industry carried on by or under 
the authority of any department of the Central Government or a State Government or a local 
authority;  
(v) employees employed by — 
(a) the Indian Red Cross Society or any other institution of a like nature (including its 
branches);  
(b) universities  and other educational institutions;  
(c) institutions (including hospitals, chambers of commerce and social welfare 
institutions) established not for purposes of profit;  
3*   *   *   *  *; 
4*   *   *   *  *; 
(viii) employees  employed by the Reserve Bank of India;  
(ix) employees employed by — 
(a) the Industrial Finance Corporation of India;  
(b) any Financial Corporation established under section 3, or any Joint Financial 
Corporation established under section 3A, of the State Financial Corporations Act, 1951            
(63 of 1951);  
(c) the Deposit Insurance Corporation;  
5[(d) the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development;]  
(e) the Unit Trust of India;  
(f) the Industrial Development Bank of India;  
6[(fa) the Small In dustries Development Bank of India established under sec tion 3 of the 
Small Industries Development Bank of India Act, 1989  (39 of 1989
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 15]
tablished under sec tion 3 of the 
Small Industries Development Bank of India Act, 1989  (39 of 1989) ;] 
7[(ff) the National Housing Bank;]  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 66 of 1980,  s. 17,  for “Provided that” (w.e.f. 21 -7-1980).  
2. The words in brackets shall stand omitted  (date to be notified) by Act  62 of 1968, s . 41. 
3. Clause ( vi) omitted by Act 45 of 2007, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -4-2006).  
4. Clause ( vii) omitted by Act 66 of 1980, s. 18 (w.e.f. 21 -7-1980).  
5. Subs. by Act 61 of 1981, s. 61 and the Second Schedule , for sub -clause ( d) (w.e.f. 2 -7-1982).  
6. Ins. by Act 39 of 1989 , s. 53 and the Second Schedule  (w.e.f. 7 -3-1990).  
7. Ins. by Act 53 of 1987, s. 56 and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 9 -7-1988).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 16]
16 
 (g) any other financial institution  1[(other than a banking company)], being an 
establishment in public sector, which the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gaze tte, specify, having regard to — 
(i) its capital structure;  
(ii) its objectives and the nature of its activities;  
(iii) the  nature and extent of financial assistance or any concession given to it by 
the Government; and  
(iv) any other relevant factor;  
2*   *   *   *  *; 
(xi) employees employed by inland water transport establishments operating on routes 
passing through any othe r country.  
33. [ Act to apply to certain pending disputes regarding payment of bonus .]—Rep. by the Payment 
of Bonus (Amendment) Act , 1976  (23 of 1976), s. 23 (w.e.f . 25-9-1975).  
3[34. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with the Act .—Subject to the provisions of 
section 31 A, the provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent 
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in the terms of any award, 
agreement, settlement or contract of service.]  
35. Saving .—Nothing contained in this Act shall be deemed to affect the provisions of the Coal 
Mines Provident Fund and Bonus Schemes Act, 1948  (46 of 1948) , or of any scheme made 
thereunder.  
36. Power of exemption .—If the appropriate Government, having regard to the financial position 
and other relevant circumstances of any establishment or class of esta blishment, is of opinion that it  
will not be in public interest to apply all or any of the provisions of this Act the reto, it may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, exempt for such period as may be specified therein and subject to 
such conditions as it may think fit to impose, such establishment or class of establishment s from all or 
any of the provisions of this Act. 
37. [Power to remove difficulties ].—Rep. by the Payment of Bonus (Amendment)  
Act, 1976  (23 of 1976), s. 23 (w.e.f. 25-9-1975).  
38. Po
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 16]
p. by the Payment of Bonus (Amendment)  
Act, 1976  (23 of 1976), s. 23 (w.e.f. 25-9-1975).  
38. Power to make rules .—4[(1) The Central Government may, subject to the condition of 
previous publication, by notification  in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of 
this Act.]  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provi de for— 
(a) the authority for granting permission under the proviso to sub -clause ( iii) of clause ( 1) of 
section 2 ; 
(b) the preparation of registers, records and other documents and the form and manner in 
which such registers, records and documents may b e maintained under section 26 ; 
(c) the powers which may be exercised by an Inspector under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 27 ; 
(d) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be a fter it is made, before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days, which may be comprised in 
one session  5[or in two or more successive sessions], and if before the expiry of the 
session  6[immediately following the s ession or the successive sessions aforesaid], both Houses agree 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 66 of 1980, s. 18 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
2. Clause ( x) omitted by Act 23 of 1976, s.  20 (w.e.f . 25-9-1975).  
3. Subs. by s. 22, ibid., for section 34 (w.e.f. 25 -9-1975).  
4. Subs. by Act 6 of 2016, s.  4, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -4-2014).  
5. Subs. by Act 23 of 1976, s. 24, for “or in two successive sessions” (w.e.f. 25 -9-1975).  
6. Subs. by s. 2 4, ibid., for “in which it is so laid or the session immediately following” (w.e.f. 25 -9-1975).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 17]
17 
 in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case m ay be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule.  
39. Application of certain law not barred .—Save as otherwise expressly provided, the 
provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 1947  (14 of 1947), or any corresponding law relating to investigation and settlement of industrial 
disputes in force in a State.  
40. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Payment of  Bonus O rdinance,  1965  (3 of 1965), is hereby 
repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance 
shall be deemed to have been done or taken under this Act as if this Act had commenced on the  29th 
May,  1965.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 18]
18 
 1[THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See section 4 ( a)] 
COMPUTATION OF GROSS PROFITS  
Accounting Year ending  ...... 
 
Item 
No. Particulars  Amount of 
sub-items  Amount of  
main items  Remarks  
2[1. Net Profit , as show in the Profit and 
Loss Account after making usual and 
necessary provisions.  Rs. Rs.  
2. Add back  provision for:     
(a) Bonus to employees.     
(b) Depreciation.     
(c) Development Rebate Reserve .   See foot-note (1)  
(d) Any other reserves.    See foot-note (1)  
Total of Item No. 2      .         .             .  Rs.   
3. Add back  also:    See foot-note (1)  
(a) Bonus paid to employees in respect 
of previous accounting years.    See foot-note (1)  
(b) The amount debited in respect of 
gratuity paid or payable to 
employees in excess of the 
aggregate of —    
(i) the amount, if any, paid to, or 
provided for payment to, an 
approved gratuity fund; and    
(ii) the amount actually paid to 
employees on their retirement 
or on termination of their 
employment for any reason .    
(c) Donation s in excess of the amount 
admissible for income -tax.    
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 66 of 1980, s. 19 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
2. Where the profit subject to taxation is shown in the Profit and Loss Account and the provision  made for taxes on income 
is shown, the actual provision for taxes on income shall be deducted from the profit.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 19]
19 
 Item 
No. Particulars  Amount of 
sub-items  Amount of main 
items  Remarks  
  Rs. Rs.  
 (d) Capital expenditure (other 
than capital expenditure on 
scientific research which is 
allowed as a deduction under 
any law for the time being in 
force relating to direct taxes) 
and capital losses (other than 
losses on sale of capital 
assets on which depreciation 
has been allowed for 
income -tax).   See foot-note (1) 
(e) Any amount certified by the 
Reserve Bank of India in 
terms of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 34A of the Banking 
Regulation  Act, 1949           
(10 of 1949).     
(f) Losses of, or expenditure 
relating to, any business 
situated outside India.     
Total of Item No. 3 .     .    .       .  Rs.   
4. Add also  income, profits or gains 
(if any) credited directly to 
published or disclosed reserves, 
other than —    
(i) capital receipts and capital 
profits (including profits on 
the sale of capital asse ts on 
which depreciation has not 
been allowed for income -
tax);    
(ii) profits of, and receipts 
relating to, any business 
situated outside India;     
(iii) income of foreign banking 
companies from investment 
outside India.     
Net total of Item No. 4 .  .  .  .   .     Rs.   
5. Total of Item Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 4   Rs. 
   
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 20]
20 
 Item 
No.  Particulars   Amount of 
sub-items  Amount of  
main items  Remarks  
  Rs. Rs.  
6. Deduct :    
(a) Capital receipts and capital 
profits (other than profits on 
the sale of assets on which 
depreciation has been 
allowed for income -tax).   See foot-note (2)  
(b) Profits of, and receipts 
relating to, any business 
situated outside India.    See foot -note (2) 
(c) Income of foreign banking 
companies from investments 
outside India.    See foot-note (2) 
(d) Expenditure or losses (if any ) 
debited directly to published 
or disclosed reserves, other 
than—    
(i) capital expenditure and 
capital losses (other 
than losses on sale of 
capital assets on which 
depreciation has not 
been  allowed for 
income -tax);    
(ii) losses of any business 
situated outside India.     
(e) In the ca se of foreign banking 
companies proportionate 
administrative  (overhead) 
expenses of Head Office 
allocable to Indian business .   See foot-note (3)  
(f) Refund of any excess direct 
tax paid for previous 
accounting years and excess 
provision, if any, of previous 
accounting years, relating to 
bonus, depreciation, or 
development rebate, if 
written back.    See foot-note (2)  
(g) Cash subsidy, if any, given by 
the Government or by any body 
corporate established by any 
law for the time being in force 
or by any other agency through 
budgetary  grants, whether given 
directly o r through any agency 
for specified purposes and the 
proceed s of which are reserved 
for such purposes.    See foot-note (2)  
Total of Item No. 6 .     .    .     .     
7. Gross Profits for purposes of 
bonus (Item No. 5 minus Item 
No. 6)   Rs. Rs. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 21]
21 
 [Explanation .—In sub -item ( b) of Item 3, “approved gratuity fund ” has the same meaning 
assigned to it in clause ( 5) of section 2 of the Income -tax Act.  
Foot -notes— 
(1) It, and to the extent, charged to Profit and Loss Account.  
(2) If, and to the extent, credited to Profit and Loss Account.  
(3) In the proportion of Indian Gross Profit (Item No. 7) to Total World Gross Profit (as per 
Consolidated Profit and Loss Account adjusted as in Item No.  2 above only).]  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 22]
22 
 1[THE SECOND SCHEDULE]  
2[See section  4(b)] 
COMPUTATION OF  GROSS PROFITS  
Accounting Year  ending......  
 
Item 
No. Particulars  Amount of 
sub-items  Amount of  
main items  Remarks  
  Rs. Rs.  
1. Net Profit as per Profit and Loss 
Account.     
2. Add back  provision for:     
(a) Bonus to employees.     
(b) Depreciation.     
(c) Direct taxes, including the 
provision (if Any) for previous 
accounting years.     
3[(d) development 
rebate /Investment 
allowance /development 
allowance  reserve .]   See foot-note (1)  
(e) Any other reserves.    See foot-note (1) 
 Total of Item No. 2 .  .    .      .   .  Rs.   
3. Add back  also :    
(a) Bonus paid to employees in 
respect of previous accounting 
years.    See foot-note (1)  
4[(aa) The amount debited in 
respect of gratuity paid or 
payable to employees  in 
excess of the aggregate of —    
(i) the amount, if any, paid to, 
or provided for payment to, 
an approved gratuity fund; 
and    
(ii) the amount actually paid to 
employees on their 
retirement or on termination 
of their employment for any 
reason.]     
  
                                                           
1.  The First Schedule renumbered as the Second Schedule by Ac t 66 of 1980, s. 19 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
2. Subs. by s. 19, ibid.,  for “( See section 4)” (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
3. Subs. by s. 19, ibid., for entry ( d) (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
4. Ins. by Act 23 of 1976, s.  26 (w.e.f. 25 -9-1975).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 23]
23 
 Ite
m 
No. Particulars  Amount of 
sub-items  Amount of            
main items  Remarks  
  Rs. Rs.  
 (b) Donations in excess of the among 
admissible for income -tax.    
(c) Any annuity due, or commuted 
value of any annuity paid, under 
the provisions of section 280D of 
the Income -tax Act during the 
accounting year.     
(d) Capital expenditure (other than 
capital expenditure on scientific 
research which is allowed as a 
deduction under any law for the 
time being in force relating to 
direct taxes) and capital losses 
(other than losses on sale of 
capital assets on which 
deprec iation has been allowed for 
income -tax or agricultural              
income -tax).   See foot-note ( 1) 
(e) Losses of, or expenditure relating 
to, any business situated outside 
India.     
 Total of Item No. 3     .           .         .  Rs.   
4. Add also  Income, profits or gains (if 
any) credited di rectly to reserves, 
other than —    
 (i) capital receipts and capital profits 
(including profits on the sale of 
capital assets on which 
depreciation has not been allowed 
for income -tax or agricultural 
income -tax);    
(ii) profits of, and receipts relating to, 
any business situated outside 
India;     
(iii) income of foreign concerns from 
investments outside India.     
 Net total of Item No. 4 .      .    .      . Rs.   
5. Total of Item Nos. 1, 2, 3, and 4 .    .  . Rs.   
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 24]
24 
 Item 
No. Particulars  Amount of 
sub-items  Amount of  
main items  Remarks  
  Rs. Rs.  
6. Deduct  :    
(a) Capital receipts and capital 
profits (other than profits on 
the sale of assets on which 
depreciation has been allowed 
for income -tax or agricultural            
income -tax).   See foot-note ( 2) 
(b) Profits of, and receipts relating 
to, any business situated 
outside India.    See foot-note ( 2) 
(c) Income of foreign concerns 
from investment outside India.    See foot-note ( 2) 
(d) Expenditure or losses (if any ) 
debited di rectly to reserves, 
other than —    
(i) capital expenditure and 
capital losses (other than 
losses on sale of capital 
assets on which 
depreciation has not been 
allowed for income -tax or 
agricultural income -tax);    
(ii) losses of any business 
situated outside India.     
(e) In the case of foreign concerns 
proportionate administrative 
(overhead) expenses of Head 
Office allocable to Indian 
business .   See foot-note ( 3) 
(f) Refund of any direct tax paid 
for previous accounting years 
and excess provision, if any, of 
previous accounting years 
relating to bonus, depreciation, 
taxation or development rebate 
or development allowance, if 
written back.    See foot-note ( 2) 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 25]
25 
 Item 
No. Particulars  Amount of 
sub-items  Amount of main 
items  Remarks  
  Rs. Rs.  
 1[(g) Cash subsidy, if any, given by 
the Government or by any 
body corporate established 
by any law for the time being 
in force or by any other 
agency through budgetary 
grants, whether given 
directly or through any 
agency for specified 
purposes and the proceed s of 
which are reserved for such 
purposes.]     
 Total of Item No. 6 .          .           . Rs.   
7. Gross Profit for purposes of bonus 
(Item No. 5 minus Item No. 6)  Rs.   
2[Explanation .—In sub -item ( aa) of Item 3, “approved gratuity fund ” has the same meaning 
assigned to it in clause ( 5) of section 2 of the Income -tax Act.]  
Foot -notes— 
(1) If, and to the extent, cha rged to Profit and Loss Account.  
(2) If, and to the extent, credited to Profit and Loss Account.  
(3) In the proportion of Indian Gross Profit (Item No.  7) to Total World Gross Profit (as per 
Consolidated  Profit and Loss Account, adjusted as in Item No. 2 above only).   
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 23 of 1976, s. 26, for sub -item ( g) (w.e.f. 25 -9-1975).  
2. Explanation  inserted by s. 26, ibid. (w.e.f. 25 -9-1975).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 26]
26 
 1[THE THIRD SCHEDULE ] 
[See section  6(d)] 
 
Item 
No. Category of employer  Further sums to be deducted    
(1) (2) (3)   
1. 2[Compan y, other than a banking 
company ]   (i) The dividends payable on its preference 
share capital for the accounting year 
calculated at the actual rate at which such 
dividends are payable;    
  (ii) 8.5 per cent . of its paid up equity share 
capital as at the commencement of the 
accounting year;   
  (iii) 6 per cent . of its reserves shown in its 
balance -sheet as at the commencement of 
the accounting year, including any profits 
carried forward from the previous 
accounting year:    
 Provided  that where the employer is a foreign 
company within the meaning of          
section 591 of the Companies Act, 1956                 
(1 of 1956), the total amount to be deduced 
under this Item shall be 8.5 per cent . on the 
aggregate of the value of the net fixed assets 
and the current assets of the company in 
India after deducting t he amount of its 
current liabilities (other than any amount 
shown as payable by the company  to its 
Head Office whether to wards any advance 
made by the Head Office or otherwise or 
any interest paid by the company to its 
Head Office) in India.   
3[2. Banking  company  (i) The dividends payable on its preference 
share capital for the accounting year 
calculated at the rate at which such 
dividends are payable;   
  (ii) 7.5 per cent. of its paid up equity share 
capital as at the commencement  of the 
accounting year;   
  (iii) 5 per cent. of its reserves shown in its 
balance sheet as at the commencement of 
the accounting year, in cluding any profits 
carried for ward from the previous 
accounting year;   
  
                                                           
1. The Second Schedule renumbered as the Third Schedule by Act 66 of 1980, s. 20 (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).   
2.  Subs. by s. 20, ibid., for “Company” (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
3. Ins. by s. 20, ibid. (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 26]
 20, ibid., for “Company” (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
3. Ins. by s. 20, ibid. (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 27]
27 
 Item No.  Category of employer  Further sums to be deducted   
(1) (2) (3)  
  (iv) any sum which , in respect of the account ing 
year, is transferred by it —  
  (a) to a reserve fund under  sub-section ( 1) 
of section 17 of the Banking Regulation 
Act, 1949 (10 of 1949); or   
  (b) to any reserves in India in pursuance of 
any direction or advice given by the  
Reserve Bank of India.   
 
 
  whichever is higher:  
 
  Provided  that where the banking company is a 
foreign company within the meaning of 
section 591 of the Companies Act, 1956              
(1 of 1956), the amount to be deducted 
under this Item shall be the aggregate of —  
  (i) the dividends payable to its preference 
shareholders for the accounting year at the 
rate a t which such dividends are pay able 
on such amount as bears the same 
proportion to its total preference share 
capital as its total working funds in India 
bear to its total world working funds;   
  (ii) 7.5 per cent. of such amount as bears the 
same proportion to its total paid up equity 
share capital as its total working funds in 
India bear to its total world working funds;   
  (iii) 5 per cent. of such amount as bears the 
same proportion to its total  disclosed 
reserves as its working funds in India bear 
to its total world working funds;   
  (iv) any sum which, in respect of the accounting 
year, is deposited by it with the Reserve 
Bank of India under sub -clause ( ii) of 
clause ( b) of   sub-section ( 2) of section 11 
of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 
of 1949), not exceeding the amount 
required under the aforesaid provision to 
be so deposited.]   
3. Corporation  (i)  8.5 per cent. of its paid up  capital as at the 
commencement of the accounting year;   
  (ii)  6 per cent. of its reserve s, if any, shown in 
its balance -sheet as at the commencement 
of the accounting year, including any 
profits carried forward from the previous 
accounting year.   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 27]
carried forward from the previous 
accounting year.   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 28]
28 
 Item No.  Category of employer  Further sums to be deducted   
(1) (2) (3)  
4. Co-operative society  (i) 8.5 per cent. of the capital invested by such 
society in its establishment as evidenced 
from its books of accounts at the 
commencement of the accounting year;   
  (ii) such sum as has been carried forward in 
respect of the accounting year to a reserve 
fund under any law relating to co -
operative societies for the time being in 
force.   
5. Any other employer not falling 
under any of the aforesaid 
categories.   (iii) 8.5 per cent. of the capital invested by him 
in his establishment as evidence d from his 
books of accounts at the commencement 
of the  accounting year:   
  Provided  that where such employer  is a person 
to whom Chapter XXIIA of the              
Income -tax Act applies, the annuity deposit 
payable by him under the provisions of that 
Chapter during the accounting year shall 
also be deducted:   
  Provided  further that where such employer is a 
firm, an amount equal to  25 per cent. of the 
gross profits  derived by it from the 
establishment in respect of the accounting 
year after deducting depreciation in 
accordance with the provisions of clause 
(a) of section 6 by way of remuneration to 
all the partners taking part in the conduct of 
business of the estab lishment shall also be 
deducted, but where the partnership 
agreement, whether oral or written, 
provides for the payment  of remune ration 
to any such partner,  and—  
  (i) the total remuneration pay able to all such 
partners is  less than the said 25 per 
cent. , the amount payable, subject  to a 
maximum of  forty -eight  thousand rupees 
to each such  partner; or   
  (ii) the total remuneration pay able to all such 
partners is  higher than the said 25  per cent. , 
such percentage, or  a sum calculated at the 
rate of forty -eight thousand rupe es to each 
such partner, which ever is less, shall be 
deducted  under this proviso:   
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 28]
partner, which ever is less, shall be 
deducted  under this proviso:   
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 29]
29 
 Item No.  Category of employer  Further sums to be deducted   
(1) (2) (3)  
  Provided  also that where such employer  is an 
individu al or a Hindu undivided  family ,—  
  (i) an amount equal to 25 per  cent. of the 
gross profits  derived by such employer  
from the establishment in  respect of the 
accounting  year after deducting 
depreciation in accordance  with the 
provisions of  clause ( a) of section 6; or   
  (ii) forty -eight thousand  rupees,  
 
  whichever is less, by way of remuneration to 
such employer, shall also  be deducted.   
6. Any employer falling under Item  No. 
1 of Item No. 3 or Item No.  4 or 
Item No. 5 and being a  licensee 
within the meaning of 
the Electricity (Supply) Act, 
1948                (54 of 1948) . In addition to the sums deductible  under any 
of the aforesaid Items, such  sums as are 
required to be appropriated  by the 
licensee in respect of the  accounting 
year to a reserve under the  Sixth 
Schedule to that Act shall also  be 
deducted.   
Explanation. —The expression “reserves ” occurring in column ( 3) against Item Nos.  1[1(iii), 2(iii) 
and 3(ii)] shall not include any amou nt set apart for the purpose of — 
(i) payment  of any direct tax which, according to the balance -sheet, would be payable;  
(ii) meeting any depreciation admissible in accordance with the provisions of clause ( a) of 
section  6; 
(iii) payment of dividends which have been declared,  
but shall include — 
(a) any amount, over and above the amount referred to in clause ( i) of this  Explanation , set 
apart as specific reserve for purpose of payment of any direct tax; and  
(b) any amount set apart for  meeting any depreciation in excess of the amount admissible in 
accordance with the provisions of clause ( a) of section  6. 
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 66 of 1980, s. 20, for “1( iii) and 3( ii)” (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 29]
) and 3( ii)” (w.e.f. 21 -8-1980).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 30]
30 
 1[THE FOURTH SCHEDULE  
(See sections 15 and 16 ) 
In this Schedule, the t otal amount of bonus equal to 8 . 33 per  cent.  of the annual salary or wage 
payable to all the e mployees is assumed to be Rs. 1,  04, 167 . Accordingly, the maximum bonus to 
which all the employees are entitled to be paid (twenty per cent . of the annual salary or wage of al l 
the employees) would be Rs. 2, 50, 000 . 
 
Year  Amount equal To sixty per  
cent. or sixty -seven               
per cent., as the case may 
be, o f available surplus 
allocable as bonus Amount 
payable as 
bonus  Set on or set off of 
the year carried 
forward  Total set on or set off  
carried forward  
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)   
  Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs.   of (year)  
1 1,04,167  1,04,167**  Nil Nil   
2 6,35,000  2,50,000*  Set on  
2,50,000*  Set on  
2,50,000*  (2) 
3 2,20,000  2,50,000* 
(inclusive of 
30,000 from 
year-2) Nil Set on  
2, 20,000  (2) 
4 3,75,000  2,50,000*  Set on  
1,25,000  Set on  
2,20,000  
1,25,000   (2)  
 (4) 
5 1,40,000  2,50,000* 
(inclusive of 
1,10,000 from 
year-2) Nil Set on  
1,10,000  
1,25,000   (2)  
 (4) 
6 3,10,000  2,50,000*  Set on  
60,000  Set on  
Nil+ (2) 
        1,25,000  (4) 
        60,000  (6) 
7 1,00,000  2,50,000* 
(inclusive of 
1,25,000 from 
year-4 and 
25,000 from 
year-6) Nil Set on  
35,000  (6) 
8 Nil 
(due to loss)  1,04,167** 
(inclusive of 
35,000 from 
year-6) Set off  
69,167  Set off  
69,167  (8) 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 66 of 1980, s. 21, for the Third Schedule (w.e.f. 21-8-1980).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965.pdf - page 31]
31 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5)   
9 10,000  1,04,167**  Set off  
94,167  Set off  
69,167  
94,167  (8) 
(9) 
10 2,15,000  1,04,167** 
(after setting  
off 69,167 
from year -8 
and 41,666 
from year -9) Nil Set off  
52,501  (9) 
Notes— 
* Maximum  
+ The balance of Rs. 1,10,000 set on from year -2 lapses.  
**Minimum. ] 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY ACT, 1972.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY ACT, 1972  
______________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
2A. Continuous service.  
3. Controlling authority . 
4. Payment of gratuity . 
4A. Compulsory insurance.  
5. Power  to exempt . 
6. Nomination . 
7. Determination of the amount of gratuity . 
7A. Inspectors.  
7B. Powers of Inspectors.  
8. Recovery of gratuity . 
9. Penalties . 
10. Exemption of employer from liability in certain cases.  
11. Cognizance of offences.  
12. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
13. Protection of gratuity . 
14. Act to override other enactments, etc.  
15. Power to make rules . 
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY ACT, 1972.pdf - page 2]
2 
 THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY ACT, 1972  
ACT NO. 39 OF 1972  
[21st August , 1972.]  
An Act to provide for a scheme for the payment of gratuity to employees engaged in facto ries, 
mines, oilfields, plantations, ports, railway companies, shops or other establishments and for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -third Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the  Payment of 
Gratuity Act, 1972.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India:  
Provided that in so far as it relates to plantations or ports, it shall not extend to the State of Ja mmu 
and Ka shmir *. 
(3) It shall apply to — 
(a) every factory, mine, oilfield, planta tion, port and railway company;  
(b) every shop or establishment within the meaning of any law for the time being in force in 
relation to shops and establishments in a State, in which ten or more persons are employed, or were 
employed, on any day of the preceding twelve months;  
(c) such oth er establishments or class of establishments, in which ten or more employees are 
employed, or were employed, on any day of the preceding twelve months, as the Central Government 
may, by notification, specify in this behalf.  
1[(3A) A shop or establishment to which this Act has become applicable shall continue to be governed 
by this Act notwithstanding that the number of persons employed therein at any time after it has become 
so applicable falls below ten.]  
(4) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appropriate Government ” means, — 
(i) in relation to an establishment — 
(a) belonging to, or under the cont rol of, the Central Governme nt, 
(b) having branches in more than one State , 
(c) of a factory belonging to, or under the cont rol of, the Central Government,  
(d) o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY ACT, 1972.pdf - page 2]
ne State , 
(c) of a factory belonging to, or under the cont rol of, the Central Government,  
(d) of a major port, mine, oilfield or railway company, the Central Government , 
 (ii) in any ot her case, the State Government;  
(b) “completed year of service ” means co ntinuous service for one year;  
3[(c) “continuous service ” means continuous ser vice as defined in section 2A;]  
(d) “controlling authority ” means an authority appointed by the appropri ate Government under 
section 3;  
                                                           
1.  Ins. by Act 26 of 1984, s. 2 (w.e.f . 18-5-1984). 
2.16th September,  1972, vide notification No. S.O. 601(E) , dated 16th September,  1972, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part 
II, sec. 3( ii).  
3. Subs. by Act 26 of 1984, s. 3, for clause ( c) and the Explanations  (w.e.f. 18-5-1984 ). 
*. Vide notification No . S.O. 3912(E), dated 30th October, 2019, this Act is made applicable to the Union territory of Jammu and 
Kashmir and the Union territory of Ladakh.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY ACT, 1972.pdf - page 3]
3 
 1[(e) “employee ” means any person (other than an apprentice) who is employed for wages , 
whether the terms of such employment are express or implied, in any kind of work, manual or 
otherwise, in or in connection with the work of a factory, mine, oilfield, plantation, port, railway 
company, shop or other establishment to which this Act applies, but does not include any such person  
who holds a post under the Central Government or a State Government and is governed by any other 
Act or by any rules providing for payment of gratuity ;] 
(f) “employer ” means, in relation to any establishment, factory, mine, oilfield, plantation,  port, 
railway company or shop — 
(i) belonging to, or under the control of, the Central Government or a State Government, a 
person or authority appointed by the appropriate Government for the supervision and control of 
employees, or where no person or autho rity has been so appointed, the head of the Minist ry or the 
Department concerned,  
(ii) belonging to, or under the control of, any local authority, the person appointed by such 
authority for the supervision and control of employees or where no person has been so appointed, 
the chief executive officer of the local authority,  
(iii) in any oth er case, the person, who, or the authority which, has the ultimate control over 
the affairs of the establishment, factory, mine, oilfield, plantation, port, railway company or shop, 
and where the said affairs are entrusted to any other person, whether call ed a manager, managing 
director or by any other name, such person;  
(g) “factory ” has the meaning assigned to it in clause ( m) of section 2 of the Fa ctories Act, 1948 
(63 of 1948);  
(h) “family ”, in relation to an employee , shall be deemed to consist of — 
(i) in the case of a male employee, himself, his wife, his children, whether married or 
unmarried, his dependent parents 2[and the dependent parents of his wife and the widow] and 
children of his predeceased son, if an
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY ACT, 1972.pdf - page 3]
s 2[and the dependent parents of his wife and the widow] and 
children of his predeceased son, if any,  
(ii) in the case of a female employee,  herself, her husband, her children, whether married or 
unmarried, her dependent parents and the dependent parents of her husband and the widow and 
children of her predeceased son, if any:  
3*   *   *  *  *        * 
Explanation. —Where the personal law of an  employee permits the adoption by him of a 
child, any child lawfully adopted by him shall be deemed to be included in his family, and where 
a child of an employee has been adopted by another person and such adoption is, under the 
personal law of the person  making such adoption, lawful, such child shall be deemed to be 
excluded from the family of the employee;  
(i) “major port ” has the meaning assigned to it in clause ( 8) of section 3 of the Indian Ports Act, 
1908  (15 of 1908);  
(j) “mine ” has the meaning assi gned to it in clause ( j) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of th e Mines 
Act, 1952 (35 of 1952);  
4[(k) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the expression 
“notified ” shall be construed accordingly] ; 
(l) “oilfield ” has the meaning assigned to it in clause ( e) of section 3 of the Oilfields (Regulation 
and Devel opment) Act, 1948 (53 of 1948);  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 47 of 2009, s. 2, for clause ( e) (w.e.f. 3 -4-1997).  
2. Subs. by Act 22  of 1987, s. 2, for “and the wi dow” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1987).  
3. The proviso omitted by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1987).  
4. Subs . by Act  12 of 2018, s. 2 , for clause ( k) (w.e.f. 29 -3-2018).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY ACT, 1972.pdf - page 4]
4 
 (m) “plantation ” has the meaning assigned to it in clause ( f) of section 2 of the Plantations Labour 
Act, 1951 (69 of 1951);  
(n) “port” has the meaning assigned to it in clause ( 4) of section 3 of the India n Ports Act, 1908 
(15 of 1908);  
(o) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(p) “railway company ” has the meaning assigned to it in clause ( 5) of section 3 of the Indian 
Railways Act, 1890 (9 of 1890);  
(q) “retirement ” means termination of the service of an employee ot herwise than on 
superannuation;  
1[(r) “superannuation ”, in relation to an employee, means the attainment by the employee of such  
age as is fixed in the contract or conditions of service as the age on the attainment of which the 
employe e shall vacate the employment;]  
(s) “wages ” means all emoluments which are earned by an employee while on duty or on leave in 
accordance with the ter ms and conditions of his employment and which are paid or are payable to him 
in cash and includes dearness allowance but does not include any bonus, commission, house rent 
allowance, overtime wages and any other allowance.  
2[2A. Continuous service. —For the  purposes of this Act, — 
(1) an employee shall be said to be in continuous service for a period if he has, for that period, 
been in uninterrupted service,  including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness, 
accident, leave, absence from duty without leave (not being absence in respect of which an order 3*** 
treating the absence as break in service has been passed in accordance with the standing orders, rules 
or regulations governing the employees of the establishment), lay -off, strike or a loc k-out or cessation 
of work not due to any fault of the employee, whether such uninterrupted or interrupted service was 
rendered before or afte r the commencement of this Act;  
(2) where an employee (not being an employee employed in a seasonal establishment)  is not in 
continuous service within 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY ACT, 1972.pdf - page 4]
 (not being an employee employed in a seasonal establishment)  is not in 
continuous service within the meaning of clause ( 1), for any period of one year or six months, he shall 
be deemed to be in continuo us service under the employer — 
(a) for the said period of one year, if the employee during the period of twelve ca lendar 
months preceding the date with reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked 
under th e employer for not less than — 
(i) one hundred and ninety days, in the case of an employee employed below the ground 
in a mine or in an establish ment which works for less than six days in a week; and  
(ii) two hundred and  forty days, in any other case;  
(b) for the said period of six months, if the employee during the period of six calendar 
months preceding the date with reference to which the calcu lation is to be made, has actually 
worked under the employer for not less than — 
(i) ninety -five days, in the case of an employee employed below the ground in a mine or 
in an establishment which works for less than six days in a week; and  
(ii) one hundred and twenty days, in any other case.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 1984, s. 2, for clause ( r) (w.e.f. 1 -7-1984).  
2. Ins. by Act 26 of 1984, s. 4 (w.e.f. 18 -5-1984).  
3. The words “imposing a punishment or penalty or ” omitted by Act 22 of 1987, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1987).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY ACT, 1972.pdf - page 5]
5 
 1[Explanation. —For the purposes of clause ( 2), the number of days on which an employee 
has actually worked under an employer sh all include the days on which — 
(i) he has been laid -off under an agreement or as permitted by standing orders made 
under the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946 (20 of 1946), or under the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), or under any other law a pplicable to the 
establishment;  
(ii) he has been on leave with full wage s, earned in the previous year;  
(iii) he has been absent due to temporary disablement caused by accident arising out of 
and in th e course of his employment; and  
(iv) in the case of a female, she has been  on maternity leave; so, however, that the total 
period of such maternity leave  does not exceed  2[such period as may be notified by the 
Central Government from time to time] ;] 
(3) where an employee, employed in a seasonal establishment, is not in continuous service within 
the meaning of clause ( 1), for any period of one year or six months, he shall be deemed to be in 
continuous service under the employer for such period if he has actually worked for not less than 
seventy -five per cent. of the numbe r of days on which the establishment was in operation during such 
period.]  
3. Controlling authority. —The appropriate Government may, by notification, appoint any officer to 
be a controlling authority, who shall be responsible for the administration of this  Act and different 
controlling authorities may be appointed for different areas.  
4. Payment of gratuity. —(1) Gratuity shall be payable to an employee on the termination of his 
employment after he has rendered continuous service for not les s than five years ,— 
(a) on his superannuation, or  
(b) on hi s retirement or resignation, or  
(c) on his death or disablem ent due to accident or disease:  
Provided that the completion of continuous service of five years shall not be necessary where the 
termination of the em
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY ACT, 1972.pdf - page 5]
mpletion of continuous service of five years shall not be necessary where the 
termination of the emplo yment of any employee is due to death or disablement:  
3[Provided further that in the case of death of the employee, gratuity payable to him shall be paid to 
his nominee or, if no nomination has been made, to his heirs, and where any such nominees or heirs  is a 
minor, the share of such minor, shall be deposited with the controlling authority who shall invest the same 
for the benefit of such minor in such bank or other financial institution, as may be prescribed, until such 
minor attains ma jority.]  
Explanati on.—For the purposes of this section, disablement means such disablement as incapacitates 
an employee for the work which he was capable of performing before the accident or disease  resulting in 
such disablement.  
(2) For every completed year of service or part thereof in excess of six months, the employer shall 
pay gratuity to an employee at the rate of fifteen days ’ wages based on the rate of wages last d rawn by the 
employee concerned:  
Provided that in the case of a piece -rated employee, daily wages shall be computed on the average of 
the total wages received by him for a period of three months immediately preceding the termination of his 
employment, and, for this purpose, the wages paid for any overtime work shall not be taken into account:  
                                                           
1. Explanation  inserted  by Act 22 of 1987, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1987).  
2. Subs. by Act 12 of 2018, s. 3 , for “twelve weeks”  (w.e.f. 29-3-2018).  
3. Subs. by Act 2 2 of 1987 , s. 4, for the second proviso (w.e.f. 1 -10-1987).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY ACT, 1972.pdf - page 6]
6 
 Provided furth er that in the case of 1[an employee who is employed in a seasonal establishment and 
who is not so employed throughout the year], the employer shall pay the gratuity at the rate of seven days ’ 
wages for each season.  
2[Explanation .—In the case of a monthly  rated employee, the fifteen days ’ wages shall be calculated 
by dividing the monthly rate of wages last drawn by him by twenty -six and multip lying the quotient by 
fifteen.]  
(3) The amount of gratuity payable to an employee shall not e xceed 3[ 4[such amount  as may be 
notified by the Central Government from time to time] ]. 
(4) For the purpose of computing the gratuity payable to an employee who is employed, after his 
disablement, on reduced wages, his wages for the period preceding his disablement shall be t aken to be 
the wages received by him during that period, and his wages for the period subsequent to his disablement 
shall be taken  to be the wages as so reduced.  
(5) Nothing in this section shall affect the right of an employee receive better terms of grat uity under 
any award or agreement or contract with the employer.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) the gratuity of an employee, whose services have been terminated for any act, wilful omission 
or negligence causing any damage or loss to, or destruction of, property belonging to the employer, 
shall be forfeited to the extent o f the damage or loss so caused;  
(b) the gratuity payable to an employee 5[may be wholly or partially forfeited] — 
(i) if the services of such employee have been terminated for his riotous or disorderly conduct 
or any oth er act violence on his part, or  
(ii) if the services of such employee have been terminated for any act which constitutes an 
offence involving moral turpitude, provided that such offence is com mitted by him in the course of 
his employment.  
6*   *    *    *    * 
7[4A. Compulsory insurance .—(1) With effect from such date as may be no
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY ACT, 1972.pdf - page 6]
t.  
6*   *    *    *    * 
7[4A. Compulsory insurance .—(1) With effect from such date as may be notified by the appropriate 
Government in this behalf, every employer, other than an employer or an establishment belonging to, or 
under the control of, the Central Government or a State Government, shall, subject to the provisions of 
sub-section ( 2), obtain an insurance in the manner prescribed, for his liability for payment towards the 
gratuity under this Act, from the Life Insurance Corporation of India established under the Life Insurance 
Corporation of India Act, 1956 ( 31 of 1956) o r any other prescribed insurer:  
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different establishments or class of establi shments  
or for different areas.  
(2) The appropriate Government may, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, exempt every 
employer who had already established an approved gratuity fund in respect of his employees and who 
desires to continue such arrangeme nt, and every employer employing five hundred or more persons who 
establishes an approved gratuity fund in the manner prescribed from the provisions of sub -section ( 1). 
(3) For the purpose of effectively implementing the provisions of this section, every e mployer shall 
within such time as may be prescribed get his establishment registered with the controlling authority in 
the prescribed manner and no employer shall be registered under the provisions of this section unless he 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 1984, s. 3, for “an employee  employed in a seasonal establishment” (w.e.f. 1 -7-1984).  
2. Explanation  inserted by Act  22 of 1987, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1987).  
3. Subs. by Act 15 of 2010, s. 2, for “three lakhs and fifty thousand rupees”  (w.e.f . 24-5-2010).  
4. Subs. by Act 12 of 2018, s. 4, for “ten lakh rupees” (w.e.f. 29 -3-2018) . 
5. Subs. by Act 25 of 1984, s. 3, for “shall be wholly forfeited” (w.e.f. 1 -7-1984).  

<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY ACT, 1972.pdf - page 6]
-3-2018) . 
5. Subs. by Act 25 of 1984, s. 3, for “shall be wholly forfeited” (w.e.f. 1 -7-1984).  
6. Sub -section ( 7) omitted by Act 34 of 1994, s. 3 (w.e.f . 24-5-1994).  
7. Ins. by Act 22 of 1987, s. 5.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY ACT, 1972.pdf - page 7]
7 
 has taken an insurance referred to in sub -section ( 1) or has established an approved gratuity fund referred 
to in sub -section ( 2). 
(4) The appropriate Government may, by notification, make rules to give effect to the provisions of 
this section and such rules may provide for the compositi on of the Board of Trustees of the approved 
gratuity fund and for the recovery by the controlling authority of the amount of the gratuity payable to an 
employee from the Life Insurance Corporation of India or any other insurer with whom an insurance has 
been taken under sub -section ( 1), or as the case may be, the Board of Trustees  of the approved gratuity 
fund.  
(5) Where an employer fails to make any payment by way of premium to the insurance referred to in 
sub-section ( 1) or by way of contribution to an ap proved gratuity fund referred to in sub -section ( 2), he 
shall be liable to pay the amount of gratuity due under this Act (including interest, if any, for delayed 
payments) forthwit h to the controlling authority.  
(6) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section ( 5) shall be punishable with fine which may 
extend to ten thousand rupees and in the case of a continuing offence with a further fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees for each day duri ng which the offence continues.  
Explanation. —In this section “approved gratuity fund ” shall have the same meaning as in clause ( 5) 
of section 2 of the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961).]  
5. Power to exempt. —1[(1)] The appropriate Government may, by notification, and subject to such 
conditions as may be specified in the notification, exempt any establishment, factory, mine, oilfield, 
plantation, port, railway company or shop to which this Act applies from the oper ation of the provisions 
of this Act if, in the opinion of the appropriate Government, the employees in such establishment, factory, 
mine, oilfield, plantation, port, railway company or shop are in receipt of gratuity or pensio
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY ACT, 1972.pdf - page 7]
ory, 
mine, oilfield, plantation, port, railway company or shop are in receipt of gratuity or pensionary benefits 
not less favoura ble than the benefits conferred under this Act.  
2[(2) The appropriate Government may, by notification and subject to such conditions as may be 
specified in the notification, exempt any employee or class of employees employed in any establishment, 
factory,  mine, oilfield, plantation, port, railway company or shop to which this Act applies from the 
operation of the provisions of this Act, if, in the opinion of the appropriate Government, such employee or 
class of employees are in receipt of gratuity or pensi onary benefits not less favourable than the benefits 
conferred under this Act.]  
3[(3) A notification issued under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) may be issued retrospectively a 
date not earlier than the date of commencement of this Act, but no such no tification shall be issued so as 
to prejudicially affect the interests of any person.]  
6. Nomination. —(1) Each employee, who has completed one year of service, shall make, within such 
time, in such form and in such manner, as may be prescribed, nomination  for the purpose of the second 
proviso to sub -section ( 1) of secti on 4.  
(2) An employee may, in his nomination, distribute the amount of gratuity payable to him under this 
Act amongst more than one nominee.  
(3) If an employee has a family at the time of ma king a nomination, the nomination shall be made in 
favour of one or more members of his family, and any nomination made by such employee in favour of a 
person who is not a memb er of his family shall be void.  
(4) If at the time of making a nomination the em ployee has no family, the nomination may be made in 
favour of any person or persons but if the employee subsequently acquires a family, such nomination 
shall forthwith become invalid and the employee shall make, within such time as may be prescribed, a 
fresh nomination in favour of one  or mo
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY ACT, 1972.pdf - page 7]
loyee shall make, within such time as may be prescribed, a 
fresh nomination in favour of one  or more members of his family.  
                                                           
1. Section 5 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 26 of 1984, s. 5 (w.e.f. 18 -5-1984).  
2. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 18-5-1984 ). 
3. Ins. by Act 22 of 1987, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1987).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY ACT, 1972.pdf - page 8]
8 
 (5) A nomination may, subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4), be modified by an 
employee at any time, after giving to his employer a written notice in such form and in such manner  as 
may be prescri bed, of his intention to do so.  
(6) If a nominee predeceases the employee, the interest of the nominee shall revert to the employee 
who shall make a fresh nomination, in the prescribed for m, in respect of such interest.  
(7) Every nominati on, fresh nomination or alteration of nomination, as the case may be, shall be sent 
by the employee to his employer, who shall keep the same in his safe custody.  
7. Determination of the amount of gratuity. —(1) A person who is eligible for payment of gratui ty 
under this Act or any person authorised, in writing, to act on his behalf shall send a written application to 
the employer, within such time and in such form, as may be prescribed , for payment of such gratuity.  
(2) As soon as gratuity becomes payable, t he employer shall, whether an application referred to in 
sub-section ( 1) has been made or not, determine the amount of gratuity and give notice in writing to the 
person to whom the gratuity is payable and also to the controlling authority specifying the am ount of 
gratuity so determined.  
1[(3) The employer shall arrange to pay the amount of gratuity within thirty days from the date it 
becomes payable to the person t o whom the gratuity is payable.  
(3A) If the amount of gratuity payable under sub -section ( 3) is not paid by the employer within the 
period specified in sub -section ( 3), the employer shall pay, from the date on which the gratuity becomes 
payable to the date on which it is paid, simple interest at such rate, not exceeding the rate notified by the 
Central Government from time to time for repayment of long -term deposits, as that Governmen t may, by 
notification specify:  
Provided that no such interest shall be payable if the delay in the payment is due to the fault of
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY ACT, 1972.pdf - page 8]
 
Provided that no such interest shall be payable if the delay in the payment is due to the fault of the 
employee and the employer has ob tained permission in writing from the controlling authority for the 
delayed payment on this ground.]  
(4)(a) If there is any dispute as to the amount of gratuity payable to an employee under this Act or as 
to the ad missibility of any claim of, or in relatio n to, an employee for payment of gratuity, or as to the 
person entitled to receive the gratuity, the employer shall deposit with the controlling authority such 
amount as he admits to be payable by him as gratuity.  
2*   *   *   *   * 
3[(b) Where there is a dispute wit h regard to any matter or matte rs specified in clause ( a), the 
employer or employee or any other person raising the dispute may make an application to the controlling 
authority for deciding the dispute.]  
4[(c) The controlling  authority shall, after due inquiry and after giving the parties to the dispute a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard, determine the matter or matters in dispute and if, as a result of 
such inquiry any amount is found to be payable to the employee, the c ontrolling authority shall direct the 
employer to pay such amount or, as the case may be, such amount as reduced by the amount already 
deposited by the employer.]  
5[(d)] The controlling authority shall pay the amount deposited, including the excess amount , if any, 
deposited by the employer, to the person entitled thereto.  
6[(e)] As soon as may be after a deposit is made under clause ( a), the controlling authority shall  pay 
the amount of the deposit — 
(i) to the applica nt where he is the employee; or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 1987, s. 7, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -10-1987).  
2. The Explanation omitted by Act 25 of 1984, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -7-1984).  
3.  Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-7-1984).  
4. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 1 -7-1984
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY ACT, 1972.pdf - page 8]
 Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-7-1984).  
4. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 1 -7-1984).  
5. Clause ( c) re-lettered as  clause  (d) thereof by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -7-1984 ). 
6. Clause ( d) re-lettered  as  clause ( e) thereof by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -7-1984).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY ACT, 1972.pdf - page 9]
9 
 (ii) where the applicant is not the employee, to the 1[nominee or, as the case may be, the guardian 
of such nominee or] heir of the employee if the controlling authority is satisfied that there is no 
dispute as to the right of the applicant to receive the amo unt of gratuity.  
(5) For the purpose of conducting an inquiry under sub -section ( 4), the controlling authority shall 
have the same powers as are vested in a court, while trying a suit, under the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908 (5 of 1908), in respect of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) enforcing the attendance of any p erson or examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discove ry and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) issuing commissions fo r the examination of witnesses.  
(6) Any inquiry under this section shall be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 
and 228, and for the purpose of section 196, of the Indian Penal C ode (45 of 1860).  
(7) Any person aggrieved by an order under sub -section ( 4) may, within sixty days from the date of 
the receipt of the order, prefer an appeal to the appropriate Government or such other authority as may be 
specified by the appropr iate Government in this behalf:  
Provided that the appropriate Government or the appellate authority, as  the case may be, may, if it is 
satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the appeal within the said 
period of sixty days, extend the said period by a further period of sixty days:  
2[Provided further that no appeal by an employer shall be admitted unless at the time of preferring the 
appeal, the appellant either produces a certificate of the controlling authority to the effect that the 
appellant has deposited with him an amount equal to the amount of gratuity required t o be deposited 
under sub -section ( 4), or deposits with the ap pellate authority such amount.]  
(8) The appropriate Government or the appellate authority, as
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY ACT, 1972.pdf - page 9]
e ap pellate authority such amount.]  
(8) The appropriate Government or the appellate authority, as the case may be, may, after giving the 
parties to the appeal a reasonable opportunity of being heard,  confirm, modify or reverse the decision of 
the controlling authority.  
3[7A. Inspectors. —(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification, appoint as many 
Inspectors, as it deems fit , for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) The appropriate Government may, by general or special order, define the area to which the 
authority of an Inspector so appointed shall extend and where two or more Inspectors are appointed for 
the same area, also provide by such order, for the distribution or allocation of work to be pe rformed by 
them under this Act.  
(3) Every Inspector shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
7B. Powers of Inspectors. —(1) Subject to any rules made by the appropriate Government in this 
behalf, an Inspector may, for the purpose of ascertaining whether any of the provisions of this Act or the 
conditions, if any, of any exemption granted thereunder, have been complied with, exercise all or any of 
the following powers, namely: — 
(a) require an e mployer to furnish such informatio n as he may consider necessary;  
(b) enter and inspect, at all reasonable hours, with such assistants (if any), being persons in the 
service of the Government or local or any public authority, as he thinks fit, any premises  of or place 
in any factory, mine, oilfield, plantation, port, railway company, shop or other establishment to which 
this Act, applies, for the purpose of examining any register, record or notice or other document 
required to be kept or exhibited under thi s Act or the rules made thereunder, or otherwise kept or 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of  1984 , s. 4, for “nominee” (w.e.f. 1 -7-1984).  
2. The proviso ins . by s. 4 , ibid. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY ACT, 1972.pdf - page 9]
by Act 25 of  1984 , s. 4, for “nominee” (w.e.f. 1 -7-1984).  
2. The proviso ins . by s. 4 , ibid.  (w.e.f. 1 -7-1984).  
3. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -7-1984).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY ACT, 1972.pdf - page 10]
10 
 exhibited in relation to the employment of any person or the payment of gratuity to the employees, 
and require the pro duction thereof for inspection;  
(c) examine with respect to any matter relevant t o any of the purposes aforesaid, the employer or 
any person whom he finds in such premises or place and who, he has reasonable cause to believe, i s 
an employee employed therein;  
(d) make copies of, or take extracts from, any register, record, notice or oth er document, as he 
may consider relevant, and where he has reason to believe that any offence under this Act has been 
committed by an employer, search and seize with such assistance as he may think fit, such register, 
record, notice or other document as he  may consider relev ant in respect of that offence;  
(e) exercise such oth er powers as may be prescribed.  
(2) Any person required to produce any register, record, notice or other document or to give any 
information by an Inspector under sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to be legally bound to do so within the 
meaning of sections 175 and 176 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
(3) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) shall so far as may be, apply 
to any search or seizure under this section as they apply to any search or seizure made under the authority 
of a warrant issued under section 94 of that Code.]  
8. Recovery of gratuity .—If the amount of gratuity payable under this Act is not paid by the 
employer, within the prescri bed time, to the person entitled thereto, the controlling authority shall, on an 
application made to it in this behalf by the aggrieved person, issue a certificate for that amount to the 
Collector, who shall recover the same, together with compound interes t thereon 1[at such rate as the 
Central Government may, by notification, specify], from the date of expiry of the prescribed time, as 
arrears of land revenue and pay the same to the person entitled thereto:  
2[Provided that the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY ACT, 1972.pdf - page 10]
 as 
arrears of land revenue and pay the same to the person entitled thereto:  
2[Provided that the controlling authority shall,  before issuing a certificate under this section, give the 
employer a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the issue of such certificate : 
Provided further that the amount of interest payable under this section shall, in no case exceed the 
amount  of gratuity payable under this Act.]  
9. Penalties. —(1) Whoever, for the purpose of avoiding any payment to be made by himself under 
this Act or of enabling any other person to avoid such payment, knowingly makes or causes to be made 
any false statement or  false representation shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to 3[ten th ousand rupees], or with both.  
(2) An employer who contravenes, or makes default in complying with, any of the pr ovisions of this 
Act or any rule or order made thereunder shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 4[which shall 
not be less than three months but which may extend to one year, or with fine which shall not be less than 
ten thousand rupees but which  may extend to twenty t housand rupees, or with both]:  
Provided that where the offence relates to non -payment of any gratuity payable under this Act, the 
employer shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than 5[six months but  
which may extend to two years] unless the court trying the offence, for reasons to be recorded by it in 
writing, is of opinion that a lesser term of imprisonment or the imposition of a fine would meet the ends 
of justice.  
10. Exemption of employer from li ability in certain cases .—Where an employer is charged with an 
offence punishable under this Act, he shall be entitled, upon complaint duly made by him and on giving 
to the complainant not less than three clear days' notice in writing of his intention to d o so, to have any 
other person whom he cha
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY ACT, 1972.pdf - page 10]
hree clear days' notice in writing of his intention to d o so, to have any 
other person whom he charges as  the actual offender brought before the court at the time appointed for 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 198 7, s. 8, for “at the rate of nine per cent. per annum” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1987). 
2. The p roviso s inserted by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1987). 
3. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “one thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1987).  
4. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -10-1987).  
5. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “three months” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1987).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY ACT, 1972.pdf - page 11]
11 
 hearing the charge; and if, after the commission of the offence has been proved, the employer proves to 
the satisfaction of the court — 
(a) that he has used due diligence to enforce  the execution of this Act, and  
(b) that the said other person committed the offence in question without his knowledge, consent 
or connivance,  
that other person shall be convicted of the offence and shall be li able to the like punishment as if he were 
the employer and the employer shall be discharged from any liability under this Act in respect of such 
offence:  
Provided that in seeking to prove as aforesaid, the employer may be examined on oath and his 
evidence and that of any witness whom he calls in his support shall be subject to cross -examination on 
behalf of the person he charges as the actual offender and b y the prosecutor:  
Provided further that, if the person charged as the actual offender by the employer cannot be brought 
before the court at the time appointed for hearing the charge, the court shall adjourn the hearing from time 
to time for a period not ex ceeding three months and if by the end of the said period the person charged as 
the actual offender cannot still be brought before the court, the court shall proceed to hear the charge 
against the employer and shall, if the offence be proved, convict the e mployer.  
11. Cognizance of offences. —(1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under 
this Act save on a complaint made by or under the authority  of the appropriate Government:  
Provided that where the amount of gratuity has not been paid,  or recovered, within six months from 
the expiry of the prescribed time, the appropriate Government shall authorise the controlling authority to 
make a complaint against the employer, whereupon the controlling authority shall, within fifteen days 
from the date of such authorisation, make such complaint to a magistrate having j urisdiction to try the 
offence.  
(2) No court inferior to t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY ACT, 1972.pdf - page 11]
uch complaint to a magistrate having j urisdiction to try the 
offence.  
(2) No court inferior to that of a 1[Metropolitain magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class] 
shall try any offence punishable under this A ct. 
12. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 
controlling authority or any other person in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to 
be done under this Act or any rule or order made thereunder.  
13. Protection of gratuity .—No gratuity payable under this Act 2[and no gratuity payable to an 
employee employed in any establishment, factory, mine, oilfield, plantation, port, railway company or 
shop exempted under section 5] shall  be liable to attachment in execution of any decree or order of any 
civil, revenue or criminal court.  
14. Act to override other enactments, etc. —The provisions of this Act or any rule made thereunder 
shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent  therewith contained in any enactment other than 
this Act or in any instrument or contract having effect by virtue of any enactment other than this Act.  
15. Power to make rules. —(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification, make rules for the 
purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of P arliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid , both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall, thereafter, 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modifica tion or annulment shall be wi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY ACT, 1972.pdf - page 11]
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modifica tion or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 34 of 1994, s. 4, for “Presidency Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first class” (w.e.f. 24 -5-1994).  
2. Ins. by Act 25 of 1984, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1 -7-1984).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 1]
1 THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Responsibility for payment of wages.  
4. Fixation of wage -periods.  
5. Time of payment of wages.  
6. Wages to be paid in current coin or currency notes  or by cheque or crediting in bank account . 
7. Deductions which may be made from wages.  
8. Fines.  
9. Deductions for absence from duty.  
10. Deductions for damage or loss.  
11. Deductions for services rendere d. 
12. Deductions for recovery of advances.  
12A. Deductions for recovery of loans.  
13. Deductions for payments to co -operative societies and insurance schemes.  
13A. Maintenance of registers and records.  
14. Inspectors.  
14A. Facilities to be afforded to Inspectors.  
15. Claims arising out of deductions from wages or delay in payment of wages and penalty for 
malicious or vexatious claims.  
16. Single application in respect of claims from unpaid group.  
17. Appeal.  
17A. Conditional attachment of property of employer or other person responsible for payment of 
wages.  
18. Powers of authorities appointed under section 15.  
19. [Omitted .]. 
20. Penalty for offences under the Act.  
21. Procedure in trial of offences.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 2]
2 SECTIONS  
22. Bar of Suits.  
22A. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
23. Contracting out.  
24. Delegation of powers.  
25. Display by notice of abstracts of the Act.  
25A. Payment of undi sbursed wages in cases of death of employed person.  
26. Rule -making power.
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 3]
3 THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936  
ACT NO. 4 OF 19361 
[23rd April ,1936 .] 
An Act to regulate the payment of wages of certain classes to 2[employed persons].  
WHEREAS  it is expedient to  regulate the payment of wages to certain classes of   2[employed persons].  
It is hereby enacted as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application .—(1) This Act may be called the Payment of 
Wages Act, 1936.  
3[(2)It extends to the whole of India  4***].  
(3) It shall come into force on such date5 as the Central Government may , by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint.  
(4) It applies in the first instance to the payment of wages to persons employed in any  6[factory, to 
persons] employed (otherwise than in a factory) upon any railway by a railway administration or, either 
directly or through a sub -contractor, by a person fulfilling a contract with a railway administration  7[,and 
to persons employed in an indu strial or other establishment specified in sub -clauses ( a) to ( g) of clause ( ii) 
of section  2]. 
(5) 8[Appropriate  Government]  may, after giving three months’  notice of its intention of so doing, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, extend the provisions of  9[this Act] or any of them to the payment of 
wages to any class of persons employed in  10[any establishment or class of establishments specified by  
11[appropriate Government] under sub -clause ( h) of clause ( ii) of section 2]:  
12[Provided that in relation to any such establishment owned by the Central Government no such 
notification shall be issued except with the concurrence of that Government.]  
13[(6) This Act applies to wages payable to an employed person in respect of a wage period if such 
wages for that wage period do not exceed  14[twenty four thousand rupees ] per month or such other higher 
sum which, on the basis of figures of the Consumer Expenditure Survey published by the National Sample 
Survey Organisation, the Central Government may, after e
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 3]
re Survey published by the National Sample 
Survey Organisation, the Central Government may, after every five years, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, specify .] 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Haryana  
Amendment of section 1 of Central Act 4 of 1936 .—Sub-section (6) of section 1 of the Payment of Wages 
Act, 1936 (hereinafter the called the principal Act) shall be omitted.  
[Vide Haryana Act 19 of 2016, s. 2]  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context, — 
15[(i) “appropriate Government ” means, in relation to railways, air transport services, mines and 
oilfields, the Central Government and, in relation to all other cases, the State Government; ] 
                                                           
1. The Act has been extended to Goa, Daman and Diu by Reg. 12 of 1962, s. 3 and the Schedule to Dadra and Nagar Haveli by 
Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and the First Schedule to Pondicherry by Reg. 7 of 1963, s. 3 and the First Schedule  and to Lakshadweep by 
Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 and the Schedule.  
2. Subs. by Act 38 of 1982, s. 2 for “persons employed in industry” (w.e.f. 15 -10-1982).  
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for sub -section ( 2). 
4. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 51 of 1970, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 1 -9-1971).  
5. 28th March 1937, see Gazette of India, 1937, Pt. I, pg. 626.  
6. Subs. by Act 38 of 1982, s. 3, for “factory and to persons” (w.e.f. 15 -10-1982).  
7. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -10-1982).  
8. Subs. by Act 41 of 2005, s. 3, for “the State Government” (w.e.f. 9 -11-2005).  
9. Subs. by Act 68 of 1957, s. 2, for “the Act” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1958.)  
10. Subs. by Act 38 of 1982, s. 3, for “any industrial establishment or in any class o r group of industrial establishments”                         
(w.e.f. 15 -10-1982).  
11. Subs. by Act 41 of 2005, s. 3, for “the Central Government or a State Government” (w.e.f. 9 -11-2005).  
12. Subs. by Act 38 of 1982, s. 3, fo
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 3]
ntral Government or a State Government” (w.e.f. 9 -11-2005).  
12. Subs. by Act 38 of 1982, s. 3, for the proviso (w.e.f. 15 -10-1982). 
13. Subs. by Act 41 of 2005, s. 2, for sub -section ( 6) (w.e.f. 9 -11-2005).  
14. Subs. by S.O. 2806 ( E), dated 28 -8-2017, for “eighteen thousand rupees”, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, s. 3( ii). 
15. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 9 -11-2005).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 4]
4 1[ 2[(ia)]  “employed person ” includes the legal representative of a deceased employed person;  
2[(ib)]“employer ” includes the legal representative of a deceased employer;  
2[(ic)]  “factory ” means a factory as defined in clause ( m) of section 2  of the Factories Act, 1948 
(63 of 1948) , and includes any place to which the provisions of that Act have been applied under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 85 thereof;]  
(ii) 3[“industrial or other establishment ” means] any — 
4[(a) tramway service, or motor transport service engaged in carrying passen ger or goods or 
both by road for hire or reward;  
(aa) air transport service other than such service belonging to, or exclusively employed in the 
military, naval or air forces of the Union or the Civil Aviation   Department of the Government of 
India;]  
(b)  dock, wharf or jetty;  
5[(c) inland vessel, mechanically propelled;]  
(d)  mine, quarry or oilfield;  
(e) plantation;  
(f) workshop or other establishment in which articles are produced, adapted or manufactured, 
with a view to their use, transport or sale;  
6[(g) establishment in which any work relating to the construction, development or maintenance 
of buildings, roads, bridges or canals, or relating to operation connected with navigation, irrigation, 
development or maintenance of buildings, roads, bridges or m ission and distribution of 
electricity   or any other form of power is being carried on;]  
7[(h) any other establishment or class of establishment which  8[appropriate Government] may, 
having regard to the nature thereof, the need for protection of persons em ployed therein and other 
relevant circumstances, specify, by notification in the Official Gazette;]  
9[(iia) “mine ” has the meaning assigned to it in clause ( j) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2  of the 
Mines Act, 1952 (35 of 1952);]  
10[(iii) “plantation ” has t he meaning assigned to it in clause ( f) of section 2  of the Plantations 
Labour Act, 1951 (69 of 1951);]  
(iv) “p
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 4]
ned to it in clause ( f) of section 2  of the Plantations 
Labour Act, 1951 (69 of 1951);]  
(iv) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
11[(v) “railway administration ” has the meaning assigned to it in clause ( 32) of section  2 of the 
Railways Act, 1989(24 of 1989); ] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 53 of 1964, s. 3, for clause ( i) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1965).  
2. Clauses ( i), (ia) and ( ib) renumbered as clauses ( ia), (ib) and ( ic) thereof by Act 41 of 2005, s. 4 (w.e.f. 9 -11-2005).  
3. Subs.  by Act 38 of 1982, s. 4, for ‘ “industrial establishmen t” means’ (w.e.f. 15 -10-1982).  
4. Subs. by Act 53 of 1964, s. 3, for sub -clause ( a) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1965).  
5. Subs. by Act 68 of 1957, s. 3, for item ( c) (w.e.f. 1 -4-1958.)  
6. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1958.)  
7. Ins. by Act 38 of 1982, s. 4 (w.e.f. 15 -10-1982).  
8. Subs. by Act 41 of 2005, s. 3, for “the Central Government or a State Government” (w.e.f. 9 -11-2005).  
9. Ins. by Act 53 of 1964, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1965).  
10. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for clause ( iii) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1965).  
11. Subs. by Act 41 of 2005, s. 4, for clause ( v) (w.e.f. 9 -11-2005).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 5]
5 1[(vi) “wages ” means all remuneration (whether by way of salary, allowances, or otherwise) 
expressed in terms of money or capable of being so expressed which would, if the terms of employment, 
express or implied, were ful filled, be payable to a person employed in respect of his employment or of 
work done in such employment, and includes — 
(a) any remuneration payable under any award or settlement between the parties or order of a 
Court;  
(b) any remuneration to which the person employed is entitled in respect of overtime work or 
holidays or any leave period;  
(c) any additional remuneration payable under the terms of employment (whether called a 
bonus or by any other name);  
(d) any sum which by reason of the termi nation of employment of the person employed is 
payable under any law, contract or instrument which provides for the payment of such sum, whether 
with or without deductions, but does not provide for the time within which the payment is to be 
made;  
(e)  any sum to which the person employed is entitled under any scheme framed under any law 
for the time being in force,  
but does not include — 
(1) any bonus (whether under a scheme of profit sharing or otherwise) which does not form part of 
the remuneration payable  under the terms of employment or which is not payable under any award or 
settlement between the parties or order of a Court;  
(2) the value of any house -accommodation, or of the supply of light, water, medical attendance or 
other amenity or of any service excluded from the computation of wages by a general or special order 
of 2[appropriate Government] ; 
(3) any contribution paid by the employer to any pension or provident fund, and the interest which 
may have accrued thereon;  
(4) any travelling allowance or the value of any travelling concession;  
(5) any sum paid to the employed person to defray special expenses entailed on him by the nature 
of his employment; or  
(6) any gratuity payable on the termination of emp
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 5]
led on him by the nature 
of his employment; or  
(6) any gratuity payable on the termination of employment in cases other than those specified in 
sub-clause ( d).] 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 2 of Act IV of 1936 .—In section 2 of the Payment of Wages  Act, 1936, in the 
its application to the State of Bombay (hereinafter referred to as the said Act), — 
(a) after clause (ii) the following new clause shall be inserted, namely: — 
“(iia) ‘legal representative’ means the person who in law represents the estate of a decrease 
employed person;  
(b) for clause (iii) the following shall be substituted, namely: — 
“(iii) ‘plantation’ means — 
(a) any esta te which is maintained for the purpose of growing cinchona rubber, coffee or tea, or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 68 of 1957, s. 3, for clause ( vi) (w.e.f. 1 -4-1958.)  
2. Subs. by Act 41 of 2005, s. 3, for “the State Government” (w.e.f. 9 -11-2005).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 6]
6 (b) any farm which is maintained for the purpose of growing sugarcane and attached to a factory 
established or maintained for the manufacture of sugar:  
Provide that on such, estate or farm twenty -five or more persons are engaged for the purpose;”  
[Vide Bombay  Act XLVIII of 1955, s. 2]  
1[3. Responsibility for payment of wages .—(1) Every employer shall be responsible for the payment 
of all wages required to be paid  under this Act to persons employed by him and in case of persons 
employed, — 
(a) in factories, if a person has been named as the manager of the factory under clause ( f) of  
sub-section (1)  of section 7  of the Factories Act, 1948  (63 of 1948) ; 
(b) in industrial or other establishments, if there is a person responsible to the employer for the 
supervision and control of the industrial or other establishments;  
(c) upon railways (other than in factories), if the employer is the railway administration and t he 
railway administration has nominated a person in this behalf for the local area concerned;  
(d) in the case of contractor, a person designated by such contractor who is directly under his 
charge; and  
(e) in any other case, a person designated by the empl oyer as a person responsible for complying 
with the provisions of the Act,  
the person so named, the person responsible to the employer, the person so nominated or the person so 
designated, as the case may be, shall be  responsible for such payment.  
(2) Notw ithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), it shall be the responsibility of the employer 
to make payment of all wages required to be made under this Act in case the contractor or the person 
designated by the employer fails to make such payment. ] 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 3 of Act IV of 1936 .—In section 3 of the payment of Wages Act, 1936 
(hereinafter referred to as the said Act), for the proviso the following shall be substituted, namely: -- 
“Provided that, in the case of p
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 6]
t), for the proviso the following shall be substituted, namely: -- 
“Provided that, in the case of per sons employed (otherwise than by a contractor) — 
(a) in factories, if a person has been named as the manager of the factory under clause (f) of sub -
section (1) of section 7 of the Factories Act, 1948 (LXIII of 1948), then the  person so named and the 
employ ed jointly and severally;  
(b) in industrial establishment, if there is a person responsibility to the employer for the 
supervision and control of the industrial establishment , then the person so responsible and the 
employer jointly and severally;  
(c) upon railways (otherwise  than in factories), if the employer is the railway administration and 
the railway administration has nominated a person in this behalf for the local area concerned, then 
the person so nominated;  
Shall be responsible for such payment.”  
[Vide Bombay  Act LXII of 1953, s. 2]  
 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 41 of 2005, s. 5, for section 3 (w.e.f. 9 -11-2005 ). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 7]
7 4. Fixation of wage -periods .—(1) Every person responsible for the payment of wages under section 3 
shall fix periods (in this Act referred to as wage -periods) in respect of which such wages shall be payable.  
(2) No wage -period shall exceed one month.  
5. Time of payment of wages .—(1) The wages of ev ery person employed upon or in — 
(a) any railway, factory or  1[industrial or other establishment] upon or in which less than one 
thousand persons are employed, shall be paid  before expiry of the seventh day,  
(b) any other railway, factory or  1[industrial or other establishment] , shall be paid before the expiry 
of the tenth day,  
after the last day of the wage -period in respect of which the wages are payable:  
2[Provided that in  the case of persons employed on a dock, wharf or jetty or in a mine, the balance of 
wages found due on completion of the final tonnage account of the ship or wagons loaded or unloaded, as 
the case may be, shall be paid before the expiry of the seventh day  from the day of such completion.]  
(2) Where the employment of any person is terminated by or on behalf of the employer, the wages, 
earned by him shall be paid before the expiry of the second working day from the day on which his 
employment is terminated:  
2[Provided that where the employment of any person in an establishment is terminated due to the closure 
of the establishment for any reason other than a weekly or other recognised holiday, the wages earned by 
him shall be paid before the expiry of the seco nd day from the day on which his employment is so 
terminated.]  
(3) 3[Appropriate  Government] may, by general or special order, exempt, to such extent and subject to 
such conditions as may be specified in the order, the person responsible for the payment of  wages to persons 
employed upon any railway (otherwise than in a factory)  4[or to persons employed as daily -rated workers 
in the Public Works Depart ment of 5[appropriate Government ]] from the oper
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 7]
s daily -rated workers 
in the Public Works Depart ment of 5[appropriate Government ]] from the operation of this section in respect 
of the wages o f any such p ersons or class of such persons:  
4[Provided that in the case of persons employed as daily -rated workers as aforesaid, no such order shall 
be made except in consultation with the Central Government.]  
(4) 6[Save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 2), all payments] of wages shall be made on a working 
day. 
7[6. Wages to be paid in current coin or currency notes  or by cheque or crediting in bank 
account .—All wages shall be paid in current coin or currency notes or by cheque or by crediting the wages 
in the ba nk account of the employee:  
Provided that the appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify the 
industrial or other establishment, the employer of which shall pay to every person employed in such 
industrial or other establishment, the wages only by cheque or by crediting the wages in his bank account.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Kerala  
Amendment of section 6 .—In the Payment  of Wages Act, 1936 (Central Act 4 of 1936), in section 6, 
after the existing proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely: — 
“Provided  further that notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the State Government may, by 
notification in the  Gazette, specify the industrial or other establishment, the employers of which shall pay 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 1982, s. 6, for “industrial establishment” (w.e.f. 15 -10-1982).  
2. Added by Act 53 of 1964, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1965).  
3. Subs. by Act 41 of 2005, s. 3, for “the State Government” (w.e.f. 9 -11-2005).  
4. Ins. by Act 53 of 1964, s. 5 (w .e.f. 1 -2-1965).  
5. Subs. by Act 41 of 2005, s. 3, for “the Central Government or a State Government” (w.e.f. 9 -11-2005).  
6. Subs. by Act 53 of 1964, s. 5, for “All payments” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1965).  
7. Subs. by Act 1 of 201
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 7]

6. Subs. by Act 53 of 1964, s. 5, for “All payments” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1965).  
7. Subs. by Act 1 of 2017, s. 2, for section 6 (w.e.f. 28-12-2016).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 8]
8 to the person employed therein, the wages either by cheque or by crediting the wages in his bank account, 
without obtaining any authorisation of the employed person.”  
[Vide Kerala Act 11 of 2016, s. 2]  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 6 of Act V of 1936. —In section 6 of the payment of Wages Act, 1936, in its 
application to the state of Bombay  (herein after referred to as the principal Act) for the proviso, the 
following proviso shall be, and shall be deemed have been, substituted on an d from the 1st day of April 
1958, namely: — 
“Provided that, where the amount of any bonus payable to an employe d person exceeds an amount 
equal to one -forth of his earnings (exclusive of dearness allowance) for the year to which the bonus 
relates, such excess shall be paid or invested in the manner prescribed. ” 
[Vide Bombay  Act VIII of 1960, s. 2]  
Amendment of section 6 of Act 4 of 1936 .—In section 6 of the payment of Wages Act, 1936, in its 
application of the State of Maharashtra, — 
“Provided also that, all wages payable to the employed persons, who are in continuous service as 
stipulated in section 25B of the I ndustrial Disputes act, 1947  (14 of 1947)  in factories or industrial or 
other establishments and are drawing wages of Rs. 3000 per month or more, except agricultural 
labourer s and sugarcane cutting labourers, shall be paid either by an account payee cheque  drawn in 
favour of the employed persons or by crediting the wages in the bank account of the employed 
persons:  
Provided also that, all wages payable to the employed persons, employed in factories or industrial 
or other establishments situated in the area of Thane District  in the State of Maharashtra, or in any 
other area as may be notified by the State Government in the Official Gazette,  whether they are in 
continuous service as stipulated in section 25B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 or otherwise an d 
irrespective of the amount of wages drawn, except agricultural labourers 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 8]
t, 1947 or otherwise an d 
irrespective of the amount of wages drawn, except agricultural labourers and sugarcane cutting 
labourers, shall also be paid either by an account payee cheque drawn in favor  of the employed 
persons or by crediting the wages in the bank account of the employed persons.”;  
(ii) for the marginal note, the following marginal note shall be substituted, namely: — 
 “Mode of payment of wages.”.   
[Vide Maharashtra Act XXVI of 2010, s. 2 ] 
Amendment of secti on 6 of Act IV of 1936 .—In the Payment of Wages act, 1936 (IV of 1936), as in 
force in the whole of the State of Maharashtra (hereinafter referred to as “the principal Act”), for section 6, 
the following shall be substituted, namely: -- 
“6. Wages to be paid in current coin or currency notes .—All wages shall be paid in current coin 
or currency notes, or in both :  
Provided that, where the amount of any bonus payable to an employed person exceeds an amount 
equal to one -fourth of his earnings  (exclusive of dearness allowance) for the year to which the bonus 
relates, such excess shall be paid or invested in the manner prescribed.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the expression — 
(1) “wages” shall include any bonus of the descriptio n given in sub -clause (1) of clause (vi) of 
section 2 ; and  
(2) “bonus” means bonus payable to an employed person under the terms of employment or 
under an award or settlement or order of a court, and also includes any bonus  of the description 
given in su b-clause (1) of clause (iv) of section 2.”  
[Vide Maharashtra Act XIII of 1961, s. 4]  
Amendment of section 6 of Act IV of 1936 .—In section 6 of the said act, the following proviso shall 
be added, namely: -- 
“Provided that when the amount of any bonus payable  to an employed person exceeds an amount 
equal to one -fourth of his earnings (exclusive of dearness allowance) for the year to which the bonus 
related, such excess shall be paid or invested in the manner prescribed
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 8]
the year to which the bonus 
related, such excess shall be paid or invested in the manner prescribed.”  
[Vide Maharashtra act LXII of 1953, s. 3] 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 9]
9 Uttarakhand  
Amendment of section 6.—Section 6 of the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 (central Act No. 04 of 1936) shall be 
substituted as follows; namely: -- 
“6. All wages shall be paid by Banks Cheques or Real Time Gross settlement or national electronic Fund 
Transfer or Electronic Clearing Services System or postal Cheque : 
Provided that if the work of the employed person is of temporary Nature or employed person is migrant and 
he wants to receive cash payment of his earned wages, after the written permiss ion of the Officer not below the 
rank of Assistant Labour Commissioner posted in the work area of employment, cash payment of wages of the 
Concerning person may be paid.”  
[Vide Uttarakhand Act 17 of 2014, s. 2]  
Haryana  
Amendment of section 6 of Central Act  4 of 1936 .—In the proviso to section 6 of the principal Act, -- 
(i) for the sign “.” Existing at the end, the sign “.” Shall be substituted.  
(ii) after the existing proviso, the following proviso shall be added, namely: - 
 “Provided further that the State G overnment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify the 
industrial establishment, the employers of which shall pay to the persons employed therein, the wages 
either by cheque or by crediting the wages in their bank account.”.  
[Vide Haryana Act 19 of 2016, s. 3]  
7. Deductions which may be made from wages .—(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of  1[the Railways Act, 
1989  (24 of 1989) ], the wages of an employed person shall be paid to him without deductions of any kind except those 
authorised by or under this Act.  
2[Explanation  I].-Every payment made by the employed person to the employer or his agent shall, for the purposes 
of this Act, be deemed to be a deduction from wages.  
3[Explanation  II.-Any loss of wages resulting from the im position, for good and sufficient cause, upon a person 
employed of any of the followi ng penalties, namely: — 
(i) the withholding of increment or promotion (including the stoppage of
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 9]
wi ng penalties, namely: — 
(i) the withholding of increment or promotion (including the stoppage of increment at an efficiency bar):  
(ii) the reduction to a lower post or time  scale or to a lower stage in a time scale: or  
(iii) suspension,  
shall not be deemed to be a deduction from wages in any case where the rules framed by the employer for the 
imposition of any such penalty are in conformity with the requirements, if any, whi ch may be specified in this behalf 
by 4[appropriate  Government] by notification in the Official Gazette.]  
(2) Deductions from the wages of an employed person shall be made only in accordance with the provisions of 
this Act, and may be of the following kind s only, namely: — 
(a) fines;  
(b) deductions for absence from duty;  
(c) deductions for damage to or loss of goods expressly entrusted to the employed person for custody, or for 
loss of money for which he is required to account, where such damage or loss is directly attributable to his neglect 
or default;  
5[(d) deductions for house -accommodation supplied by the employer or by Government or any housing board 
set up under any law for the time being in force (whether the Government or the board is the employer o r not) or 
any other authority engaged in the business of subsidizing house -accommodation which may  be specified in this 
behalf by 5[appropriate  Government] by notification in the Official Gazette;]  
(e) deductions for such amenities and services supplied by  the employer as the  6*** 5[appropriate  
Government]   7[or any officer specified by it in this behalf] may, by gener al or special order, authorise;  
Explanation —The word “services ” in 8[this clause] does not include the supply of tools and raw materials 
required for the purposes of employment;]  
9[(f) deductions  for recovery of advances of whatever nature (including advances for travelling 
allowance or conveyance allowance), and the interest due in respect thereof, or for adjustment of over -

<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 9]
ance or conveyance allowance), and the interest due in respect thereof, or for adjustment of over -
payments of wages;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 41 of 2005, s. 6, for “sub -section ( 2) of section 47 of the Indian Railways Act, 1890 (9 of 1890)”                                     
(w.e.f. 9 -11-2005).  
2. Explanation  renumbered as Explanation  I thereof by Act 68 of 1957, s.  5 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1958).  
3. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1958).  
4. Subs. by Act 41 of 2005, s. 3, for “the State Government” (w.e.f. 9 -11-2005).  
5. Subs. by Act 68 of 1957, s. 5, for clause ( d) (w.e.f. 1 -4-1958).  
6. The words “Governor -General in Council o r” omitted by the A.O. 1937.  
7. Ins. by Act 53 of 1964, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1965).  
8. Subs. by Act 56 of 1974, s. 3 and the Second Schedule, for “this sub -clause” (w.e.f. 20 -12-1974).  
9. Subs. by Act 53 of 1964, s. 6, for clause ( f) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1965).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 10]
10 (ff) deductions for recovery of loan s made from any fu nd constitut ed for the welfare of labour  in 
accordance with the rules approved by 1[appropriate  Government ], and the interest due in respect 
thereof;  
(fff) deductions for recovery of loans granted for house -building or other purposes ap proved by 
1[appropriate Government ] and the interest due in respect thereof;]  
(g) deductions of income -tax payable by the employed person;  
(h) deductions required to be made by order of a Court or other authority competent to make such 
order;  
(i) deductions for subsc riptions to, and for repayment of advances from any provident fund to which 
the Provident Funds Act, 1925 (19 of 1925), applies or any recognized provident fund as defined  2[in 
clause  (38) of section 2  of the Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961) ], or any prov ident fund approved in 
this behalf by 1[appropriate  Government ], during th e continuance of such approval;  3*** 
4[(ii) deductions made with the written authorisation of — 
(i) the employed person; or  
(ii) the president or secretary of the registered trade union of which the employed person is a 
member on such conditions as may be prescribed,  
for contribution to the National Defence Fund or to any Defence Savings Scheme approved by 
1[appropriate Government ];] 
(j) deductions for payments to co -operative socie ties approved by 1[appropriate  Government]  5[or 
any officer  specified by it in this behalf ] or to a scheme of insurance maintained by the Indian Post 
Office;  6[and]  
7[ 7[(k) deductions, made with the written authorisation  of the person employed for payment of any 
premium on his life insurance policy to the Life Insurance Corporation of India established under the 
Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956 (31 of 1956), or for the purchase of securities of the Government 
of India  or of any  1[appropriate  Government] or for being deposited in any Post Office Savings Bank 
in furtherance of any savings scheme of
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 10]
ent] or for being deposited in any Post Office Savings Bank 
in furtherance of any savings scheme of any such Government.]]  
8[(kk) deductions made, with the written authorisation of the employed person, for the payment of 
his contribution to any fund constituted by the employer or a trade union registered under the Trade 
Union Act, 1926 (16 of 1926), for the welfare of the employed persons or the membe rs of their families, 
or both, and approved by 1[appropriate  Government ] or any officer specified by it in this behalf, during 
the continuance of such approval;  
(kkk) deductions made, with the written authorisation of the employed person, for payment of the 
fees payable by him for the membership of any trade union registered under  the Trade Unions Act, 
1926 (16 of 1926);]  
9[(l) deductions  for payment of insurance premia on Fidelity Guarantee Bonds;  
(m) deductions for recovery of losses sustained by a railway administration on account of 
acceptance by the employed person of counterfeit or base coins or mutilated or forged currency notes;  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 41 of 2005, s. 3, for “the State Government” (w.e.f. 9 -11-2005).  
2. Subs. by s. 6,  ibid.,  for “in section 58A of the Indian Income -tax Act, 1922” (w.e.f. 9 -11-2005).  
3. The word “and” omitted by Ordinance 3 of 1940, s. 2.  
4. Ins. by Act 42 of 1971, s. 6 (w.e.f. 4 -12-1971).  
5. Ins. by Act 53 of 1964, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1965).  
6. Added by Ordinance 3 of 1940, s. 2  
7. Subs. by Act 68 of 1957, s. 5, for clause ( k) (w.e.f. 1 -4-1958).  
8. Ins. by Act 38 of 1982, s. 7 (w.e.f. 15 -10-1982).  
9. Ins. by Act 53 of 1964, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1965).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 11]
11 (n) deductions for recovery of losses sustained by a railway administration on account of the failure 
of the employed person to invoice, to bill, to collect or to account for the appropriat e charges due to 
that administration whether in respect of fares, freight, demurrage, wharfage and carnage or in respect 
of sale of food in catering establishments or in respect of sale of commodities in grain shops or 
otherwise;  
(o) deductions for recover y of losses sustained by a railway administration on account of any 
rebates or refunds incorrectly granted by the employed person where such loss is directly attributable 
to his neglect or default;]  
1[(p) deductions, made with the written authorisation of the employed person, for contribution to 
the Prime Minister ’s National Relief Fund or to such other Fund as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify;]  
2[(q) deductions for contributions to any insurance scheme framed by the Central Government for 
the benefit of its employees.]  
3[(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the total amount of deduc tions which may be 
made under sub -section ( 2) in any wage -period from the wages of any employed person shall not exceed — 
(i) in cases where such deductions are wholly or partly made for payments to co -operative societies 
under clause ( j) of sub -section ( 2), seventy -five percent . of such wages, and  
(ii) in any other case, fifty percent . of such wages:  
Provided that wh ere the total deductions authorised under sub -section ( 2) exceed seventy -five 
percent . or, as the case may be, fifty percent . of the wages, the excess may be recovered in such manner 
as may be prescribed.  
(4) Nothing contained in this section shall be cons trued as precluding the employer from recovering 
from the wages of the employed person or otherwise any amount payable by such person under any law for 
the time being in force other than  4[the Railways Act, 1989  (24 of 1989)
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 11]
person under any law for 
the time being in force other than  4[the Railways Act, 1989  (24 of 1989) ].] 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Kerala  
Amendment of section 7 .—In section 7 of the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 (Central Act 4 of 1936), 
in sub -section (2), after clause (o), the following clause shall be inserted, namely. — 
“(p) deductions for repayment to the State Government of the amount of fi nancial and granted under 
the Kerala Financial And (to the Discharged or Dismissed Labour) Rules, 1958”  
[Vide Kerala Act 34 of 1969 , sec. 2.]  (w.e.f. 8 -10-1969).  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 7 .—In section 7 of the principal Act in sub -section (2), after clause (p), the 
following clauses shall be added namely: — 
“(q) deductions to recover from a person re -employed after the termination of his former 
employment any amount paid to him from a provident fund or as a gratuity on such te rmination:  
Provided that such recovery shall not excee d 20 per cent of total earnings.  Re-employment in this 
context means employment under the same employer;  
(r) deduction specially authorised by the State Government for purposes beneficial to the employe d 
person”.  
[Vide Karnataka Act 2 of 1977, s. 3]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 29 of 1976, s. 4 (w.e.f. 12 -11-1975).  
2. Ins. by Act 19 of 1977, s. 2 (w.e.f. 30 -6-1977).  
3. Ins. by Act 53 of 1964, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1965).  
4. Subs. by Act 41 of 2005, s. 6, for “the Indian Railways Act, 1890” (w.e.f. 9 -11-2005).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 12]
12 Karnataka  
Amendment of section 7. —In section 7 of the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 (Central Act 4 of 1936) 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), clause (r) shall be omitted.  
[Vide Karnataka Act 2 of 1982, s. 2]  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 7 of Act IV of 1936. —In section 7 of the Payment of Wages Act, 1936, in sub -
section (2), in clause (d), after the word “employer” the following shall be added, namely: — 
“or the State Government, or the Bombay Housing Board constituted under the Bombay Housing 
Board act, 1948, or such other agency as the State Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette , direct”.  
[Vide Bombay  Act XXXVII of 1956, s. 2]  
Amendment  of section 7 of Act IV of 1936. —In section 7 of the principal Act, in sub -section (2), in 
clause (k), the words “for being deposited in any Post Office Saving bank” shall be deleted.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act XIII of 1961 , s. 5] 
Amendment of section 7 of Act IV of 1936. —In section 7 of the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 (IV of 
1936), in sub -section (2),  — 
(a) in clause (j), the word “and” at the end shall be deleted;  
(b) after clause (k), the following new clause shall be added, namely:  — 
“(l) deduction made, with the consent of the person employed, for contribution towards any 
public charitable purpose which the State Government may by notification in the Official Gazette  
specify in that behalf.”  
[Vide Maharashtra Act XLII of 1961, s. 2]  
8. Fines .—(1) No fine shall be imposed on any employed person save in respect of such acts and 
omissions on his part as the employer, with the previous approval of 1[appropriate  Government] or of the 
prescribed authority, may have specified by notice under sub-section ( 2). 
(2) A notice specifying such acts and omissions shall be exhibited in the prescribed manner on the 
premises in which the employment is carried on or in the case of person employed upon a railway (otherwise 
than in a factory), at the prescr ibed plac
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 12]
n the case of person employed upon a railway (otherwise 
than in a factory), at the prescr ibed place or places.  
(3) No fine shall be imposed on any employed person until he has been given an opportunity of showing 
cause against the fine, or otherwise than in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed for the 
imposition of fines.  
(4) The total amount of fine which  may be imposed in any one wage -period on any employed person 
shall not exceed an amount equal to  2[three per cent.] of the wages payable to him in respect of that wage -
period.  
(5) No fine shall be imposed on any employed person  who is under the age of fifteen years.  
(6) No fine imposed on any employed person shall be recovered from him by installments or after the 
expiry of  3[ninety days] from the day on which it was imposed.  
(7) Every fine shall be deemed to have been imposed o n the day of the act or omission in respect of 
which it was imposed.  
(8) All fines and all realisations thereof shall be recorded in a register to be kept by the person 
responsible for the payment of wages under section 3 in such form as may be prescribed;  and all such 
realisations shall be applied only to such purposes beneficial to the persons employed in the factory or 
establishment as are approved by the prescribed authority.  
Explanation .—When the persons employed upon or in any railway, factory or  4[industrial or other 
establishment] are part only of a staff employed under the same management, all such realisations may be 
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 41 of 2005 , s. 3, for “the State Government” (w.e.f. 9 -11-2005).  
2. Subs. by Act 38 of 1982, s. 8, for “half -an-anna in the rupee” (w.e.f. 15 -10-1982).  
3. Subs. by Act 41 of 2005, s. 7, for “sixty days” (w.e.f. 9 -11-2005).  
4. Subs. by Act 38 of 1982, s. 8, for “industrial establishment” (w.e.f. 15 -10-1982).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 12]
ent” (w.e.f. 15 -10-1982).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 13]
13 credited to a common fund maintained for the staff as a whole, provided that the fund shall be applied only 
to such purposes as are a pproved by the prescribed authority.  
9. Deductions for absence from duty .—(1) Deductions may be made under clause ( b) of sub -section 
(2) of section 7 only on account of the absence of an employed person from the place or places where, by 
the terms of his employment, he is required to work, such absence being for the whole or any part of the 
period during which he is so required to work.  
(2) The amount of such deduction shall in no case bear to the wages payable to the employed person in 
respect of the wage -period for which the deduction is made a large proportion than the period for which he 
was absent bears to the total period, within such wage -period, during which by the terms of his employment, 
he was required to work:  
Provided that, subject to any r ules made in this behalf by 1[appropriate  Government ], if ten or more 
employed persons acting in concert absent themselves without due notice (that is to say without giving the 
notice which is required under the terms of their contracts of employment) and without reasonable cause, 
such deduction from any such person may include such amount not exceeding his wages for eight days as 
may by any such terms be due to the employer in lieu of due notice.  
2[Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, an employed  person shall be deemed to be absent 
from the place where he is required to work if, although present in such place, he refuses, in pursuance of 
a stay -in strike or for any other cause which is not reasonable in the circumstances, to carry out his work.]  
10. Deductions  for damage or loss .—3[(1) A deduction under clause ( c) or clause  (o) of                                 
sub-section ( 2) of section 7 shall not exceed the amount of the damage or loss  caused to the employer by 
the neglect or default of the employed person.  
(1A) A deduction s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 13]
loss  caused to the employer by 
the neglect or default of the employed person.  
(1A) A deduction shall not be made under clause ( c) or clause ( m) or clause ( n) or clause( o) of  
sub-section ( 2) of section 7 until the employed person has been given  an opportunity of showing cause 
against the deduction, or otherwise than  in accordance  with such procedure as may be prescribed for the 
making of such deductions.]  
(2)All such deductions and all realisations thereof shall be recorded in a register to be kept by the person 
responsible for the payment of wages under section 3 in  such form as may be prescribed.  
11. Deductions for services rendered .—A deduction under clause ( d) or clause ( e) of sub -section ( 2) 
of section 7 shall not be made from the wages of an employed person, unless the house -accommodation 
amenity or service has been accepted by him, as a term of employment or otherwise, and such deduction 
shall not exceed an amount equivalent to the value of the house -accommodation amenity or service supplied 
and, in the case of a deduction under the said clause ( e), shall be sub ject to such conditions as  4*** 
5[appropriate  Government ] may impose.  
12. Deductions  for recovery of advances .—Deductions under clause ( f) of sub -section ( 2) of section 
7 shall be subject to the  following conditions, namely: — 
(a) recovery of an advance of money given before employment began shall be made from the first 
payment of wages in respect of a complete wage -period, but no recovery shall be made of such advances 
given for travelling -expenses;  
6[(aa) recovery of an advance of money given after employm ent began shall be subject to such 
conditions as 1[appropriate  Government ] may impose;]  
(b) recovery of advances of wages not already earned shall be subject to any rules made by 
1[appropriate Government ] regulating the extent to which such advances may be  given and the 
installments by which they may be recovered.  
                    
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 13]
 advances may be  given and the 
installments by which they may be recovered.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 41 of 2005, s. 3, for “the State Government” (w.e.f. 9 -11-2005).  
2. Added by Act 22 of 1937, s. 2 (w.e.f. 14 -4-1937).  
3. Subs. by Act 53 of 1964,  s. 7, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1965).  
4. The words “the Governor -General in Council or” omitted by the A.O. 1937.  
5. Subs. by Act 41 of 2005, s. 3, for “the State Government” (w.e.f. 9 -11-2005).  
6. Ins. by Act 53 of 1964, s. 8 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1965).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 14]
14 1[12A. Deductions for recovery of loans .—Deductions for recovery of loans granted under clause ( fff) 
of sub -section ( 2) of section 7 shall be subject to any rules made by 2[appropriate  Government ] regulating 
the extent to which such loans may be granted and the rate of interest payable thereon.]  
13. Deductions for payments to co -operative societies and insurance schemes .—Deductions under 
clause ( j) 3[and clause ( k)] of sub -section ( 2) of section 7 shall be subject to such conditions as 2[appropriate 
Government ] may impose.  
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 13. —In section 13 of the principal Act, — 
(1) for the heading the following heading shall be substituted, namely: — 
“13. Other deductions.”  
(2) for the words, letters and brackets,  “under clause (j) and clause (k)” the words, letters and brackets”  
under clause (j), clause (k), clause (q) and clause (r)” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Karnataka Act 2 of 1977, s. 4]  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 13. —In sub -section (2) of section 13 of the principal Act for the words, letters 
and brackets “clause (q) and clause (r)”, the words, letter and brackets “and clause (q)” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Karnataka Act 2 of 1982, s. 3].  
4[13A. Maintenance  of registers and records .—(1) Every employer shall maintain such registers and 
records giving such particulars of persons employed by him, the work performed by them, the wages paid 
to them, the deductions made from their wages, the receip ts given by them and such other particulars and 
in such form as may be prescribed.  
(2) Every register and record required to be maintained under this section shall, for the purposes of this 
Act, be preserved for a period of three years after the date of th e last entry made therein.]  
14. Inspectors .—(1) An Inspector of Factories appointed under  5[sub-section ( 1) of section 8  of the 
Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948)], shall be an Inspector for the purposes of this Act in 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 14]
8  of the 
Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948)], shall be an Inspector for the purposes of this Act in respect of all factories 
within the local limits assigned to him.  
(2)  1[Appropriate  Government] may appoint Inspectors for the purposes of this Act in respect of all 
persons employed upon a railway (otherwise than in a factory ) to whom this Act applies.  
(3) 1[Appropriate Government] may, by  notification in the Official Gazette, appoint such other persons 
as it thinks fit to be Inspectors for the purposes of this Act, and may define the local limits within which 
and the class of factories and  6[industrial or other establishments] in respect o f which they shall exercise 
their functions.  
7[(4) An Inspector may, — 
(a) make such examination and inquiry as he thinks fit in order to ascertain whether the provisions 
of this Act or rules made thereunder are being observed;  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 53 of 1964, s. 9 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1965).  
2. Subs. by Act 41 of 2005, s. 3, for “the State Government” (w.e.f. 9 -11-2005)  
3. Ins. by Ordinance 3 of 1940, s. 3.  
4. Ins. by Act 53 of 1964, s. 10 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1965).  
5. Subs. by Act 68 of 1957, s. 6, for  “sub-section ( 1) of section 10 of the Factories Act, 1934” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1958).  
6. Subs. by Act 38 of 1982, s. 9, for “industrial establishments” (w.e.f. 15 -10-1982).  
7. Subs. by Act 53 of 1964, s. 11, for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1965).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 15]
15 (b) with such assistance, i f any, as he thinks fit, enter, inspect and search any premises of any 
railway, factory or  1[industrial or other establishment ] at any reasonable time for the purpose of carrying 
out the object of this Act;  
(c) supervise  the payment of wages to persons employed upon any railway or in any factory 
or 1[industrial or other establishment ]; 
(d) require by a written order the production at such place, as may be prescribed, of any register  or 
record  maintained in pursuance of th is Act and take on the spot or otherwise statements of any persons 
which he may consider necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act;  
(e) seize or take copies of such registers or documents or portions thereof as he may consider 
relevant in respect  of an offence under this Act which he has reason to believe has been committed by 
an employer;  
(f) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed:  
Provided that no person shall be compelled under this sub -section to answer any question or make 
any statem ent tending to incriminate himself.  
(4A) The provisions of the  2[Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)] shall, so far as may be, 
apply to any search or seizure under this sub -section as they apply to any search or seizure made under the 
authority of  a warrant issued under  3[section 94] of the said Code.]  
(5) Every Inspector shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of the Indian Penal Code 
(45 of 1860).  
4[14A. Facilities  to be afforded to Inspectors .—Every employer shall afford an Inspector all 
reasonable facilities for making any entry, inspection, supervision, examination or inquiry under this Act.]  
15. Claims arising out of deductions from wages or delay in payment of wages and penalty for 
malicious or vexatious claims .—5[(1) The  appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint — 
(a) any Commissioner for Workmen's Compensation; or  
(b) any officer of the Central G
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 15]
e, appoint — 
(a) any Commissioner for Workmen's Compensation; or  
(b) any officer of the Central Government exercising functions as, — 
(i) Regional Labour Commissioner; or  
(ii) Assistant Labour Commissioner with at least two years ’ experience; or  
(c) any officer of the State Government not below the rank of Assistant Labour Commissioner with 
at least two years ’ experience; or  
(d) a presiding officer of any Labour Court or Industrial Tribun al, constituted under the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947  (14 of 1947)  or under any corresponding law relating to the investigation and 
settlement of industrial disputes in force in the State; or  
(e) any other officer with experience as a Judge of a Civil Co urt or a Judicial Magistrate,  
as the authority to hear and decide for any specified area all claims arising out of deductions from the wages, 
or delay in payment of the wages, of persons employed or paid in that area, including all matters incidental 
to such claims:  
Provided that where the appropriate Government considers it necessary so to do, it may appoint more 
than one authority for any specified area and may, by general or special order, provide for the distribution 
or allocation of work to be perfor med by them under this Act. ] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 1982, s. 9, for “industrial establishment” (w.e.f. 15 -10-1982).  
2. Subs. by s. 9, ibid.,  for “Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898” (w.e.f. 15 -10-1982).  
3. Subs. by s. 9, ibid.,  for “section 98” (w.e.f. 15 -10-1982).  
4. Ins. by Act 53 of 1964, s. 12 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1965).  
5. Subs. by Act 41 of 2005, s. 8, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 9 -11-2005).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 16]
16 (2) Where  contrary to the provisions of this Act any deduction has been made from the wages of an 
employed person, or any payment of wages has been delayed, such person himself, or any legal practitioner 
or any official of a re gistered trade union authorised in writing to act on his behalf, or any Inspector under 
this Act, or any other person acting with the permission of the authority appointed under sub -section ( 1), 
may apply to such authority for a direction under sub -section  (3): 
Provided that every such application shall be presented within  1[twelve months] from the date on which 
the deduction from the wages was made or from the date on which the payment of the wages was due to be 
made, as the case may be:  
Provided further t hat any application may be admitted after the said period of  1[twelve months] when 
the applicant satisfies the authority that he had sufficient cause for not making the application within such 
period.  
2[(3) When any application under sub -section ( 2) is entertained, the authority shall hear the applicant 
and the employer or other person responsible for the payment of wages under section 3, or give them an 
opportunity of being heard, and, after such further enquiry, if any, as may be necessary, may, w ithout 
prejudice to any other penalty to which such employer or other person is liable under this Act, direct the 
refund to the employed person of the amount deducted, or the payment of the delayed wages, together with 
the payment of such compensation as t he authority may think fit, not exceeding ten times the amount 
deducted in the former case and not exceeding three thousand rupees but not less than one thousand five 
hundred rupees in the latter, and even if the amount deducted or delayed wages are paid b efore the disposal 
of the  application, direct the payment of such compensation, as the authority may think fit, not exceeding 
two thousand rupees:  
Provided that a claim under this Act shall be disposed o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 16]
 fit, not exceeding 
two thousand rupees:  
Provided that a claim under this Act shall be disposed of as far as practicable within a period of three 
mont hs from the date of registration of the claim by the authority:  
Provided further that the period of three months may be extended if both parties to  the dispute agree 
for any bona fide reason to be recorded by the authority that the said period of three mon ths may be extended 
to such period as may be necessary to dispose of the application in a just manner:  
Provided also that no direction for the payment of compensation shall be made in the case of delayed 
wages if the authority is satisfied that the delay w as due to — 
(a) a bona fide  error or bona fide  dispute as to the amount payable to the employed person; or  
(b) the occurrence of an emergency, or the existence of exceptional circumstances, the person 
responsible for the payment of the wages was unable, in spite of exercising reasonable diligence; or  
(c) the failure of the employed person t o apply for or accept payment.]  
3[(4) If the authority hearing an application under this section is satisfied —  
(a) that the application was either malicious or vexatious,  the authority may direct that a 
penalty  4[not exceeding  three hundred seventy -five rupees] be paid to the employer or other person 
responsible for the payment of wages by the person presenting the application; or  
(b) that in any case in which compensation  is directed to be paid under sub -section ( 3), the applicant 
ought not to have been compelled to seek redress under this section, the authority may direct that a 
penalty 2[not exceeding three hundred seventy -five rupees]  be paid to 5[appropriate  Government ] by 
the employer or other person responsible for the payment of wages.  
(4A) Where there is any dispute as to the person or persons being the legal representative or 
representatives of the employer or of the employed person, the decision of the authority o n such 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 16]
 
representatives of the employer or of the employed person, the decision of the authority o n such dispute 
shall be final.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 53 of 1964, s. 13, for “six months” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1965).  
2. Subs. by Act 41 of 2005, s. 8, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 9 -11-2005).  
3. Subs. by Act 53  of 1964, s. 13, for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1965).  
4. Subs. by Act 41 of 2005, s. 8, for “not exceeding fifty rupees” (w.e.f. 9 -11-2005).  
5.Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for “the State Government” (w.e.f. 9 -11-2005).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 17]
17 (4B) Any  inquiry under this section shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning 
of sections 193,  219 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).]  
(5) Any Amount directed to be paid under this section may  be recovered — 
(a) if the authority is a Magistrate, by the authority as if it were a fine imposed by him as Magistrate, 
and 
(b) if the authority is not a Magistrate, by the Magistrate to whom the authority makes application 
in this behalf, as if it were a  fine imposed by such Magistrate.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 15 .—In section 15 of the principal Act. — 
(1) in sub -section (2), after the word, brackets and figure “sub -section (3)”, the following shall be 
inserted, namely: — 
“and in case of death of the employed person, it shall be lawful for his legal representatives to make and 
application for such direction”;  
(2) for sub -section (5), the following sub -section shall be substituted, namely: — 
“(5) Any amount directed to be pai d under this section may be recovered by the authority as an arrear of 
land revenue and the authority shall for that purpose be deemed to be a public officer within the meaning of 
section 5 of the Revenue Recovery Act, 1890 ”. 
[Vide Karnataka Act 2 of 1977, s.  5] 
Insertion of new section 15A .—After section 15 of the Principal Act, the followin g section shall be inserted, 
namely: — 
“15A. Liability for payment of court fees .—(1) In any proceedings under section 15, the applicant shall 
not be liable to pay any court fees (other than fees payable for the service of process) in respect of such 
proceedings:  
Provided that when the application is presented by an Inspector he shall not be liable to pay the process fees 
also. 
(2) Where the appl icant succeeds in such proceedings, the authority hearing the application shall calculate 
the amount of court fees which would have been payable by the applicant but for sub -section (1) and direct the 
employer or other 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 17]
would have been payable by the applicant but for sub -section (1) and direct the 
employer or other person responsible for the payment of  wages under section 3 to pay such  amount to the State  
Government. Such amount shall, without prejudice to any other mode of recovery be recoverable as an arrear of 
land revenue.  
(3) When an appeal is preferred under section 17 by a person making an application under section 15, the 
provisions of sub -sections (1) and (2) shall mutatis mutandis apply with the modification that such person, not 
being an Inspector, shall pay court fee s of an amount of five rupees, but that such amount shall be refunded to 
him in the event of his succeeding in the appeal.”  
[Vide Karnataka Act 2 of 1977, s. 6]  
Karnataka  
In section 15 for the words “Stipendiary Magistrate” the words “Judicial Magistrate” shall be 
substituted.  
[Vide Karnataka Act 13 of 1965, s. 67 and Schedule]  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 15 of Act IV of 1936. —In section 15 of the said Act, -- 
(a) in sub -section (1), for the words and figures beginning with the words "appoint any" and ending 
with the words "to be the authority", the words "appoint one or more persons to be the authority or 
authorities ” shall be substituted;  
(b) after sub -section (1), insert the following sub -sections, namely: -- 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 18]
18 “(1A) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as an authority under this Act unless he 
is a Commissioner for Workmen's Compensation or any other officer with experience as a Judge 
of a Civil Court or as a stipendiary Judicial Magistrate or as a Judg e of a Labour Court or as a 
judicial member of the Industrial Court constituted under the Bombay Industrial Relations Act, 
1946  (XI of 1947) , or as a stipendiary Judicial Magistrate.  
(IB) Where more than one person are appointed for any specified area as a uthorities under           
sub-section (1), the State Government may by general or special order make such arrangements as 
it thinks fit for the distribution of the work among the authorities so appointed. ”; 
(c) in sub -section (2). — 
(i) after the words “to  act on his behalf the words and figures “ or a representative union 
registered as such under the Bombay Industrial Relations act, 1946 (Bom. XI of 194 7), shall be 
inserted;  
(ii) after the word, brackets and figure “sub -section (3)” the following shall be inserted, 
namely: -- 
“and in case of death of the employed person, it shall be lawful for his legal representative 
to make an application for  such direction”;  
(d) in sub -section  (3), -- 
(i) for the words “refund to the employed person” the words “refund to  the employed person 
of his legal representative, as the case may be,” shall be substituted;  
(ii) after the words “twenty -five rupees in the latter” the following shall be inserted, namely: - 
“and the authority may direct the payment of such compensation in cases, where the 
amount deducted or the delayed wages are paid by the employer to the employed person or his 
legal representative before he disposal for the application ”; 
(iii) in the provis o, after the words “employed person”, at both the places where they occur, the 
words “or his legal representative” shall be inserted;  
(e) after sub -section (5), the following shall be added, namely: - 
“(6) Where a quest
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 18]
 inserted;  
(e) after sub -section (5), the following shall be added, namely: - 
“(6) Where a question arises as to whether any person is  or is not a legal representative of the 
decreased employed person, such question shall be determined by the authority and the decision of 
the authority shall be final.”  
[Vide Bombay  Act XLVII I of 1955, s. 3]  
Maharashtra  
Deletion of section 15 (3A) from Act IV of 1936 .—Sub-section (3 -A) inserted in section 15 of the 
Payment of Wages Act, 1936 (IV of 1936), by section 4 (4) of the Payment of Wages (Bombay Amendment) 
Act, 1953(Bom LXII of 1953), shall, in its application to the Bombay area of the State of M aharashtra, be 
deleted therefrom.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act XIII of 1961, s. 3]  
Amendment of section 15 of Act IV of 1936 .—In section 15 of the Principal act, in sub -section (1A), 
for the portion beginning with the words “of a Labour  Court” and ending with the words “Judicial 
Magistrate” the following shall be substituted, namely: - 
 “as a stipendiary Judicial Magistrate or as Judge of a Labour Court or as judicial member of the 
Industrial Court constituted under the Bombay Industrial Relations Act, 1946 (Bom. XIV of 1947), or 
as presiding officer of a Tribunal constituted under the Industrial Disputes, 1947 (XI of 1947) ”. 
[Vide Maharashtra Act XII I of 1961, s. 6]  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 19]
19 Amendment of section 15 of Act IV of 1953. —In section 15 of the said act,— 
(1) in sub -section (1), after the words “Civil Court” the words and figures “or of a Labour Court 
constituted under the Bombay Industrial Relations Act, 1946 (Bom. XI of 1947), shall be inserted;  
(2) in sub -section (2), in both the proviso, for the w ords “six months” the words “one year” shall 
be substituted.  
(3) in sub -section (3), for the words “ten rupees” the words “twenty -five rupees” shall be 
substituted;  
(4) after sub -section (3) the following shall be inserted, namely: -- 
“(3A) Where at any sta ge of an applicati on under sub -section (2) the authority, upon report 
made to it and after hearing such employer or other person is satisfied that it is necessary go to do 
in order that the satisfaction of any direction that may be given under sub -section (3) is not delayed 
or defeated, the authority may order the conditional attachment of the property which may be liable 
for the satisfaction of such direction, unles s such employer or other person either deposits with the 
authority an adequate sum sufficien t to satisfy the claim or given security for a like amount.  
An attachment made under the this sub -section shall have the same effect as if made by a 
competent Civil Court.”;  
(5) for sub -section (4), the following shall be substituted, namely: -- 
“(4) if the  Authority hearing any application under this section is satisfied, -- 
(i) that the application was either malicious or vexatious, the authority may direct that 
a penalty not exceeding fifty rupees be paid to the employer or other person responsible 
for the  payment of wages by the presenting the application ; or  
(ii) that, in any case in which compensation is directed to be paid under sub -section 
(3), the applicant ought not to have been compelled to seek redress under this section, the 
authority may direct that a penalty not exceeding fifty rupees to also paid by the employer 
or other perso
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 19]
ty may direct that a penalty not exceeding fifty rupees to also paid by the employer 
or other person responsible for the payment of wages. The amount of such penalty when 
paid or recovered shall be credited to the State Government. ” 
[Vide Maharashtra Act LXII of 1953, s. 4]  
Insertion of new section 15A in Act IV of 1953 .—After section 15 of the said Act, the following 
section shall be inserted, namely: -- 
“15A. Liability for payment of court -fees.—(1) In any proceedings under section 15, th e 
applicant shall not be liable to any court -fees (other than fees payable for service of process) in respect 
of such proceedings:  
Provided that when the application is presented by an Inspector he shall not be liable to pay the 
process fees also.  
(2) Wher e the applicant succeeds in such proceedings, the authority hearing the application shall 
calculate the amount of court -fees which would have been payable by the applicant but for sub -section 
(1) and direct the employer or  other person responsible for the  payment of wages under section 3 to 
pay such amount to the State Government, Such amount shall, without prejudice to any other mode of 
recovery, be recoverable as an arrear of land revenue.”  
[Vide Maharashtra Act LXII of 1953, s. 5]  
Rajasthan  
Insertion of  new section 15A, Central Act 4 of 1936. -After section 15 of the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 
(Central Act 4 of 1936), hereinafter referred to as the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely - 
"15A. Liability for payment of court -fees.- (1) In any proceedings under section 15, the applicant 
shall not be liable to pay any court -fees (other than fees payable for service of process) in respect of 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 20]
20 such proceedings; provided that when the application is presented by an Inspector, he shall not be liable 
to pay the process fees even.  
(2) Where the applicant succeeds in such proceedings, the authority hearing the application shall 
calculate the amount of court -fees which would have been payable by the applicant, but for sub -section 
(1), and direct  the employer or other person responsible for the payment of wages under section 3, to 
pay such amount to the State Government. Such amount shall, without prejudice to any other mode of 
recovery, be recoverable as an arrear of land revenue."  
[Vide Rajastha n Act 13 of 1970, s. 2]  
Amendment of section  15, Central Act 4 of 1936. --In the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 (Central Act 
4 of 1936), in its application to the State of Rajasthan, in section 15, in sub -section (1), after the expression 
"stipendiary Magistrate", the expression "or a Vikas Adhikari appointed under the Rajasthan Panchayat 
Samiti And Zila Parishads Act, 1959 (Raj asthan Act 37 of 1959)" shall be inserted.  
[Vide Rajasthan Act  11  of 1976, s. 2]  
Haryana  
After the proviso to sub -section (1) of section 15 of the Payment of  Wages Act, 1936, the following 
further proviso shall be added, namely: -- 
“Provided further that the State Government may transfer any matter from one authority to the 
other authority.”.  
[Vide Haryana Act 5 of 1985, s. 2]  
16. Single application in respect of claims from unpaid group .—(1) Employed persons are said to 
belong to the same unpaid group if they are borne on the same establishment and if  1[deductions have been 
made from their wages in contravention of this Act for the same cause and during the same wage period or 
periods or if] their wages for the same wage -period or periods have remained unpaid after the day fixed by 
section 5.  
(2) A single application may be presented under section 15 on behalf or in respect of any number of 
employed persons belonging to the same unpaid group, and in
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 20]
n behalf or in respect of any number of 
employed persons belonging to the same unpaid group, and in such case  2[every person on whose behalf 
such application is presented may be awarded maximum compensa tion to the extent specified in sub -section 
(3) of section 15].  
(3) The authority may deal with any number of separate pending applications, presented under section 
15 in respect of persons belonging to the same unpaid group, as a single application presen ted under sub -
section ( 2) of this section, and the provisions of that sub -section shall apply accordingly.  
17. Appeal .—(1) 3[An appeal against an order dismissing either wholly or in part an application made 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 15, or against a direction made under sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4) of 
that section] may be preferred, within thirty days of the date on which  4[the order or direction] was made, 
in a Presidency -town  5*** before the Court of Small Causes and elsewhere before the Dis trict Court — 
(a) by the  employer or other person responsible for the payment of wages under section 3, if the 
total sum directed to be paid by way of wages and compensation exceeds three hundred rupees  6[or 
such direction has the effect of imposing on the employer or the other person a financial liability 
exceeding one thousand rupees], or  
7[(b) by an employed person or any legal practitioner or any official of a registered trade union 
authorised in writing to act on his behalf or any Inspector under this A ct, or any other person permitted 
by the authority to make an application under sub -section ( 2) of section 15, if the total amount of wages 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 53 of 1964, s. 14 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1965).  
2. Subs. by s. 14, ibid.,  for “the maximum compensation that may be awarded under sub -section (3) of section 15 shall be ten rupees 
per head” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1965).  
3. Subs. by Act 68 of 1957, s. 7, for “An appeal ag
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 20]
l be ten rupees 
per head” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1965).  
3. Subs. by Act 68 of 1957, s. 7, for “An appeal against a direction made under sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4) of section 15” 
(w.e.f. 1 -4-1958).  
4. Subs. by s. 7, ibid.,  for “the direction” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1958).  
5. The words “or in Rangoon” omitted by the A.O. 1937.  
6. Ins. by Act 53 of 1964, s. 15 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1965).  
7. Subs. by s.15, ibid., for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1965).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 21]
21 claimed to have been withheld from the  employed person exceeds twenty rupees or from the unpaid 
group to which the e mployed person belongs or belonged exceeds fifty rupees, or]  
(c) by any person directed to pay a penalty under  1[sub-section ( 4)] of section 15.  
1[(1A) No appeal under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1)] shall lie unless the memorandum of appeal is 
accompanied by a certificate by the authority to the effect that the appellant has deposited the amount 
payable under the direction appealed against.]  
2[(2) Save as provided in sub -section ( 1) any order dismissing either wholly or in part an application 
made under sub -section ( 2) of section 15, or a direction made under sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4) of 
that section shall be final.]  
3[(3) Where an employer prefers an appeal under this section, the authority against whose decision the 
appeal has been preferred may, and if so directed by the court referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall, pending 
the decision of the appeal, withhold payment of any sum in deposit with it.  
(4) The court referred to in sub -section ( 1) may, if it thinks fit, submit any question of law for the  
decision of the High Court and, if it so does, shall decide the question in conformity with such decision.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 17 .—In section 17 of the principal Act, — 
(1) in sub -section (2), after the words , brackets and figure “sub -section (4) of that section” the 
words, brackets, figures and letter, “or any order made under sub -section  (1) of section 17A” shall be 
inserted.  
(2) after sub -section (4), the following sub -section shall be added, namely: — 
“(5) the provisions  of section 5 of the Limitation Act, 1963 shall be applicable to appeals 
under this section.”  
[Vide Karnataka Act 2 of 1977, s. 7]  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 17 of Act IV of 1936 .—In section 17 of the said Act, in sub -section (1), in 
clause (b), -- 
(i) after the words “an 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 21]
6 .—In section 17 of the said Act, in sub -section (1), in 
clause (b), -- 
(i) after the words “an employed person” the following shall be inserted namely: - 
“or any legal practitioner or any official of  a registered trade union authorised in writing to act 
on act on his behalf or a representative union  registered as such under the Bombay Industrial 
Relations act, 1946, or any Inspector under this Act or any other person authorised by an authority 
to make an application under sub -section (2) of section 15 and in the case of death of the employed 
person, his legal representative, as the case may be,”;  
(ii) for the words “him” and “he” the words “the employed person” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Bombay  Act XLVIII of 19 55, s. 4]  
Amendment of section 17 of Act IV of 1936 .—In section 17 of the principal Act, in  sub-section (1) ,— 
(1) for clause (b), the following shall be substituted, namely:  — 
“(b) by an employed person, or any legal practitioner or any official of a registered trade union 
authorised in writing in writing to act on his behalf, or a representativ e union registered as such 
under the Bombay Industrial Relations Act, 1946 (Bom. XI of 1947), or any Inspector under this 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 20 of 1937, s. 2 and the First Schedule, for “sub -section ( 5) (w.e.f. 14 -4-1937).  
2. Subs. by Act 68 of 1957, s. 7, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 1 -4-1958).  
3. Ins. by Act 53 of 1964, s. 15 (w.e.f. 1-2-1965).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 22]
22 Act, or any other person authorised by an authority to make an application under sub -section (2) of 
section 15, and (in the case of th e death of the employed person) by his legal  representative, as the 
case may be, if the total amount of  wages claimed to have been withheld from the employed person, 
or from the unpaid group to which the employed person belonged, exceeds fifty rupees, or ” 
(2) after the first proviso, the following shall be added, namely: -- 
 “Provided further that, when the order or direction appealed against was made by any person 
who holds or has held office of or above the rank of a District Judge or a judicial member o f the 
Industrial Court constituted under the Bombay Industrial relations Act, 1946, or the presiding 
officer of a Tribunal constituted under the Industrial Disputes act, 1947, an appeal under this section 
shall lie to the High Court.”  
[Vide Maharashtra Act  XIII of 1961, s. 7]  
Amendment of section 17 of Act IV of 193 6.—In section 17 of the said Act, -- 
(1) to sub -section (1), the following shall be added, namely: -- 
“Provided that no appeal by an employer or other person responsible for the payment of wages 
under section 3, under clause (a) shall lie unless the memorandum of appeal is accompanied by a 
certificate by the authority, to the effect that the appellant has deposited with it the amount payable 
under the order appealed against.”  
(2) sub -section (2), after the brackets and figure “(4)” the words, brackets figure and letter”, or any 
order made under sub -section (3A)” shall be inserted;  
(3) after sub -section (2), the following sub -section shall be added, namely: -- 
“(3) The provisions of section 5 of the Indian Limitation Act, 1908  (IX of 1908) , shall be 
applicable to appeals under this section.”  
[Vide Bombay Act LXII of 1953, s. 6]  
1[17A. Conditional attachment of property of employer or other person responsible for payment 
of wages .—(1) Where at any time  after an application ha
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 22]
r or other person responsible for payment 
of wages .—(1) Where at any time  after an application has been made under sub -section ( 2) of section 15 
the authority, or where at any time after an appeal has been filed under section 17 by an employed person 
or 2[any legal practitioner or any official of a registered trade union author ised in writing to act on his behalf 
or any Inspector under this Act or any other person permitted by the authority to make an application under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 15] the Court referred to in that section, is satisfied that the employer or other 
person responsible for the payment of wages under section 3 is likely to evade payment of any amount that 
may be directed to be paid under section 15 or section 17, the authority or the court, as the case may be, 
except in cases where the authority or court  is of opinion that the ends of justice would be defeated  by the 
delay, after giving the employer or other person an opportunity of being heard, may direct the attachment 
of so much of the property of the employer or other person responsible for the payment of wages as is, in 
the opinion of the authority or cour t, sufficient to satisfy the amount which may be payable under the 
direction.  
(2) The provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), relating to attachment before 
judgment under that Code shall, so far as may be, apply to any order for attach ment under sub -section ( 1).] 
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 68 of 1957, s. 8 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1958).  
2. Subs. by Act 53 of 1964, s. 16, for “any official of a registered trade union authorised in writing to act on his behalf"”                 
(w.e.f. 1 -2-1965).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 23]
23 STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 17A of Act IV of 1936 inserted by Act LXVIII of 1957 .—In section 17A 
inserted in the principal Act by section 8 of the Payment of Wages (Amendment) Act, 1957 (III of 1957), 
in sub -section (1), for the words “any official of a registered trade union authorised in writing to act on his 
behalf” the words “any other person or a representative union competent to present such appeal,” shall be 
substituted.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act XIII of 1961, s. 8]  
Renumbering of section 17A of Act IV of 1936 .—Section 17A as inserted in the principal Act by 
section 3 of the Payment  of Wages (Bombay Amendment) Act, 1954 (Bom LXX of 1954), shall be 
renumbered as section 17B the principal Act.  
[Vide Maharashtra act XIII of 1961, s. 9]  
Rajasthan  
Insertion of new section 17B, Central Act 4 of 1936. -After section 17A of the principal Act,  the 
following section shall be inserted, namely: - 
"17B.  Provisions of section 15A to apply to appeals preferred under section 17 with 
modification .- When an appeal is preferred under section 17 by a person making an application under 
section 15, the provi sions of section 15A shall mutatis mutandis apply, with the modification that such 
person, not being an Inspector, shall pay court -fees of an amount of five rupees, but that such amount 
shall be refunded to him in the event of his success in the appeal."  
[Vide Rajasthan Act 13 of 1970, s. 3]  
18. Powers of authorities appointed under section 15 .—Every authority appointed under sub -section 
(1) of section 15  shall have all the powers of a Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 
1908), for the  purpose of taking evidence and of enforcing the attendance o f witnesses and compelling the 
production of documents, and every such authority shall be deemed to be a Civil Court of all the purposes 
of section 195  and of  1[Chapter XXVI of the Code of Crimin al Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)].  
19.[Power to rec
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 23]
95  and of  1[Chapter XXVI of the Code of Crimin al Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)].  
19.[Power to recover from emplo yer in certain cases ].—Omitted by the Payment of Wages 
(Amendment ) Act, 1964 (53 of 1964), s. 17 (w.e.f . 1-2-1965).  
20. Penalty for offences under the Act .—(1) Whoever being responsible for the payment of wages to 
an employed person contravenes any of the provisions of any of the following section, namely,  2[section5 
except sub -section ( 4) thereof, section 7, section 8 except sub -section( 8) thereof, section 9, section 10 
except sub -section ( 2) thereof, and sections11 to 13], both inclusive, shall be punishable 3[with fine which 
shall not be less than one thousand five hundred rupees but which may extend to seven thousand 
five hundred rupees].  
(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 4 ,4[sub-section( 4) of section 5, section 6, sub -section 
(8) of section 8, sub -section ( 2) of section 10] or section 25 shall be punishable 5[with fine which may 
extend to  three thousand seven hundred fifty rupees].  
6[(2A) Whoever  being required to nominate or designate a person under section 3 fails to do so, such 
person shall be punishable with fine which may extend to three thousand rupees. ] 
7[(3)Whoever being required under this Act to maintain any records or registers or to fu rnish any 
information or return — 
(a) fails to maintain such register or record; or  
(b) wilfully refuses or without lawful excuse neglects to furnish such infor mation or return; or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 1982, s. 10, for “Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973” (w.e.f. 15 -10-1982).  
2. Subs. by Act 53 of 1964, s. 18, for “section 5 and sections 7 to 13” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1965).  
3. Subs. by Act 41 of 2005, s. 9, for “with fine which shall not be less than two  hundred rupees but which may extend to one 
thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 9 -11-2005).  
4. Subs. by Act 53 of 1964, s.18, f
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 23]
which may extend to one 
thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 9 -11-2005).  
4. Subs. by Act 53 of 1964, s.18, for “section 6” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1965).  
5. Subs. by Act 41 of 2005, s. 9, for “with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 9 -11-2005). 
6. Ins. by Act 41 of 2005, s. 9 (w.e.f. 9 -11-2005).  
7. Ins. by Act 53 of 1964, s.18 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1965).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 24]
24 (c) wilfully furnishes or causes to be furnished any information or return which he knows to be 
false; or  
(d) refuses to answer or wilfully gives a false answer to any question necessary for obtaining any 
information required to be furnished under this Act,  
shall for each such offence, be punishable  5[with fine  which shall not be  less than one thousand five hundred 
rupees but which may extend to seven thousand five hundred rupees].  
(4) Whoever — 
(a) wilfully obstructs an Inspector in the discharge of his duties under this Act; or  
(b) refuses  or wi lfully  neglects to afford an Inspector any reasonable facility for making any entry, 
inspection, examination, supervision, or inquiry authorised by or under this Act in relation to any 
railway, factory of  1[industrial or other establishment]; or  
(c) wilfully ref uses to produce on the demand of an Inspector any register or other document kept 
in pursuance of this Act; or  
(d) prevents or attempts to prevent or does anything which he has any reason to believe is likely to 
prevent any person from appearing before or being examined by an Inspector acting in pursuance of 
his duties under this Act,  
shall be punishable  2[with fine which shall not be less than one thousand five hundred rupees but which 
may extend to seven thousand five hundred rupees].  
(5) If any person who has been convicted of any offence punishable under this Act is again guilty of an 
offence involving contravention of the same provision, he shall be punishable on a subsequent conviction 
with imprisonment for a term  3[with fine which shall not be less than three thousand seven hundred fifty 
rupees but which may extend to twenty -two thousand five hundred]:  
Provided that for the purpose of sub -section, no cognizance shall be taken of any conviction made more 
than two years before the date on which the com mission of the offence which is being punished came to 
the knowledge of the Inspector.  
(6) If any person fails o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 24]
offence which is being punished came to 
the knowledge of the Inspector.  
(6) If any person fails or wi lfully neglects to pay the wages o f any employed person by the dat e fixed 
by the authority, in this behalf, he shall, without prejudice to a ny other action that may be taken against 
him, be punishable with an additional fine which may extend to  4[seven hundred fifty rupees] for each day 
for which such failure or neglect continues.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 20 of Act IV of 1936. —In section 20 of the said Act, in sub -section (1), for the 
words “five hundred rupees” the words “two thousand rupees” shall be substituted.”.  
[Vide Bombay Act LXII of 1953, s. 7]  
21. Procedure  in trial of offences .—(1) No Court shall take cognizance of a complaint against any 
person for an offence under sub -section ( 1) of section 20 unless an application in respect of the facts 
constituting the offence has been presented under section 15 has been granted wholly or in part and the 
authority empowered under the latter section or the appellate Court granting such application has sanctioned 
the making of the complaint.  
(2) Before sanctioning the making of a complaint against any person for an offence under sub -section 
(1) of section 20, the authority empowered under section 15 or the appellate Court, as the case may be, shall 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 1982, s. 11, for “industrial establishment” (w.e.f. 15 -10-1982).  
2. Subs. by Act 41 of 2005, s. 9, for “with fine which shall not be less than two hundred rupees but which may extend to one 
thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 9 -11-2005).  
3. Subs. by Act 41 of 2005 , s. 9, for “with fine which shall not be less than five hundred rupees but which may extend to three 
thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 9 -11-2005).  
4. Subs. by s. 9, ibid.,  for “one hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 9 -11-2005).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 24]
undred rupees” (w.e.f. 9 -11-2005).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 25]
25 give such person an opportunity of showing cause  against the granting of such sanction, and the sanction 
shall not be granted if such person satisfi es the authority or Co urt that his default was due to — 
(a) a bona fide  error or bona fide  dispute as to the amount payable to the employed person, or  
(b) the occurrence of an emergency or the existence of exceptional circumstances, such that the 
person res ponsible for the payment of the wages was unable, though exercising reasonable diligence, 
to make prompt payment, or  
(c) the failure of the employed person to apply for or accept payment.  
(3) No Court shall take cognizance of a contravention of section 4 o r of section 6 or of a contravention 
of any rules made under section 26 except on a complaint made by or with the sanction of an Inspector 
under this Act.  
1[(3A) No Court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under sub -section ( 3) or sub -section 
(4) of section 20 except on a complaint made by or with the sanction of an Inspector under this Act.]  
(4) In imposing  any fine for an offence under sub -section ( 1) of section 20 the court shall take into 
consideration the amount of any compensation already  awarded against the accused in any proceedings 
taken under section 15.  
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 21. —In section 21 of the principal Act, — 
(1) in sub -section (1), for the words “and the authority empowered under the latter section or  the 
Appellate Court granting such application”, the words “by the authority or the Appellate Court or th e State 
Government or any Officer authorised by it in this behalf” shall be substituted;  
(2) in sub -section (2) for the words and figures “the authority  empowered under section 15 or the 
Appellate Court”, the words “the State Government or the officer authorised by it in this behalf” shall be 
substituted.  
[Vide Karnataka Act 2 of 1977, s. 8]  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 21  of act IV of 1936 .—In s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 25]
ide Karnataka Act 2 of 1977, s. 8]  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 21  of act IV of 1936 .—In section 21 of the said Act, in sub -section (2), after 
the words “employed person”, at both the places where they occur, the words “or his legal representative” 
shall be inserted.  
[Vide Bombay  Act XLVIII of 1955, s. 5]  
Amendment of section 21 of  Act 21 of 1936. —In section 21 of the said Act, -- 
(1) in sub -section (1), for the words “and the authority empowered under the latter section or the 
appellate Court granting such applicant” the words “by the authority or the appellate Court and the 
State Government o r any officer authorised by it in this behalf “ shall be substituted;  
(2) in sub -section (2), -- 
(i) for the words and figures “the authority empowered under section 15 or the appellate Court, 
the words “the State Government or the officer authorised by it  in this behalf,” shall be substituted.  
(ii) for the words “the authority or Court” the words “the State Government or the authorised 
office” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Bombay  Act LXII of 1953, s. 8] 
 22. Bar of Suits .—No Court shall entertain any suit for the recovery of wages or of any deduction 
from wages in so far as the sum so claimed — 
(a) forms the subject of an application under section 15 which has been presented by the plaintiff 
and which is pending before the  authority appointed under that sect ion or of an appeal under section 
17; or  
(b) has formed the subject of a direction under section 15 in favour of the plaintiff; or  
(c) has been adjudged, in any proceeding under section 15, not to be owed to the plaintiff; or  
(d) could have been recovered by an application under section 15.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 53 of 1964, s.19 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1965).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 26]
26 1[22A. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Government or any officer of the Government for anything which is in good faith done or 
intended to be  done under this Act.]  
23. Contracting out .—Any contract or agreement, whether made before or after the commencement 
of this Act, whereby an employed person relinquishes any right conferred by this Act shall be null and void 
in so far as it purports to deprive him of such right.  
2[24. Delegation of powers .—The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act shall, in relation to such matters and subject 
to such conditions, if any , as may be specified in the direction, be also exercisable — 
(a) where the appropriate Government is the Central Government, by such officer or authority 
subordinate to the Central Government or by the State Government or by such officer or authority 
subordinate to the State Government, as may be specified in the notification;  
(b) where the appropriate Government is a State Government, by such officer or authority 
subordinate to the State Government as may be specified in the notification. ] 
25. Display  by notice of abstracts of the Act .—The person responsible for the payment of wages to 
persons3[employed in a factory or an industrial or other establishment] shall cause to be4[displayed in such 
factory or industrial or other establishment] a notice conta ining such abstracts of this Act and of the rules 
made there under in English and in the language of the majority of the persons employed5[in the factory or 
industrial or other establishment ] as may be prescribed.  
6[25A. Payment of undi sbursed wages in cases of death of employed person .—(1) Subject to the 
other provisions of the Act, all amounts payable to an employed person as wages shall, if such amounts 
could not or cannot be paid on account of his death befor
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 26]
ed person as wages shall, if such amounts 
could not or cannot be paid on account of his death before payment or on account of his whereabouts  not 
being known ,— 
(a) be paid to the person nominated by him in this behalf in accordance with the rules made under 
this Act; or  
(b) where no such nomination has been made or where for any reasons such amounts cannot be 
paid to the person so nominated, be  deposited with the prescribed authority who shall deal with the 
amounts so deposited in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) Where, in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 1), all amounts payable  to an employed 
person as wages — 
(a) are paid by the employer to the person nominated by the employed person, or  
(b) are deposited by the employer  with the prescribed authority,  
the employer shall be discharged of his liability to pay those wages. ] 
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 53 of 1964 , s. 20 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1965).  
2. Subs. by Act 41 of 2005, s. 10, for section 24 (w.e.f. 9 -11-2005).  
3. Subs. by Act 38 of 1982, s. 12, for “employed in a factory” (w.e.f. 15 -10-1982).  
4. Subs. by s. 12, ibid.,  for “displayed in such factory” (w.e.f. 15 -10-1982).  
5. Subs. by s. 12, ibid.,  for “in the factory” (w.e.f. 15 -10-1982).  
6. Ins. by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -10-1982).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 27]
27 26. Rule -making power .—(1) 1[Appropriate  Government] may make rules to regulate the procedure 
to be followed by the authorities and Courts referred to in sections 15 and 17.  
(2) 5[Appropriate  Government] may,2*** by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for the 
purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Act.  
(3) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, rules  made under sub -
section ( 2) may — 
(a) require the maintenance of such records, registers, returns and notices as are necessary for  the 
enforcement of the Act  3[, prescribe the form thereof and the particulars to be entered in such registers 
or records];  
(b) require the display in a conspicuous place or premises where employment is carried on of 
notices specifying rates of wages payab le to persons employed on such premises;  
(c) provide for the regular inspection of the weights, measures and weighing machines used by 
employers in checking  or ascertaining the wages of persons employed by them ; 
(d) prescribe the manner of giving notice of  the days on which wages will be paid;  
(e) prescribe the authority competent to approve under sub -section ( 1) of section 8 acts and 
omissions in respect of which fines may be imposed;  
(f) prescribe  the procedure for the imposition of fines under section 8 and for the making of the 
deductions referred to in section 10;  
(g) prescribe the conditions subject to which deduction may be made under the proviso to sub -
section ( 2) of section 9;  
(h) prescribe the authority competent to approve the purposes on which the proceeds of fines shall 
be expended;  
(i) prescribe the extent to which advances may be made and the installments by which they may be 
recovered with reference to clause ( b) of section 12;  
4[(ia) prescribe the extent to which loans may be granted and the rate of interest payable thereon 
with reference to section 12A;  
(ib) prescribe the powers of Inspectors for the
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 27]
st payable thereon 
with reference to section 12A;  
(ib) prescribe the powers of Inspectors for the purposes of this Act;]  
(j) regulate the scales of costs which may be allowed in proce edings under this Act;  
(k) prescribe the amount of court -fees payable in respect of any proceedings under this Act;5*** 
(l) prescribe the abstracts to be contained in the notices required by section 25;6*** 
7[(la) prescribe the form and manner in which nominations may be made for the purposes of sub -
section (1) of section 25A, the cancellation or variation of any such nomination, or the making of any 
fresh nomination in the event of the nominee predeceasing the person making nomination, and other 
matters  connected with such nominations;  
(lb) specify the authority with whom amounts required to be deposited under clause (b) of sub -
section ( 1) of section 25A shall be deposited, and the manner in which such authority shall deal with 
the amounts deposited with  it under that clause;]  
1[(m) provide for any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 41 of 2005, s. 3, for “the State Government” (w.e.f. 9 -11-2005).  
2. The words “subject to the control of the Governor -General in Council,” omitted by the A.O. 1937.  
3. Subs. by Act 53 of 1964, s. 22, for “and prescribed the  form thereof” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1965).  
4. Ins. by Act 53 of 1964, s. 22 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1965).  
5. The word “and” omitted by Act 53 of 1964, s. 22 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1965).  
6. The word “and” omitted by Act 38 of 1982, s. 14 (w.e.f. 15 -10-1982).  
7. Ins. by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -10-1982).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 28]
28 (4) In making any rule under this section1[appropriate  Government] may provide that a contravention 
of the rule shall be punishable with fine2[which shall not be less than seven hundred fifty rupees but which 
may extend to one thousand five hundred rupees] . 
(5) All rules made under this section shall be subject to the condition of previous publication, and the 
date to be specified under clause ( 3) of section 23  of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), shall not 
be less than three months from the date on which the draft of the proposed rules was published.  
1[(6) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in3[two or more successive sessions,] and if, before the expiry of the 
session  4[immediately following the sessi on or the successive sessions aforesaid] both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule, or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.]  
5[(7) All rules made under this section by the State Government shall, as soon as possible after they are 
made , be lai d before the State Legislature .] 
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 26 .—In section 26 of the principal Act in sub -section (3 ), in clause (k) for the 
words “Court fees”, the words “ ad valorem  or fixed court fees” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Karnataka Act 2 of 1977, s. 9]  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 26 of Act IV of 1936. —In section 26 of the said Act, in sub -section (3), -- 
(1) after clause (d) the following shall be inserted, namely: -- 
“(da) prescribing the manner in which the exce
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936.pdf - page 28]
ause (d) the following shall be inserted, namely: -- 
“(da) prescribing the manner in which the excess amount of the bonus shall be paid or invested 
under section 16;”  
(2) in clause (k), — 
(a) for the word “court -fees” the words “ ad valorem or  fixed court -fees”  shall be substituted;  
(b) the word “and” shall be deleted.  
[Vide Bombay  Act LXII of 1953, s. 9]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 41 of 2005, s. 3, for “the State Government” (w.e.f. 9 -11-2005).  
2. Subs. by s. 11, ibid.,  for “which may extend to two hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 9 -11-2005).  
3. Subs. by Act 38 of 1982, s. 14, for “two successive sessions” (w.e.f. 15 -10-1982).  
4. Subs. by s. 14, ibid.,  for “in which it is so laid or the session immediately following” (w.e.f. 15 -10-1982).  
5. Ins. by Act 41 of 2005, s. 11 (w.e.f. 9 -11-2005).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PENSIONS’ ACT, 1871.pdf - page 1]
1 
 R E A M B L E   PAGE  
113     THE PENSIONS’  ACT, 1871  
____ ____  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
 
PREAMBLE  
I.—PRELIMINARY . 
SECTIONS  
1. Short t itle. 
 Extent of Act.  
2. [Repealed. ]. 
3. Interpretation -Section.  
3A. Definition.  
II.—RIGHTS  TO PENSIONS  
4. Bar of suits relating to pensions.  
5. Claims to be made to collector , Deputy Commissioner or other  authorised officer.  
6. Civil Court empowered to take cognizance of such claims.  
7. Pensions for lands held under grants in perpetuity.  
III.—MODE OF PAYMENT . 
8. Payment to be made by  Deputy Commissioner,  Collector or other authorised officer.  
9. Saving of rights in respect of the recovery of land -revenue.  
10. Commutation of pensions.  
IV.—MISCELLANEOUS . 
11. Exemption of pension from attachment.  
12. Assignments, &c., in anticipation of pension, to be void.  
12A.Nomination by pensioner to receive moneys outstanding on account of pension.  
13. Reward to informers.  
14. Power to make rules.  
15. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
16. Laying of rules.  
 [SCHEDULE. ][Repealed .].
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PENSIONS’ ACT, 1871.pdf - page 2]
2 
 THE PENSIONS’ ACT, 1871  
ACT NO. 23 OF 1871  
[8th August , 1871.]  
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to pensions and grants by Government of 
money or land -revenue.  
Preamble. —WHEREAS  it is expedient to consolidate and amend the law relating to pensions and 
grants by Government of money or land -revenue; It is hereby enacted as follows: — 
I.—PRELIMINARY . 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the “1Pensions’  Act, 1871 ”: 
Extent of Act .—2[In so far as it relates to Union pensions, it extends to the whole of India and 
in so  far as it relates to other pensions, it extends] to 3[the whole of India except 4[the territories 
which, immediately before the 1st November, 1956, were comprised in Part B States]].  
5*   *   *   *          * 
6*   *   *   *       * 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  
In section 1, for the  entry under th e heading “Extent of Act”, the following entry shall be substituted, 
namely: - 
“It extends to the whole of the State of Karnataka.”  
[Vide Karnataka Act 23 of 1979, s. 4]  
2.[Enactments repealed  Saving of  Rules. ] Rep. by the Repealing Act, 1938 (1 of 1938),              
s. 2 and the Schedule . 
3. Interpretation -section.—In this Act, the expression “grant of money or land -revenue ” 
includes anything payable on the part of Government in respect of any right, privilege, 
perquisite or office.  
7[3A.Defini tion.—The expression “the appropriate Government ” means, in relation 
to8[Union] pensions, the Central Government, and in relation to other pensions, 9[the State 
Government.] 
II.—RIGHTS  TO PENSIONS . 
4. Bar of suits relating to pensions. —Except as hereinafter provided , no Civil Court shall 
entertain any suit relating to any pension or grant of money or land -revenue conferred or made  
by the 10[Government or by] any former Government, whatever may have been the consideration 
for any such pension or grant, and whatever may have been the nature of the payment, claim or 
right for which such pens
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PENSIONS’ ACT, 1871.pdf - page 2]
 or grant, and whatever may have been the nature of the payment, claim or 
right for which such pension or grant may have been substituted.  
                                                      
1.It has been amended in its application to U. P. by U. P. Act 12 of 1922. Rep. in par t in West Bengal by West Bengal Act                      
7 of 1948.  
The Act has been extended to  the Union territories and brought into force in Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 
and the First S chedule  (w.e.f. 1 -7-1965) and extended to the whole of the Union territory of Lakshadweep by Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 
and the Schedule  (w.e.f. 1 -10-1967).  
The Act has been repealed in its application to Bellary District by Mysore Act 14 of 1955.  
2.Subs . by Act 20 of 1982, s. 2, for “It extend”.  
3.Subs. by the A.O .1950, for “all the Provinces of India” which had been subs. by the A.O.1948, for “the whole of British India”.  
4.Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956, for “Part B States”.  
5.The words “And it shall come into force on the date of the passing thereof” rep . by Act 10 of 1914, s. 3 and the Second 
Schedule . 
6.The words  “but not so as to affect any suit in respect of a pension or grant of money or land -revenue  which may have been  
instituted before such date” rep. by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and  the First Schedule . 
7.Ins. by the A.O. 1937  (w.e.f. 1 -4-1937) . 
8.Sub. by the A. O. 1950 , for “federal”  (w.e.f. 26 -1-1950 ). 
9. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “Provincial Government”.  
10.Subs. by the A. O. 1950, as amended by C.O . 29, for “British or”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PENSIONS’ ACT, 1871.pdf - page 3]
3 
 5. Claims to be made to Collector , Deputy Commissioner,  or other authorized                      
officer.—Any person having a claim  relating to a ny such pension or grant may prefer such claim 
to the Collector of the District or  Deputy Commissioner or other officer authorized in this behalf 
by the1[appropriate Go vern ment], and such Collector, Deputy Commissioner or other officer 
shall dispose of such claim in  accordance with such rules as the Chief Revenue Authority may, subject 
to the general control of the 1[appropriate Government], from time to time prescribe in this behalf.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 5 .—In section 5, of the  words, “Any person having a claim”, the words 
“Save as otherwise provided i n any law or any rule regulating  payment of pension to persons appointed to 
public services and posts in connection with the affairs of the State, any person having a claim” shall be 
substituted and for the words “as the Chief Revenue Authority may, subject to the general control of the 
appropriate Government”, the words “as the appropriate Government may” shall be substitut ed; 
[Vide Karnataka Act 23 of 1979, s. 4]   
6. Civil Court e mpowered to take cognizance of such claims. —A Civil Court, otherwise 
competent to try the same, shall take cognizance of any such claim upon receiving a certificate from such 
Collector, Deputy Commissioner or other officer authori zed in that behalf that the case may be so tried, 
but shall not make any order or decree in any suit whatever by which the liability of Government to pay 
any such pension or grant as aforesaid is affected directly or indirectly.  
7. Pensions for lands held under grants in perpetui ty.—Nothing in sections 4 and 6 applies to —  
(1) any inam of the class referred to in  the first section  of Madras Act No. IV of 18622; 
(2) pensions heretofore granted by Government in the territories respectively subject to the 
Lieutenant -Governors of Beng al and  the Nor
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PENSIONS’ ACT, 1871.pdf - page 3]
rnment in the territories respectively subject to the 
Lieutenant -Governors of Beng al and  the North -Western Provinces, either wholly or in part as an 
indemnity for loss sustained by the resumption by a Native Government of lands held under sanads 
purporting to confer a right in perpetuity. Such pensions shall not be liable to resumption on the death 
of the recipient, but every such pension shall be capable of alienation and descent, and may be sued 
for and recovered in the same manner as any other property.  
III.—MODE  OF PAYMENT . 
8. Payment to be made by Collector , Deputy Commissioner  or other authori zed officer. —All 
pensions or grants by Government of money or land -revenue shall be paid by the Collector or the Deputy 
Commissioner or other authorized officer, subject to such rules as may, from time to time, be prescribed 
by the Chief Contro lling Revenue -Authority.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 8. —In section 8, for the words “All pensions or grants” the words “Save as 
otherwise provided in  any law or an y rule regulating grant and payment of pension to person s appointed 
to public services and posts in connection  with the affairs of the State, all pensions or grants, shall be 
substituted and for the words “Chief Controlling Revenue Authority” the words “appropriate  
Government” shall be substituted;  
[Vide Karnat aka Act 23 of 1979, s. 4]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “L ocal Government .” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1937) . 
2. I.e., “inams of the classes described in clase  1, s. 2, [Mad.] Regulation 4 of 1831, which have been, or shall be, enfranchised by 
the Inam Commissioner and converted into freeholds in perpetuity, or into absolute freeholds in perpetuity”. The classes so 
described are “hereditary or personal grants of  money or of land -revenue, however, denominated, conferred by the authority of 
the Governor in Council [or which, having been made by any Native
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PENSIONS’ ACT, 1871.pdf - page 3]
ed, conferred by the authority of 
the Governor in Council [or which, having been made by any Native Govt. have been confirmed or continued by the British 
Govt. —Act 31 of 1836] in consideration of services render ed to the State or in lieu of resumed offices or privileges, or of 
zamindaris  or paleiyams forfeited or held under attachment or management by the officers of Govt., or as a yaumia or 
charitable allowance, or as a pension”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PENSIONS’ ACT, 1871.pdf - page 4]
4 
  
9. Saving of rights  in respect of the recovery of land -revenue.—Nothing in sections 4 and 8 shall 
affect the right of a grantee of land -revenue, whose claim to such grant is admitted by Government, to 
recover such revenue from th e persons liable to pay the same under any law for the time being in force for 
the recovery of the rent of land.  
10. Commutation of pensions. —The 1[appropriate Government] may, with the consent of the 
holder, order the whole or any part of his pension or g rant of money or  land-revenue to be commuted for 
a lump sum on such terms as may seem fit.  
IV.—MISCELLANEOUS . 
211. Exemption of pension from attachment. —No pension granted or continued by Government  
on political considerations,  or on account of past servi ces or present infirmities or as a  
compassionate allowance,  
and no money due or to become due on account of any such pension or allowance,  
shall be liable to seizure, attachment or sequest ration by process of any Court 3***, at the instance of 
a creditor, for any demand against the pensioner, or in satisfaction of a decree or order of any such Court.  
4[This section applies 3*** also t o pensions granted or continued5, after the separation of Burma from 
India, by the Government  of Burma.]  
12. Assignments, &c., in anticipation of pension, to be void. —All assignments, agreements , orders, 
sales and securities of every kind made by the person entitled to any pension, pay or allowance mentioned 
in section 11, in respect of any  money not payable at or before the making thereof, on account of any such 
pension, pay or allowance, or for giving or assigning any future interest therein, are null and void.  
6[12A. Nomination by pensioner to receive moneys outstanding on account of pension. —
Notwithstanding anything contained in section 12 or in any other law for the time being in force, —  
(a) any person to whom any pension mentioned in section 11 is payable by the Government of 
India or out of the Co
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PENSIONS’ ACT, 1871.pdf - page 4]
 to whom any pension mentioned in section 11 is payable by the Government of 
India or out of the Consolidated Fund of India (such person being h ereinafter referred to as the 
pensioner) may nominate any other person (hereinafter referred to as the nominee), in such manner 
and in such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government by rules, to receive after the death 
of the pensioner, all money s payable to the pensioner on account of such pension at, before or after 
the date of such nomination and which remain unpaid immediately before the death of the pensioner; 
and 
(b) the nominee shall be entitled, on the death of the pensioner, to receive, t o the exclusion of all 
other persons, all such moneys which have so remained unpaid:  
Provided that if the nominee predeceases the pensioner, the nomination shall, so far as it relates to the 
right conferred upon the said nominee, become void and of no effe ct: 
Provided further that where provision has been duly made in the nomination, in accordance with the 
rules made by the Central Government, conferring upon some other person the right to receive all such 
moneys, which have so remained unpaid, in the event  of the nominee predeceasing the pensioner, such 
right shall, upon the decease as aforesaid of the nominee, pass to such other person.]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “Local Government.”  
2. See also s. 60, cl ause (g) of the Code of Civil Procedure 1908 (Act 5 of 1908).  
3. The words “in Part A States and Part C States” omitted by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956. The words  and letters  
“Part A States and Part C  States” were subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “the Provinces” which had been subs. by the A.O. 1948, for 
“British India”.  
4. Ins. by the A. O. 1937  (w.e.f. 1 -4-1937) . 
5. I.e., on or after the1st April, 1937.  
6. Ins. by Act 20 of 1982, s. 3.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PENSIONS’ ACT, 1871.pdf - page 4]
Act 20 of 1982, s. 3.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PENSIONS’ ACT, 1871.pdf - page 5]
5 
 13. Reward to informers. —Whoever proves to the satisfaction of the 1[appropriate Government] 
that any pension is fraudul ently or unduly received by the person enjoying the benefit thereof shall be 
entitled to a reward equivalent to the amount of such pension for the period of six months.  
14. Power to make rules .—2[In each State] the Chief Controlling Revenue Authority may, with the 
consent of the 1[appropriate Government], from time to time make rules consistent with this Act 
respecting all or any of the following matters: —  
(1) the place and times at which, and th e person to whom, any pension shall be paid ; 
(2) inquiries into the identity of claimants ; 
(3) records to be kept on the subject of pensions ; 
(4) transmission of such records ; 
(5) correction of such records ; 
(6) delivery of certificates to pensioners ; 
(7) registers of such certificates ; 
(8) reference to the Civil Court, under section 6, of persons claiming a right of succes sion to, or 
participation in, pensions or grants of money or land -revenue payable by Govern ment , 
and generally  for the guidance of officers under this Act.  
All such rules shall be published in the local official Gazette, and shall thereupon have the force of 
law. 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 14. -In section 14, for the words, “Chief Controlling  Revenue Authority may 
with the consen t of the appropriate Government ”, the words  “appropriate Government may” shall be 
substituted.  
[Vide Karnataka Act 23 of 1979, s. 4]  
3[15. Power of Central Government to make rules. —The Central Government may, by notif ication 
in the Official Gazette, make rules to provide for all or any o f the following matters, namely : — 
(a) the manner and form in which any nomination may be made under section 12A and the 
manner and form in which such nomination may be cancelled or va ried by another nomination;  
(b) the manner in which provision may be made, for the purposes of the second proviso
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PENSIONS’ ACT, 1871.pdf - page 5]
 nomination;  
(b) the manner in which provision may be made, for the purposes of the second proviso to 
section 12A, in any such nomination for conferring on some person other than the nominee the right 
to receive moneys payable to the nominee  if such no minee predeceases the pensioner.  
16. Laying of rules. —Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act and every rule 
made under section 14 by a Chief Controlling Revenue Authority with the consent of the Central 
Government, shall be lai d, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parlia ment, while it is 
in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immedia tely following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses 
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no ef fect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modi fication or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.]  
  
                                                      
1.Subs. by the A .O. 1937, for “L.G”.  
2.Ins., ibid. 
3.Ins. by Act 20  of 19 82, s. 3. 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PENSIONS’ ACT, 1871.pdf - page 6]
6 
 [SCHEDUL E.]Rep. by the Repealing Act , 1938 (1 of 1938), s. 2 and the Schedule . 
 
_______  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 1]
1 THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951  
—————  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
—————  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Reference to time of day . 
CHAPTER IA  
REGISTRATION OF PLANTATIONS  
3A. Appointment of  registering officers.  
3B.  Registration of plantations . 
3C. Appeals against orders of registering officer . 
3D. Power to make rules . 
CHAPTER II  
INSPECTING STAFF  
4. Chief inspector and inspectors.  
5. Powers and functions of inspectors.  
6. Facilities to be a fforded to inspectors.  
7. Certifying surgeons.  
CHAPTER III  
PROVISIONS AS TO HEALTH  
8. Drinking water.  
9. Conservancy.  
10. Medical facilities.  
CHAPTER IV  
WELFARE  
11. Canteens.  
12. Creches.  
13. Recreational facilities.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 2]
2 SECTIONS  
14. Educational facilities.  
15. Housing facilities.  
16. Power to make rules relating to housing.  
16A. Liability of employer in respect of accidents resulting from collapse of houses provided by him.  
16B. Appointment of Commissioners.  
16C. Application for compensation.  
16D. Procedure an d powers of Commissioner.  
16E. Liability to pay compensation, etc., to be decided by Commissioner.  
16F. Saving as to certain rights.  
16G. Power to make rules.  
17. Other facilities.  
18. Welfare officers.  
CHAPTER IVA  
PROVISIONS AS TO SAFETY  
18A. Safety.  
18B.  Power of State Government to make rules.  
CHAPTER V  
HOURS AND LIMITATION OF EMPLOYMENT  
19. Weekly hours.  
20. Weekly holidays.  
21. Daily intervals for rest.  
22. Spread -over. 
23. Notice of period of work . 
24. Prohibition of employment of children . 
25. Night work for women  and children .  
26. Non -adult workers to carry tokens . 
27. Certificate of fitness . 
28. Power to require medical examination.  
CHAPTER VI  
LEAVE WITH WAGES  
29. Application of Chapter . 
30. Annual leave with wages . 
31. Wages during leave period . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 3]
3 SECTIONS  
32. Sickness and maternity benefits . 
CHAPTER VIA  
ACCIDENTS  
32A. Notice of accident . 
32B. Register of accidents . 
32C. Compensation . 
CHAPTER VII  
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE  
33. Obstruction . 
34. Use of false certificate of fitness . 
35. Contravention of pr ovisions regarding employment of   labour . 
36. Other offences . 
37. Enhanced penalty after previous conviction . 
37A. Power of court to make orders.  
38. Exemption of employer from liability in certain cases . 
39. Cognizance of offences . 
39A. Protection of acti on taken in good faith . 
40. Limitation of prosecutions . 
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
41. Power to give directions . 
42. Power to exempt . 
43. General power to make rules .
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 4]
4 THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951  
ACT NO. 69 OF 19511 
[2nd November , 1951.]  
An Act to prov ide for the welfare of labour, and to regulate the conditions of work, in 
plantations.  
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application .—(1) This Act may be called the Plantations 
Labour Ac t, 1951.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except  the State of Jammu and Kashmir *. 
(3) It shal l come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification i n the 
Official Gazette, appoint  
 3[(4) It applies to the following plantations,  that is to say, — 
(a) to any land used or intended to be used fo r growing tea, coffee, rubber 4[,cinchona or 
cardamom] which admeasures 5[5 hectares] or more and in which 6[fifteen] or more persons are 
employed or were employed on any day of the preceding  twelve months;  
(b) to any land used or intended to be used for growing any other plant, which admeasures                       
5[5 hectares] or more and in which 6[fifteen] or more persons are employed or were employed on any 
day of the preceding twelve mo nths, if, after obtaining the approval of the Central Government, the 
State Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, so directs.  
7[Explanation .—Where any piece of land used for growing any plant referred to in clause ( a) or 
clause ( b) of this s ub-section admeasures less than 5 hectares and is contiguous to any other piece of land 
not being so used, but capable of being so used, and both such pieces of land are under the management 
of the same employer, then, for the purposes of this sub -section,  the piece of land first mentioned shall be 
deemed to be a plantation, if the total area of both such pieces of land admeasures 5 hectares or more.]  
(5) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that all or any of the 
provi sions of this Act shall apply also to any land used or inte
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 4]
e, declare that all or any of the 
provi sions of this Act shall apply also to any land used or intended to be used for growing any plant 
referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) of sub -section ( 4), notwithstanding that — 
                                                      
1. The Act comes into force in Pondicherry on 1 -10-1963 by Reg. 7 of 1963, s. 3 and S ch. I. The Act has been amended in Kerala 
by Kerala Act 25 of 1969.  
2. 1st April, 1954: see S.R.O. 880 dated 6th March, 1954, Gazette of India, 1954, Pt. II, Sec. 3, p. 530  
3. Subs. by Act 34 of 1960, s. 2, for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 21 -11- 1960).  
4. Subs . by Act 58 of 1981, s. 2, for "or cinchona" (w.e.f. 26 -1- 1982).  
5. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “10.117 hectares ” (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982).  
6. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “thirty ” (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982).  
7. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982).  
* Vide notification N o. S.O. 3912(E), dated 30th October, 2019, this Act is made applicable to the Union territory of Jammu  and 
Kashmir and the Union territory of Ladakh.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 5]
5 (a) it admeasures less than 1[5 hectares], or  
(b) the number of persons emplo yed therein is less than 2[fifteen]:  
Provided that no such declaration shall be made in respect of such la nd which admeasured less than 
1[5 he ctares] or in which less than 2[fifteen] persons were employed, immediately before the 
commencement of this Act.]  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
 (a) “adolescent ” means a  person who has completed his 3[fourteenth] year but has no t completed 
his eighteenth year ; 
(b) “adult ” means a person who has completed his eighteenth year;  
(c) “child ” means a person who has not  completed his 3[fourteenth] year;  
(d) “day” means a period of twenty -four hours beginning at midnight;  
(e) “employer ” when used in relation to a plantation, means the person who has the ultimate 
control over the affairs o f the plantation, and where the affairs of any plantation are entrusted to any 
other person (whether called a managing agent, manager, superintendent or by any other name) such 
other person shall be deemed to be the employer in relation to that plantation;  
4[Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, "the person who has the ultimate control over the 
affairs of the plantation" means in the case of a plantation owned or controlled by — 
(i) a company, firm or other association of individuals, whether incorpo rated or not, every 
director, partner or individual;  
(ii) the Central Government or State Government or any local authority, the person or persons 
appointed to manage the affairs of the plantation; and  
(iii) a lessee, the lessee;]  
5[(ee) “family ”, when use d in relation to a worker, means — 
(i) his or her spouse, and  
(ii) the legitimate and adopted children of the worker dependent upon him or her, who have 
not completed their eighteenth year,  
6[and includes  parents and widow sister, dependent upon him or he r;] 
7[(eee) “inspector ” means an inspector of plantations appointed 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 5]
ter, dependent upon him or he r;] 
7[(eee) “inspector ” means an inspector of plantations appointed under sub -section ( 1) of section 4 
and includes an additional inspector of plantations appointed under sub -section ( 1A) of that section;]  
                                                      
1.  Subs. by Act 58 of 1981, s. 2, for “10.117 hectares ” (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982).  
2.  Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “thirty ” (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982).   
3.  Subs. by Act 61 of 1986, s. 24, for “fifteenth” (w.e.f. 23 -12-1986).  
4.  Ins. by Act 17 of 2010, s. 2 (w.e.f. 7 -6-2010).  
5.  Ins. by Act 34 of 1960, s. 3 (w.e.f. 21 -11-1960).  
6.  Subs. by Act 17 of 2010, s. 2 , for certai n words  (w.e.f. 7 -6-2010).  
7.  Ins. by Act 58 of 1981, s. 3 (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 6]
6 1[(f) “plantation ” means any plantation to which this Act, whether wholly or in part, applies and 
includes offices, hospitals, dispensaries, schools, and any other premises used for any purpose 
connected with such plantation, but does not include any factory on the premises to which the 
provisions of the  Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948) apply;]  
(g) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
2[(h) “qualified medical practitioner ” means a person holding a qualification granted by an 
authority specified or notified under section 3 of the Ind ian Medical Degrees Act, 1916 (7 of 1916), 
or specified in the Schedules to the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956), and includes any 
person having a certificate granted under any Provincial or State Medical Council Act;]  
(i) “wages ” has the mea ning assigned to it in clause ( h) of section 2 of the Minimum Wages Act, 
1948 (11 of 1948);  
(j) “week ” means a period of seven days beginning at mid -night on Saturday night or such other 
night as may be fixed by the State Government in relation to plantati ons in any area after such 
consultation as may be prescribed with reference to the plantations concerned in that area;  
3[(k) “worker ” means a person employed in a plantation for hire or reward, whether directly or 
through any agency, to do any work, skille d, unskilled, manual or clerical  4[and includes a person 
employed on contract for more than sixty days in a year] , but does not include — 
 (i) a medical officer employed in the plantation;  
(ii) any person employed in the plantation (including any member of  the medical staff) whose 
monthly wages exceed 5[rupees ten thousand] ; 
(iii) any person employed in the plantation primarily in a 6[managerial  or administrative  
capacity, notwithstanding that his monthly wages do not exceed ten thousand] ; or 
(iv) any perso n temporarily employed in the plantation in any work relating to the 
construction, development or maintenan
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 6]
arily employed in the plantation in any work relating to the 
construction, development or maintenance of buildings, roads, bridges, drains or canals;]  
(l) “young person ” means a person who is either a child or an adolescent.  
3. Reference to time of  day.—In this Act, references to time of day are references to Indian Standard 
Time being five and a half hours ahead of Greenwich Mean Time:  
Provided that for any area in which the Indian Standard Time is not ordinarily observed, the State 
Government may make rules — 
(a) specifying the area;  
                                                      
1.  Subs. by Act 34 of 1960, s. 3, for cl. ( f) (w.e.f. 21 -11-1960).  
2.  Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for cl. ( h) (w.e.f. 21 -11-1960).  
3.  Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for cl. (k) (w.e.f. 21 -11-1960).  
4.  Ins. by Act 17 of 2010, s. 2 (w.e.f. 7 -6-2010).  
5.  Subs. by s. 2,  ibid., for “rupees seven hundred and fifty” (w.e.f. 7 -6-2010).  
6.  Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “managerial capacity, notwithstanding that his monthly wages do not exceed rupees  seven hundred and 
fifty”  (w.e.f. 7 -6-2010).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 7]
7 (b) defining the local mean time ordinarily observed therein; and  
(c) permitting such time to be observed in all or any of the plantations situated in that area.  
1[CHAPTER IA  
REGISTRATION OF PLANTATIONS  
3A. Appointment of registering officers .—The State Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, — 
(a) appoint such persons, being Gazetted Officers of Government, as it thinks fit, to be registering 
officers for the purposes of this Chapter, and  
(b) define the limits within which a registering officer shall exercise the powers and discharge the 
functions conferred or imposed on him by or under this Chapter.  
3B. Registration of plantations .—(1) Every employer of a plantation, existing at the commencement 
of the P lantation s Labour (Amendment) Act, 1981 (58 of 19 81) shall, within a period of sixty days of 
such commencement, and every employer of any other plantation coming into existence  after such 
commencement shall, within a period of sixty days of the coming into  existence of such plantation, make 
an application to the registering officer for the registration of such plantation:  
Provided that the registering officer may entertain any such application after the expiry of the period 
aforesaid if he is satisfied that  the applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from making the 
application within such period.  
(2) Every application made under sub -section ( 1) shall be in such form and shall contain such 
particulars and shall be accompanied by such fees as may be presc ribed.  
(3) After the receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1), the registering officer shall register the 
plantation.  
(4) Where a plantation is registered under this section, the registering officer shall issue a certificate 
of registration to the e mployer thereof in such form as may be prescribed.  
(5) Where, after the registration of a plantation under this section, any change occurs in the ownership 
or management or in the extent of th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 7]
ntation under this section, any change occurs in the ownership 
or management or in the extent of the area or other prescribed particulars in respect of such planta tion, the 
particulars regarding such change shall be intimated by the employer to the registering officer within 
thirty days of such change in such form as may be prescribed.  
(6) Where as a result of any  intimation received under sub -section ( 5), the regis tering officer is 
satisfied that the plantation is no longer required to be registered under this section, he shall, by order in 
writing, cancel the registration thereof and shall, as soon as practicable, cause such order to be published 
in any one newspap er in the language of, and having circulation in, the area where the plantation is 
situated.  
3C. Appeals against orders of registering officer .—(1) Any person aggrieved by the order of a 
registering officer under sub -section ( 6) of section 3B may, within t hirty days of the publication of such 
order in the newspaper under that sub -section, prefer an appeal to such authority as may be prescribed:  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 58 of 1981, s. 4 (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 8]
8 Provided that the appellate authority may entertain an appeal under this sub -section after the expiry of 
the afore said period if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring 
the appeal within such period.  
(2) After the receipt of an appeal under sub -section ( 1), the appellate authority may, after giving the 
appellant , the employ er referred to in  sub-section ( 5) of section 3B and the registering officer an 
opportunity of being heard in the matter, dispose of the appeal as expeditiously as possible.  
3D. Power to make rules .—(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Offic ial Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Chapter.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the form of application for t he registration of a plantation, the particulars to be contained in 
such application and the fees to be accompanied along with such application;  
(b) the form of the certificate of registration;  
(c) the particulars regarding any change in respect of which i ntimation shall be given by the 
employer to the registering officer under sub -section ( 5) of section 3B and the form in which such 
change shall be intimated;  
(d) the authority to which an appeal may be preferred under section 3C and the fees payable in 
respect of such a ppeal ; 
(e) the registers to be kept and maintained by a registering officer.]  
CHAPTER II  
INSPECTING STAFF  
4. Chief inspector and inspectors .—(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint for the State a duly q ualified person to be the chief inspector of plantations and so many 
duly qualified persons to be inspectors of plantations subordinate to the chief inspector as it thinks fit.  
1[(1A) The State Government may also, by notification in the Official Gazette,  appoint such officers 
of the State Go
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 8]
overnment may also, by notification in the Official Gazette,  appoint such officers 
of the State Government or of any local authority under its control, as it thinks fit, to be additional 
inspectors of plantations for all or any of the purposes of this Act.]  
(2) Subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf by  the State Government, the chief inspector 
may declare the local area or areas within which, or the plantations with respect to which, inspectors shall 
exercise their powers under this Act, and may himself exercise the powers of an inspector within such 
limits as may be assigned to him by the State Government.  
(3) The chief inspector and all inspectors shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
5. Powers and functions of inspectors .—Subject to any rules made by the State Government in this 
behalf, an inspector may within the local limits for which he is appointed — 
(a) make such examination and inquiry as he thinks fit in order to ascertain whether the 
provisions of this Act and of the rules made thereunde r are being observed in the case of any 
plantation;  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 58 of 1981, s. 5 (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 9]
9 (b) with such assistants, if any, as he thinks fit, enter, inspect and examine any plantation or part 
thereof at any reasonable time for the purpose of carrying out the objects of this Act;  
(c) examine th e crops grown in any plantation or any worker employed therein or require the 
production of any register or other document maintained in pursuance of this Act, and take on the 
spot or otherwise statements of any person which he may consider necessary for c arrying out the 
purposes of this Act;  
(d) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed:  
Provided that no person shall be compelled under this section to answer any question or make any 
statement tending to incriminate himself.  
6. Facilities to be afford ed to inspectors .— Every employer shall afford the inspector all reasonable 
facilities for making any entry, inspection, examination or inquiry under this Act.  
7. Certifying surgeons .—(1) The State Government may appoint qualified medical practitioners to 
be certifying surgeons for the purposes of this Act within such local limits or for such plantation or class 
of plantations as it may assign to them respectively.  
(2) The certifying surgeon shall carry out such duties as may be prescribed in connection wit h— 
(a) the examination and certification of workers;  
(b) the exercise of such medical supervision as may be prescribed where adole scents 1[are] , 
employed in any work in any plantation which is likely to cause injury to their health.  
CHAPTER III  
PROVISIONS AS TO HEALTH  
8. Drinking water .—In every plantation effective arrangements shall be made by the employer to 
provide and maintain at convenient places in the plantation a sufficient supply of wholesome drinking 
water for all workers.  
9. Conservancy .—(1) The re shall be provided separately for males and females in every plantation a 
sufficient number of latrines and urinals of prescribed types so situated as to be convenient and accessible 
to workers employed therei
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 9]
inals of prescribed types so situated as to be convenient and accessible 
to workers employed therein.  
(2) All latrines and urinals provided unde r sub -section ( 1) shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary 
condition.  
10. Medical facilities .—(1) In every plantation there shall be provided and maintained so as to be 
readily available such medic al facilities for the workers 2[and their families] as m ay be prescribed by the 
State Government.  
(2) If in any plantation medical facilities are not provided and maintained as required by                            
sub-section ( 1) the 3[State Government upon a request by the chief inspector ] may cause to be pr ovided 
and maintained therein such medical facilities, and recover the cost thereof from the defaulting employer.  
(3) For the purposes of such recovery the chief inspector may certify the costs to be recovered to the 
collector, who may recover the amount a s an arrear of land -revenue.  
 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 17 of 2010, s. 3, for “and children are, or are to be” (w.e.f. 7 -6-2010).  
2. Ins. by Act 3 4 of 1960, s. 4 (w.e.f. 21 -11-1960).  
3. Subs. by Act 17 of 2010, s. 4, for “chief inspector” (w.e.f. 7 -6-2010).     
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 10]
10 STATE AMENDMENT  
Kerala  
Amendment of section 10. —In section 10 of the Plantations Labour Act, 1951 (Central Act 69 of 1951), 
after sub -section ( 1), the following Explanation  shall be inserted, namely: — 
“Explanation. —For the pur pose of this section, “family”, when used in relation to a worker, means —  
(i) his or her spouse;  
(ii) mentally retarded children, minor legitimate or adopted son, unmarried legitimate or adopted 
daughter of the worker dependent upon him or her, and includ es the parents of the worker dependent 
upon him or her. ”. 
[Vide Kerala Act 1 of 19 99, s. 2. ] 
CHAPTER IV  
WELFARE  
11. Canteens .—(1) The State Government may make rules requiring that in every plantation wherein 
one hundred and fifty workers are ordinarily em ployed, one or more canteens shall be provided and 
maintained by the employer for the use of the workers.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for — 
(a) the date by which the canteen shall be provided;  
(b) the number of canteens that shall be provided and the standards in respect of construction, 
accommodation, furniture and other equipment of the canteens;  
(c) the foodstuffs which may be served therein and the charges which may be made therefor;  
(d) the cons titution of a managing committee for the canteen and the representation of the 
workers in the management of the canteen;  
(e) the delegation to the chief inspector, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, of the 
power to make rules under clause ( c). 
12. Creches .—1[(1) In every plantation wherein fifty or more women workers (including women 
workers employed by any contractor) are employed or were employed on any day of the preceding twelve 
months, or where the number of children of women workers (inc luding women workers employed by any 
contractor) is twenty or more, there shall be provided and maintained by the employer suitable rooms for 
the use of children of such women wo
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 10]
 be provided and maintained by the employer suitable rooms for 
the use of children of such women workers.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section and sub -section ( 1A), “children ” means persons 
who are below the age of six years.]  
2[(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), if, in respect of any plantation wherein 
less than fifty women workers (including women workers employed by any contractor) are emp loyed or 
were employed on any day of the preceding twelve month s, or where the number of children of such 
women workers is less than twenty, the State Government, having regard to the number of children of 
such women workers deems it necessary that suitabl e rooms for the use of such children should be 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 58 of 1981, s. 6, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 26 -1- 1982).  
2. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 11]
11 provided and maintained by the employer, it may, by order, direct the employer to provide and maintain 
such rooms and thereupon the employer shall be bound to comply with such direction.]  
(2) 1[The rooms refer red to in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 1A)] shall — 
(a) provide adequate accommodation;  
(b) be adequately lighted and ventil ated; 
(c) be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition; and  
(d) be under the charge of a woman trained in the care of children  and infants.  
(3) The State Government may make rules prescribing the location and the standards of 1[the rooms 
referred to in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 1A)] in respect of their construction and accommodation and 
the equipment and amenities to be pro vided therein.  
13. Recreational facilities .—The State Government may make rules requiring every employer to 
make provision in his plantation for such recreational facilities for the workers and children employed 
therein as may be prescribed.  
14. Educationa l facilities .—Where the children between the ages of six and twelve of workers 
employed i n any plantation exceed twenty -five in number, the State Government may make rules 
requiring every employer to provide educational facilities for the children in such manner and of such 
standard as may be prescribed.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Assam  
Amendment of section 14. —In the principal Act, for existing section 14, the following shall be 
substituted, namely: — 
“14. — Educational Faculties. —Where the children between the ages of six and fourteen of workers 
employed in any plantation exceed twenty five in number, the State Government may make rules 
requiring every employer to provide educational facilities for the children in such manner and of such 
standard as may be prescribed .” 
[Vide Assam Act 1 of 2018, s. 2.]  
2[15. Housing facilities .—It shall be the duty of every employer to provide and maintain necessary 
housing accommodation — 
(a) for every worker (including h
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 11]
ployer to provide and maintain necessary 
housing accommodation — 
(a) for every worker (including his family) residing in the plantation;  
(b) for every worker (inc luding his family) residing outside the plantation, who has put in six 
months of continuous service in such plantation and who has expressed a desire in writing to reside in 
the plantation:  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 58 of 1 981, s. 6, for “such rooms ” (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982).  
2. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for section 15 (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 12]
12 Provided that the requirement of continuous service of six months  under this clause shall not apply to 
a worker who is a member of the family of a deceased worker who, immediately before his death, was 
residing in the plantation.]  
16. Power to make rules relating to housing .—The State Government may make rules for the 
purpose of giving effect to the provisions of section 15 and, in particular providing for — 
(a) the standard and specification of the accommodation to be provided;  
(b) the selection and preparation of sites for the construction of houses and the size of such  plot; 
(c) the constitution of advisory boards consisting of representatives of the State Government, the 
employer and the workers for consultation in regard to matters connected with housing and the 
exercise by them of such powers, functions and duties in  relation thereto as may be specified;  
(d) the fixing of rent, if any, for the housing accommodation provided for workers;  
(e) the allotment to workers and their families of housing accommodation and of suitable strips of 
vacant land adjoining such accommo dation for the purpose of mai ntaining kitchen gardens, 1*** and 
for the eviction of workers and their families from such accommodation;  
(f) access to the public to those parts of the plantation wherein the workers are housed.  
2[16A. Liability of employer in respect of accidents resulting from collapse of houses provided 
by him .—(1) If death or injury is caused to any worker or a member of his family as a result of the 
collapse of a house provided under section 15, and the collapse is not solely and directl y attributable to a 
fault on the part of any occupant of the house or to a natural calamity, the employer shall be liable to pay 
compensation.  
(2) The provisions of section 4 of, and Schedule IV to, the Workmen's Compensation                               
Act, 1923 (8 of 1923), as in force for the time being, regarding the amount of compensation payable to a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 12]
 1923 (8 of 1923), as in force for the time being, regarding the amount of compensation payable to a 
workman under that Act shall, so far as may be, apply for the determination of the amount of 
compensation payable under sub -section ( 1). 
16B. Appointme nt of Commissioners .—The State Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint as many persons, possessing the prescribed qualifications , as it thinks fit, to be 
Commissioners to determine the amount of compensation payable under section 16 A and may define the 
limits within which each such Commissioner shall exercise the powers and discharge the functions 
conferred or imposed on him by or under this Act.  
16C. Application for compensation .—(1) An application for payment of compensation under 
section 16A may be made to the Commissioner — 
(a) by the person who has sustained the injury; or  
(b) by any agent duly authorised by the person who has sustained the injury; or  
(c) where the person who has sustained the injury is a minor, by his guardian; o r 
(d) where death has resulted out of the collapse of the house, by any dependant of the deceased or 
by any agent duly authorised by such dependant or, if such dependant is a minor, by his guardian.  
                                                      
1. Certain words and figures omitted by Act 34 of 1960, s. 5 (w.e.f. 21 -11- 1960).  
2. Ins. by Act 58 of 1981, s. 8 (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 13]
13 (2) Every application under sub -section ( 1) shall be in s uch form and shall contain such particulars as 
may be prescribed.  
(3) No application for compensation under this section shall be entertained unless it is made within 
six months of the collapse of the house : 
Provided that the Commissioner may, if he is sat isfied that the applicant was prevented by sufficient 
cause from making the application within the aforesaid period of six months, entertain such application 
within a further period of six months.  
Explanation .—In this section, the expression “dependant ” has the meaning assigned to it in clause ( d) 
of section 2 of the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923 (8 of 1923).  
16D. Procedure and powers of Commissioner .—(1) On receipt of an application under                       
section 16C, the Commissioner may make an i nquiry into the matter covered by the application.  
(2) In determining the amount of compensation payable under section 16A, the Commissioner may, 
subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, follow such summary procedure as he thinks fit.  
(3) The Commissioner shall have all the powers of a civil court while trying a suit under the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) in respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath ; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office;  
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;  
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
(4) Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, the commissioner may, for the purpose of 
determining any claim or compensation, choose one or more persons possessing special knowledge of any 
matter relevant  to the inquiry to assist him in holding the inquiry.  
16E. Liability to pay compensation, etc., to b
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 13]
o the inquiry to assist him in holding the inquiry.  
16E. Liability to pay compensation, etc., to be decided by Commissioner .—(1) Any question as to 
the liability of an employer to pay compensation under section 16A, or as to the amount thereof, or as to 
the person to whom such compensation is payable, shall be decided by the Commissioner.  
(2) Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Commissioner refusing to grant compensation, or as to 
the amount of compensation granted to him, or to the apportionment th ereof, may prefer an appeal to the 
High Court having jurisdiction over the place where the collapse of the house has occurred, within ninety 
days of the communication of the order of the Commissioner to such person:  
Provided that the High Court may enterta in any such appeal after the expiry of the period aforesaid if 
it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the appeal within such 
period:  
Provided further that nothing in this sub -section shall be deemed to authoris e the High Court to grant 
compensation in excess of the amount of compensation payable under section 16A.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 14]
14 (3) Subject to the decision of the High Court in cases in which an appeal is preferred under                     
sub-section ( 2), the decision of the C ommissioner under sub -section ( 1) shall be final and shall not be 
called in question in any court.  
16F. Saving as to certain rights .—The right of any person to claim compensation under section 16A 
shall be without prejudice to the right of such person to r ecover compensation payable under any other 
law for the time being in force; but no person shall be entitled to claim compensation more than once in 
respect of the same collapse of the house.  
16G. Power to make rules .—(1) The State Government may, by notif ication in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for giving effect to the provisions of sections 16A to 16F (both inclusive).  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for — 
(i) the qualifications a nd conditions of service of Commissioners;  
(ii) the manner in which claims for compensation may be inquired into and determined by the 
Commissioner;  
(iii) the matters in respect of which any person may be chosen to assist the Commissioner under 
section 16D  and the functions that m ay be performed by such person;  
(iv) generally for the effective exercise of any powers conferred on the Commissioner.]  
17. Other facilities .—The State Government may make rules requiring that in every plantation the 
employer shall  provide the workers with such number and type of umbrellas, blankets, rain coats or other 
like amenities for the protection of workers from rain or cold as may be prescribed.  
18. Welfare officers .—(1) In every plantation wherein three hundred or more work ers are ordinarily 
employed the employer shall employ such number of welfare officers as may be prescribed.  
(2) The State Government may prescribe the duties, qualifications and conditions of service of 
officers employed under sub -section ( 1). 
STATE AMENDM EN
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 14]
ifications and conditions of service of 
officers employed under sub -section ( 1). 
STATE AMENDM ENT  
Kerala  
Amendment of Section 18. —In Section 18 of the Plantation Labour Act, 1951 (Central Act 69 of 
1951) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after sub -section ( 1), the following sub -section shall 
be inserted, namely: — 
“(1A) If in any plant ation, welfare officers are not employed as required by the rules made under                 
sub-section ( 1), the chief inspector may appoint the required number of welfare officers and thereupon 
such officers shall be deemed to have been employed by the e mployee under sub -section ( 1): 
Provided that before appointing welfare officers under this sub -section the employer shall be given an 
opportunity of being heard.”  
[Vide Kerala Act 25 of 1969, s. 2.]  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 15]
15 1[CHAPTER IVA  
PROVISIONS AS TO SAFETY  
18A. Safety. —(1) In every plantation, effective arrangements shall be made by the employer to 
provide for the safety of workers in connection with the use, handling, storage and transport of 
insecticides, chemicals and toxic substances.  
(2) The State Government may make rul es for prohibiting or, restricting employment of women or 
adolescents in using or handling hazardous chemicals.  
(3) The employer shall appoint persons possessing the prescribed qualifications to supervise the use, 
handling, storage and transportation of in secticides, chemicals and toxic substances in his plantation.  
(4) Every employer shall ensure that every worker in plantation employed for handling, mixing, 
blending and applying insecticides, chemicals and toxic substances, is trained about the hazards in volved 
in different operations in which he is engaged, the various safety measures and safe work practices to be 
adopted in emergencies arising from spillage of such insecticides chemicals and toxic substances and such 
other matters as may be prescribed by  the State Government.  
(5) Every worker who is exposed to insecticides, chemicals and toxic substances shall be medically 
examined periodically, in such manner as may be prescribed, by the State Government.  
(6) Every employer shall maintain health record o f every worker who is exposed to insecticides, 
chemicals and toxic substances which are used, handled, stored or transported in a plantation, and every 
such worker shall have access to such record.  
(7) Every employer shall provide — 
(a) washing, bathing and  clock room facilities; and  
(b) protective clothing and equipment,  
to every worker engaged in handling insecticides, chemicals or toxic substances in such manner as may 
be prescribed by the State Government.  
(8) Every employer shall display in the plantati on a list of permissible concentrations of insecticides, 
chemicals and toxic substances in the breathing
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 15]
list of permissible concentrations of insecticides, 
chemicals and toxic substances in the breathing zone of the workers engaged in the handling and 
application of such insecticides, chemicals and toxic substances.  
(9) Every employer shall exhibit such  precautionary notices as may be prescribed by the State 
Government indicating the hazards of insecticides, chemicals and toxic substances.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Kerala  
Insertion of new section 18A —After section 18 of the principal Act, the following section sha ll be 
inserted, namely: — 
“18A. Chief Inspector to provide facilities on default by employer. — 
                                                      
1. Ins. by A ct 17 of 2010, s. 5 (w.e.f.  7-6-2010).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 16]
16 (1) If in any plantation, facilities are not provided or maintained by the employer as required by 
section 8 or section 9 or section 12 or section 15 or the rule s made under section 11 or section 14 or 
section 17, the chief inspector may cause to be provided or maintained therein such facilities and recover 
the cost thereof from the defaulting employer:  
Provided that before providing or maintaining such facilities  the employer shall be given an 
opportunity of being heard.  
(2) For the purpose of the recovery of the cost under sub -section ( 1) the chief inspector may certify the 
amount to be recovered to the Collector, who may thereupon recover such amount as an arrea r of land 
revenue. ”. 
[Vide Kerala Act 25 of 1969, s. 3]  
18B. Power of State Government to make rules. —(1) The State Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Chapter.  
(2) In particular, and withou t prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:  — 
(a) the restriction on employment of women and adolescents for handling hazardous chemicals 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 18A ; 
(b) the qualifications of supervisor appointed under sub -section ( 3) of section 18A;  
(c) the matters for training of workers under sub -section ( 4) of section 18A;  
(d) the medical examination of workers under sub -section ( 5) of section 18A;  
(e) the facili ties and equipment to be provided to the workers engaged in handling insecticides, 
chemicals and toxic substances under sub -section ( 7) of section 18A;  
(f) the precautionary notices to be exhibited under sub -section ( 9) of section 18A .] 
CHAPTER V  
HOURS AND  LIMITATION OF EMPLOYMENT  
19. Weekly hours .—1[(1)] Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, no adult worker shall be 
required or allowed to work o n any plantation in excess of 2[forty -eight hours] a week and no adol escent 
3***
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 16]
llowed to work o n any plantation in excess of 2[forty -eight hours] a week and no adol escent 
3*** for more than 4[twen ty-seven hours] a week.  
 5[(2) Where an adult worker works in any plantation on any day in excess of the number of hours 
constituting a normal working day or for more than forty -eight hours in any week, he shall, in respect of 
such overtime work, be entitl ed to twice the rates of ordinar y wages:  
                                                      
1. Section 19 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 58 of 1981, s. 9 (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982).  
2. Subs. by s. 9, ibid, for “fifty-four hours ” (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982).  
3. The words “or child’ omitted by Act 17 of 2010, s. 6 (w.e.f. 7 -6-2010).  
4. Subs. by  Act 58 of 1981,  s. 9, for “forty hours ” (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982).  
5. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 6 -1-1982).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 17]
17 Provided that no such worker shall be allowed to work for more than nine hours on any day and more 
than fifty -four hours in any week.  
(3) For any work done on any closed holiday in the plantation or on any day of re st, a worker shall be 
entitled to twice the rates of ordinary wages as in the case of overtime work.]  
20. Weekly holidays .— (1) The State Government may by rules made in this behalf — 
(a) provide for a day of rest in every period of seven days which shall b e allowed to all workers;  
1[(b) provide for the conditions subject to which, and the circumstances in which, an adult worker 
may be required or allowed to work overtime.]  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( a) of sub - section ( 1) where a wo rker is willing 
to work on any day of rest which is not a closed holiday in the plantation, nothing contained in this 
section shall prevent him from doing so:  
Provided that in so doing a worker does not work for more than ten days consecutively without a 
holiday for a whole day intervening.  
Explanation 1.—Where on any day a worker has been prevented from working in any plantation 
by reason of tempest, fire, rain or other natural causes, that day, may, if he so desires, be treated as his 
day of rest for the  relevant period of seven days within the meaning of sub -section ( 1). 
Explanation 2.—Nothing contained in this section shall apply to any worker whose total period of 
employment including any day spent on leave is less than six days . 
21. Daily intervals fo r rest .—The period of work on each day shall be so fixed that no period shall 
exceed five hours and that no worker shall work for more than five hours before he has had an interval for 
rest for at least half an hour.  
22. Spread -over .—The period of work of an adult worker in a plantation shall be so arranged that 
inclusive of his in terval for rest under section 2[21] it shall not spread -over more than twelve hours 
including the time spent in waiting for
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 17]
tion 2[21] it shall not spread -over more than twelve hours 
including the time spent in waiting for work on any day.  
23. Notice of period of work .—(1) Ther e shall be displayed and correctly maintained in every 
plantation a notice of periods of work in such form and manner as may be prescribed showing clearly for 
every day the periods during which the workers may be required to work.  
(2) Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, no worker shall be required or allowed to 
work in any plantation otherwise than in accordance with the notice of periods of work displayed in the 
plantation.  
(3) An employer may refuse to employ a worker for any day if on that day he turns up for work more 
than half an hour after the time fixed for the commencement of the day's work.  
3[24. Prohibition of employment of children .—No child shall be employed to work in any 
plantation.]   
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 58 of 1981, s. 10, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982).  
2. Subs. by Act 42 of 1953, s. 4 and the Third Sch edule , for “19”. 
3. Ins. by Act 17 of 2010, s. 7 (w .e.f. 7 -6-2010).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 18]
18 25. Night work for women 1***.—Except w ith the permission of the State Government, no woman  
2*** worker shall be employed in any plantation otherwise than between the hours of 6 A.M. and 7 P.M.:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to midwives and nurses employed as 
such in any plantation.  
26. Non -adult workers to carry tokens .— No 3*** adolescent shall be required or allowed to work 
in any plantation unless — 
(a) a certificate of fitness granted with reference to him under section 27 is in the custody of the 
employer; a nd 
(b) such 4*** adolescent carries with him while he is at work a token giving a references to such 
certificate.  
27. Certificate of fitness .—(1) A certifying surgeon shall, on the application of any young person or 
his parent or guardian accompanied by a document signed by the employer or any other person on his 
behalf that such person will be employed in the plantation if certified to be fit for work, or on the 
application of the employer or any other person on his behalf with reference to any young perso n 
intending to work, examine such person and ascertain his fitness for work 5*** as an adolescent.  
(2) A certificate of fitness granted under this section shall be valid for a period of twelve months from 
the date thereof, but may be renewed.  
(3) Any fee p ayable for a certificate under this section shall be paid by the employer and shall not be 
recoverable from the young person, his parents or guardian.  
28. Power to require medical examination .—An inspector may, if he thinks necessary so to do, 
cause any yo ung person employed in a plantation to be examined by a certifying surgeon.  
CHAPTER VI  
LEAVE WITH WAGES  
29. Application of Chapter .— (1) The provisions of this Chapter shall not operate to the prejudice of 
any rights to which a worker may be entitled under  any other law or under the terms of any award, 
agreement, or contract of service:  
Provided that where such award, ag
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 18]
der the terms of any award, 
agreement, or contract of service:  
Provided that where such award, agreement or contract of service provides for a longer leave with 
wages than provided in this Chapter the worker shall be entitled only to su ch longer leave.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this Chapter leave shall not, except as provided in section 30, 
include weekly holidays or holidays for festivals or other similar occasions.  
                                                      
1. The words “and children” omitted by Act 17 of 2010 , s. 8 (we.f. 7 -6-2010).   
2. The words “or child” omitted by s. 8, ibid. (we.f. 7 -6-2010).  
3. The words “child and no” omitted by Act 1 7 of 2010, s. 9 (w.e.f. 7 -6-2010).  
4. The words “child or” omitted by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 7 -6-2010).  
5. The words “ either as a child or” omitted by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 7 -6-2010).   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 19]
19 30. Annual leave with wages .—(1) Every worker shall be allowed l eave with wages for a number of 
days calculated at the rate of — 
(a) if an adult, one day for every twenty days of work performed by him, and  
(b) if a young person, one day for every fifteen days of work performed by him.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
2[ 3[Explanatio n 1].—For the purposes of calculating leave under this sub -section, — 
(a) any day on which no work or less than half a day's work is performed shall not be counted; 
and 
(b) any day on which half or more than half a day's work is performe d shall be counted a s one 
day.]  
4[Explanation 2.—The leave admissible under this sub -section shall be exclusive of all holidays, 
whether occurring during, or at either and of , the period of leave.]  
(2) If a worker does not in any one period of twelve months take the whole of the leave allowed to 
him under sub -section ( 1), any leave not taken by him shall be added to the leave to be allowed to him 
under that sub -section in the succeeding period of twelve months.  
(3) A worker shall cease to earn any leave under this section when  the earned leave due to him 
amounts to thirty days.  
2[(4) If the employment of a worker who is entitled to leave under this section is terminated by the 
employer before he has taken the entire leave to which he is entitled, the employer shall pay him the 
amount payable under section 31 in respect of the leave not taken, and such payment shall be made before 
the expiry of the second working day after such termination.]  
31. Wages during leave period .— 5[(1) For the leave allowed to a worker under section 30,  he shall 
be paid, — 
(a) if employed wholly on a time -rate basis, at a rate equal to the daily wage payable to him 
immediately before the commencement of such leave under any law or under the terms of any award, 
agreement or contract of service, and  
(b) in other cases, including cases where he is, during the preceding twelve calendar months, pai
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 19]
  
(b) in other cases, including cases where he is, during the preceding twelve calendar months, paid 
partly on a time -rate basis and partly on a piece -rate basis, at the rate of the average daily wage 
calculated over the preceding twelve calendar months.  
Explanati on.—For the purposes of clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1), the average daily wage shall be 
computed on the basis of his total full -time earnings during the preceding twelve calendar months, 
exclusive of any over -time earnings or bonus, if any, but inclusive of  dearness allowance . 
                                                      
1. The proviso omitted by Act 58 of 1981, s. 11 (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982).  
2. Ins.  by Act 34 of 1960, s. 6 (w.e.f. 21 -11-1960).  
3. The existing  Explanation  numbered as Explanation  1 thereof by Act 58 of 1981, s. 11 (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982).  
4. Ins. by s. 11. ibid. (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982).  
5. Subs. by Act 34 of 1960, s. 7, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e. f. 21-11- 1960).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 20]
20  (1A) In addition to the wages for the leave period at the rates specified in sub -section ( 1), a worker 
shall also be paid the cash value of food and other concessions, if any, allowed to him by the employer in 
addition to his daily wa ges unless these concessions are continued during the leave period.]  
(2) A worker who has been a llowed leave for 1[any period not less than] four days in the case of an 
adult and five days in the case of a young person under section 30 shall, before his le ave begins, be paid 
his wages for the period of the leave allowed.  
32. Sickness and maternity benefits .—(1) Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, 
every worker shall be entitled to obtain from his employer — 
(a) in the case of sickness certif ied by a qualified medical practitioner, sickness allowance, and  
(b) if a woman, in the case of confinement or expected confinement, maternity allowance,  
at such rate, for such period and at such intervals as may be prescribed.  
(2) The State Government may  make rules regulating the payment of sickness or maternity allowance 
and any such rules may specify the circumstances in which such allowance shall not be payable or shall 
cease to be payable, and in framing any rules under this section the State Governme nt shall have due 
regard to the medical facilities that may be provided by the employer in any plantation.  
2[CHAPTER VIA  
ACCIDENTS  
32A. Notice of accident .—Where in any plantation, an accident occurs which causes death or which 
causes any bodily injury to a worker by reason of which the worker injured is prevented from working for 
a period of forty -eight hours or more immediately following the accident, or which is of such a nature as 
may be prescribed in this behalf, the employer thereof shall send notice thereof to such authorities, in 
such form, and within such time, as may be prescribed.  
32B. Register of accidents .—The employer shall maintain a register of all accidents which occur
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 20]
.  
32B. Register of accidents .—The employer shall maintain a register of all accidents which occur in 
the plantation in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed.]  
3[32C. Compensation. —The employer shall give compensation to a worker in plantation in case of 
accident and the memorandum relating to such compensation shall be got registered by the employer            
with the Commissioner in accordance with the provisio ns of the Workmen ’s Compensation                          
Act, 1923  (8 of 1923) .] 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 42 of 1953, s. 4 and the Third Schedule , for "any period less than".  
2. Ins. by Act 58 of 1981, s. 12 (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982).  
3.  Ins. by Act 17 of 2010, s. 11 (w.e.f. 7 -6-2010).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 21]
21 CHAPTER VII  
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE  
33. Obstruction .—(1) Whoever obstructs an inspector in the discharge of his duties under this Act or 
refuses or wilfully neglects to affo rd the inspector any reasonable facility for making any inspection, 
examination or inquiry authori sed by or under this Act in relation to any plantation, shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 1[six months, or with fine which may extend to ten 
thousand rupees, or with both].  
(2) Whoever wilfully refuses to produce on the demand of an inspector any register or other 
document kept in pursuance of this Act, or prevents or attempts to prevent or does anything which he has 
reason to  believe is likely to prevent any person from appearing before or being examined by an inspector 
acting in pursuance of his duties under this Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to 1[six months, or with fine which may ext end to ten thousand rupees, or with both. ] 
34. Use of false certificate of fitness .—Whoever knowingly uses or attempts to use as a certificate of 
fitness granted to himself under section 27 a certificate granted to another person under that section, or 
having been granted a certificate of fitness to himself, knowingly allows it to be used, or allows an 
attempt to use it to be made by another person, shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend 
to 2[two months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees,  or with both ]. 
35. Contravention of provisions regarding employment of labour .—Whoever, except as otherwise 
permitted by or under this Act, contravenes any provision of this Act or of any rules made thereunder, 
prohibiting, restricting or regulating the employment of persons in a plantation, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to 1[six months, or with fine which may extend to ten 
thousand rupees, or with both].  
36. Other offences .—Whoever contravenes any o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 21]
 may extend to ten 
thousand rupees, or with both].  
36. Other offences .—Whoever contravenes any of the  provisions of this Act or of any rules made 
thereunder for which no other penalty is elsewhere provided by or under this Act shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to 1[six months, or with fine which may extend to ten 
thousand r upees, or with both].  
37. Enhanced penalty after previous conviction .—If any person who has been convicted of any 
offence punishable under this Act is again guilty of an offence involving a contravention of the same 
provision, he shall be punishable on a s ubsequent conviction with imprisonment which may extend to 
3[one year,  or with fine which shall not be less than ten  thousand rupees  but which may extend to one lakh 
rupees, or with both ]: 
Provided that for the purposes of this section no cognizance shall be taken of any conviction made 
more than two years before the commission of the offence which is being punished.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by  Act 17 of 2010,  s. 12, for “three mo nths, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both”                    
(w.e.f. 7 -6-2010).  
2. Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for “one month, or with fine which may extend to fifty rupees, or with both” (w.e.f. 7 -6-2010).   
3.  Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for “six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both” (w.e.f. 7 -6-2010).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 22]
22 1[37A. Power of court to make orders .—(1) Where an employer is convicted of an offence 
punishable under section 36, the court may, in addition  to awarding any punishment, by order in writing, 
require him within such period as may be specified in the order (which the court may, if it thinks fit and 
on an application made in this behalf by the employer, from time to time, extend) to take such meas ures 
as may be so specified for remedying the matters in respect of which the offence was committed.  
(2) Where an order is made under sub -section ( 1), the employer shall not be liable under this Act in 
respect of the continuation of the offence during the period or extended period, as the case may be, 
specified by the court, but if, on the expiry of such period or extended period, the order of the court has 
not been fully complied with, the employer shall be deemed to have committed a further offence and he  
shall, on conviction, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months and 
with fine which may extend to three hundred rupees for every day after such expiry.]  
38. Exemption of employer from liability in certain cases .—Where an em ployer charged with an 
offence under this Act alleges that another person is the actual offender, he shall be entitled upon 
complaint made by him in this behalf to have, on giving to the prosecutor in this behalf three clear days, 
notice in writing of his intention so to do, that other person brought before the Court on the day appointed 
for the hearing of the case and if, after the commission of the offence has been proved, the employer 
proves to the satisfaction of the Court that — 
(a) he has used due dili gence to enforce the execution of the relevant provisions of this Act; and  
(b) that the other person committed the offence in question without his knowledge, consent or 
connivance;  
the said other person shall be convicted of the offence and shall be liabl e to the like punishment as i
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 22]
said other person shall be convicted of the offence and shall be liabl e to the like punishment as if he 
were the employer and the employer shall be acquitted:  
Provided that — 
(a) the employer may be examined on oath and his evidence and that of any witness whom he 
calls in his support shall be subject to cross -examination on  behalf of the person he charges to be the 
actual offender and by the prosecutor, and  
(b) if, in spite of due diligence, the person alleged as the actual offender cannot be brought before 
the Court on the day appointed for the hearing of the case, the Cour t shall adjourn the hearing thereof 
from time to time so, however, that the total period of such adjournment does not exceed three 
months, and if, by the end of the said period, the person alleged as the actual offender cannot still be 
brought before the C ourt, the Court shall proceed to hear the case against the employer.  
2[39. Cognizance of offences .— No Court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act except 
on a complaint made by  any worker or an office bearer of a trade union of which such wor ker is a 
member or an inspector and no court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate 
of the first class  shall try any offence punishable under this Act.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 58 of 1981, s. 13  (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982).  
2. Subs. by Act 17 of 2010, s. 12, for section 39 (w.e.f. 7 -6-2010).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 23]
23 39A. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or o ther legal proceeding shall 
lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.]  
40. Limitation of prosecutions .— No Court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under 
this Act unless the complaint  thereof has been made or is made within three months from the date on 
which the alleged commission of the offence came to the knowledge of an inspector:  
Provided that where the offence consists of disobeying a written order made by an inspector, 
complaint  thereof may be made within six months of the date on which the offence is alleged to have 
been committed.  
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
41. Power to give directions .—The Central Government may give directions to the Government of 
any State as to the carrying  into execution in the State of the provisions contained in this Act.  
42. Power to exempt .—The State Government may, by order in writing, exempt, subject to such 
conditions and restrictions as it may think fit to impose, any employer or class of employers from all or 
any of the provisions of this Act:  
Provided that no such exemption 1[other than an exemption from section 19] shall be granted except 
with the previous approval of the Central Government.  
43. General power to make rules .—(1) The State Governmen t may, subject to the condition of 
previous publication, make rules to carr y out the purposes of this Act:  
Provided that the date to be specified under clause ( 3) of section 23 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 
(10 of 1897) shall not be less than six weeks from the date on which the draft of the proposed rules was 
published.  
(2) In particular,   and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, any such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the qualifications required in respect of the chief inspector and inspector;  
(b) the powers which may be exercised by inspectors and the areas in whi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 23]
 inspector and inspector;  
(b) the powers which may be exercised by inspectors and the areas in which and the manner in 
which such powers may be exercised;  
(c) the medical supervision which may be exercised by certifying surgeons;  
(d) the examination by inspectors or othe r persons of the supply and distribution of drinking 
water in plantations;  
(e) appeals from any order of the chief inspector or inspector and the form in which, the time 
within which and the authorities to which, such appeals may be preferred;  
(f) the time  within which housing, recreational, educational or other facilities required by this Act 
to be provided and maintained may be so provided;  
(g) the types of latrines and urinals that should be maintained in plantations;  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 34 of 196 0, s. 8 (w.e.f. 21 -11-1960).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PLANTATIONS LABOUR ACT, 1951.pdf - page 24]
24 (h) the medical, recreational and ed ucational facilities that should be provided in plantations;  
(i) the form and manner in which notices of periods of work shall be displayed and maintained;  
(j) the registers which should be maintained by employers and the returns, whether occasional or 
periodical, as in the opinion of the State Government may be required  for the purposes of this Act; 
1***  
(k) the hours of work for a normal working day for the purpose of wages and over -time;  
2[(l) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescr ibed.]  
3[(3) Every rule  made by the State Government under this Act shall, as soon as may be after it is 
made, be laid before the State Legislature.]   
4*   *   *   *   * 
                                                      
1. The word "and" omitted by Act 58 of 1981, s. 14 (w.e. f. 26-1- 1982).  
2. Added by Act 58 of 1981, s. 14 (w.e.f. 26 -1-1982).  
3. Subs. by Act 17 of 2010, s. 16, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 7 -6-2010).  
4. Sub-section ( 4) omitted  by Act 4 of 2018,  s. 3 and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 5 -1-2018).   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POLICE ACT, 1861.pdf - page 1]
 
 
1 THE POLICE ACT, 1861  
______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
PREAMBLE  
SECTIONS  
1. Interpretation clause.  
2. Constitution of the force.  
3.  Superintendence in the State Government.  
4.  Inspector -General of Police, etc.  
5.   Powers of Inspector General . Exercise of power.  
6.  [Repealed .]. 
7.  Appointment, dismissal, etc., of inferior officers.  
8.   Certificates to police officers.  
 Surrender of certificate.  
9.  Police -officers not to resign without leave or two months ’ notice.  
10.  Police -officers not to engage inother employment.  
11.  [Repealed .]. 
12.  Power of Inspector -General to make rules.  
13.  Additional police -officer employed at cost of individuals.  
14. Appointment of additional force in the neighbourhood of railway and other works.  
15. Quartering of additional police in disturbed or dangerous districts.  
15A. Awarding compensation to sufferers from misconduct of inhabitants or persons interested in 
land.  
16.  Recovery of moneys payable under sections 13, 14, 15 and 15A, and disposal of same when 
 recovered.  
17.  Special police -officers.  
18. Powers of special police -officers.  
19.  Refusal to serve as special police -officers.  
20. Authority to be exercised by police -officers . 
21.  Village police -officers.  
 Police -chaukidars in the Presidency of Fort William.  
22.  Police -officers always on duty and may be employed in any part of district.  
23.  Duties of police -officers.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POLICE ACT, 1861.pdf - page 2]
 
 
2 SECTIONS  
24. Police -officers may lay information, etc.  
25. Police -officers to take charge of unclaimed property, and be subject to Magistrate’s orders as 
 to disposal.  
26.  Magistrate may detain property and issue proclamation.  
27.  Confiscation of property if no clai mant appears.  
28.  Persons refusing to deliver up certificate, etc., on ceasing to be police -officers.  
29.  Penalties for neglect of duty, etc.  
30.  Regulation of public assemblies and processions and licensing of the same.  
 Music in the streets.  
30A. Pow ers with regard to assemblies and processions violating conditions of l icense.  
31.  Police to keep order in public roads, etc.  
32.  Penalty for disobeying orders issued under last three sections, etc.  
33.  Saving of control of Magistrate of district . 
34.  Punishment for certain offences on roads, etc.  
Power of police -officers  
Slaughtering cattle, furious riding, etc.  
Cruelty  to animals.  
Obstructing passengers . 
Exposing goods for sale.  
Throwing dirt into street.  
Being found drunk or riotous.  
Indecent exposure of person.  
Neglect to protect dangerous places.  
35.  Jurisdiction.  
36.  Power to prosecute under other law not affected.  
 Proviso . 
37.  Recovery of penalties and fines imposed by Magistrates.  
41.  [Repealed .]. 
42. Limitation of actions. 
 Tender of amends . 
 Proviso.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POLICE ACT, 1861.pdf - page 3]
 
 
3 SECTIONS  
43.  Plea that act was done under warrant.  
 Proviso.  
44.  Police -officers to keep diary.  
45.  State Government may prescribe form of returns.  
46.  Scope of Act.  
47.  Authority of District Superintendent  of Police over village police.  
 FORM  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POLICE ACT, 1861.pdf - page 4]
 
 
4 THE POLICE ACT, 18611 
ACT, NO. 5 OF 1861  
[22nd March , 1861 .] 
An Act for the Regulation of Police.  
Preamble. —WHEREAS  it is expedient to re -organi se the police and to make it a more efficient 
instrument for  the prevention and detection of crime; It is enacted as follows:  — 
1.Interpretation clause. — The following words and expressions in this Act shall have the 
meaning assigned to them, unless there be something in the subject or context repugnant to such 
construction, that is to say — 
the words “Magistrate of the district” shall mean the chief office r charged with the executive 
administration of a district and exercising the powers of a Magistrate, by whatever designation the 
chief officer charged with such executive administration is styled:  
                                                           
1. Short title given by the Indian Short Titles Act, 1897 (14 of 1897).  
This Act has been applied to — 
the S onthalParganas by the S onthalParganas Settlement Regulation,1872 (3 of 1872), s . 3; 
the Town of Calcutta and its suburbs, with modifications by the Calcutta Police Act, 1898 (Ben.1 of 1898);  
the Khondmals District by the Khondmals Laws Regulation, 1936 (4 of1936), s. 3 and Schedule;   
the Angul District by the Angul Laws Regulation,  1936 (5 of 1936), s . 3 and Schedule ; and  
the areas transferred to Orissa from the Madras Presidency, by the Orissa Laws Regulation, 1936 (1 of 1936).  
It has been declared, by notification under section3( a) of the Scheduled Districts Act, 1874 (14 of 1874 ), to be in force in 
the following Scheduled Districts, namely: — 
The District of Hazaribagh, Lohardaga (now the Ranchi District, see Calcutta Gazette, 1899 PartI, p.44) and Manbhum 
and ParganaDhalbhum and the Kolhan in the District of Singhbhum, see Gazett e of India, 1881, PartI p.504, and the Porahat 
Estate in the Singhbhum District, see Gazette of India, 1897, PartI, p 1059.  
It has been extended, by notification under s . 5 of t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POLICE ACT, 1861.pdf - page 4]
 see Gazette of India, 1897, PartI, p 1059.  
It has been extended, by notification under s . 5 of the same Act, to the Kumaon and Garhwal Districts, see Gazette of 
India, 1891, PartI, p.185, and (with the exception of s . 5) to the Scheduled District of Coorg, see Gazette of India, 1914, 
PartII, p.2347.Ss . 15, 15A, 16, 30, 30A, 31 and 32 have been extended to the Scheduled Districts in Ganjam and 
Vizagapatam, see Fort St.George Ga zette, 1898, PartI, p.667, and Gazette of India, 1898, PartI, p.873.The whole Act has 
been extended to the Amindivi Islands attached to the South Kanara District; see Fort St.George Gazette, 1935, PartI, p.1202.  
It has been extended to the Merged States an d the States of Bhopal, Bilaspur, Himachal Pradesh and Kutch by the 
Merged States (Laws) Act, 1949 (59 of 1949), and to the States of Manipur, Tripura and Vindhya Pradesh by the Part C 
States (Laws) Act, 1950 (30 of 1950).  
It has been extend to – 
(1) and b rought into force in Dadra and Nagar Haveli (w.e.f. 1 -7-1965) by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and the First Schedule ; 
(2) Laccadive Minicoy and Amindivi Islands (w.e.f. 1 -10-1967): vide Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 and Schedule ; 
(3) the whole of Madhya Pardesh by M.P. Act  23 of 1958 (when notified); and  
(4) Goa, Daman and Diu with modifications, by Reg. 12 of 1962, s. 3 and the Schedule.  
As to special enactments in force in Madras, Bombay and Lower Provinces of Bengal, and extensions of this Act under 
the power conferred  by section46, see notes to that section.   
As to special enactments for Military, Frontier or Rural Police in force in certain parts of the States, see footnote to 
section8.  
As to the creation of special police -districts embracing parts of two or more Provinces and the extension to every part 
thereof the powers and jurisdiction of members of a police force belonging to any part of the States, see the Police Act, 1888 
(3 of 188 8). 
The Act has been amended in its application to — 
the C.P.and Berar by 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POLICE ACT, 1861.pdf - page 4]
ce Act, 1888 
(3 of 188 8). 
The Act has been amended in its application to — 
the C.P.and Berar by C.P. and Berar Act 3 of 1937 ; Madras by Madras Act 13 of 1948 ; the U.P. by U.P. Acts 2 of 
1939, 2 of 1944 and 32 of 1952 ;Punjab by E.P. Act 30 of 1948; Pondicherry by Pondicherry Act 7 of 1968; West Bengal 
by West Bengal Act 5 of 1973; Orissa by Orissa Act s 5 of 1976 and 34 of 1976 and Sikkim by Skkim Act 7 of 1980.  
Repealed in its application to Bellary District by Mysore Act 14 of 1955.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POLICE ACT, 1861.pdf - page 5]
 
 
5 the word “ Magistrate ” shall include all persons within the  general police -district, exercising all or 
any of the power of a Magistrate:  
the word “police ” shall include all persons who shall beenrolled under this Act:  
the words “general police -district ” shall embrace any1presidency, 2[State ] or place, or any part of 
any presidency ,2[State ] or place, in which this Act shall be ordered to take effect:  
3[the words “District Superintendent ” and “District Superintendent of Police ” shall include any 
Assistant District Superintendent or other person appointed by general or special order of the 4[State 
Government ] to perform all or any of the duties of a District Superintendent of Police under this Act 
in any district:]  
the word “property” shall include any moveable property money, or valuable security:  
5*   *   *   *   * 
the word  “person ” shall include a company or corporation:  
the word “month ”  shall mean a calendar month:  
6the word “cattle” shall, besides horned cattle, include elephants, camels, horses,  asses, mules, 
sheep, goats and swine.  
7[References to the subordinate ranks of a police force shall be construed as references to members 
of that force belo w the rank of Deputy Superintendent.]  
82. Constitution of the forces .—The entire police -establishment under a 4[State Government ] shall 
for the purposes of this Act, be deemed to be one 9police force, and shall be formally enrolled; and 
shall consist of such number of officers and men, and shall be constituted in such manner , 10*** as 
shall from time to time be ordered by the 4[State Government ]11***. 
12[Subject to the provisions of this Act the pay and all other conditions of service of members of 
the subordinate ranks of any police force shall be such as may -be determined by the2[State ] 
Government. ] 
3. Superintendence in the 4[State Government ].—The superintendence of the police throughout 
a general police -district shall vest in and 9*** shall be exe
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POLICE ACT, 1861.pdf - page 5]
rintendence of the police throughout 
a general police -district shall vest in and 9*** shall be exercised by the 4[State Government ] to which 
such district is subordinate; and except as authori sed under the provisions of this Act, no person, 
officer, or Court shall be empowered by the 4[State Government ] to 13*** supersede, or control any 
police functionary.  
4. Inspector -General of Police, etc. —14The administration of the police throughout the general 
police district shall be vested in an officer to be styled the Inspector -General of Police, and in such 
                                                           
1. Under s. 2 of Police Act, 1888 (3 of 1888),  the Central Government may, notwithstanding this provision, create a special 
police -district, consisting of parts of two or more States.  
 As to Delhi State, see Gazette of India, 1912, Pt. I, p. 1105.  
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1950 , for “Province”.  
3. Ins. by Act 8 of 1895, s. 1.  
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1950 , for “Provincial Government” which ha d been subs. by the A.O. 1937 , for “L.G.”   
5. The definitions relating to “number” and “gender” rep. By Act 10 of 1914, s. 3 and the Second Schedule.  
6. Cf. Definition of “cattle” in s. 3 of the Cattle -trespass Act, 1871 (1 of 1871).  
7. Ins. by the A.O. 1937.  
8. S. 2, so far as it is related to the provinces under the administration of the Lieutenant -Governor of Bengal, rep. by the 
Bengal Police Act, 1869 (Ben. 7 of 1869).  
9. See note to s. 8, infra , as to enrolment of the police force in certain places.  
10. The words “and the members of such force shall receive such pay” omitted by the A.O. 1937.  
11. Certain words omitted, ibid. 
12. Ins. ibid. 
13. The word “appoint” omitted , ibid. 
14. In the town and suburbs of Calcutta, the administration of the police vests in the “Commissioner of Police”,  
See s. 3 of the Calcutta Police Act, 1866 (Ben. 4 of 1866).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POLICE ACT, 1861.pdf - page 5]
1866 (Ben. 4 of 1866).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POLICE ACT, 1861.pdf - page 6]
 
 
6 Deputy Inspectors -General and Assistant Inspectors -General as to the 1[State Gover nment ] shall been 
seem fit.  
The administration of the police throughout the local jurisdiction of the Magistrate of the district 
shall, under the general control and direction of such Magistrate, be vested in a District Superintendent 
and such Assistant Di strict Superintendents as the 1[State Government ] shall consider necessary.  
2*   *   *   *   * 
5.  Powers of Inspector General Exercise of power .— The Inspector -General of Police shall 
have the full powers of a Magistrate throughout the general police -district; but shall exercise those 
powers subject to such limitation as may from time to time be imposed by the 1[State Government. ] 
6. [Magisterial po wers of police officers .]Rep.by the Code of Criminal Procedure,  1882 ( Act 10 of 
1882), s. 2 and Schedule  I (b).  
7. Appointment, dismissal, etc., of inferior officers .— 3[4[Subject to the provisions of  article 311 
of the Constitution, and to such rules] as the 1[State Government ] may from time to time make under 
this Act, the Inspector -General, Deputy Inspectors -General, Assistant Inspector -General and District 
Superintendents of Police may at any time dismiss, susp end or reduce any police -officer of the 
subordinate ranks] whom they shall think remiss or negligent in the discharge of his duty, or unfit for 
the same;  
5[or may award any one or more of the following punishments to any police -officer6[of the 
subordinate ranks] who shall discharge his duty in a careless or negligent manner, or who by any act 
of his own shall render himself unfit for the discharge thereof, namely:  — 
(a)fine to any amount not exceeding one month ’s pay;  
(b) confinement to quarters for a term not exceeding fifteen days, with or without punishment -
drill, extra guard, fatigue or other duty;  
(c) deprivation of good -conduct pay;  
(d) removal from any office of distinction or special emolument.]7 
8.  Certif
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POLICE ACT, 1861.pdf - page 6]
 good -conduct pay;  
(d) removal from any office of distinction or special emolument.]7 
8.  Certificates to police officers . —8Every police -officer 9[appointed to the police force other 
than an officer mentioned in section 4] shall receive on his appointment a certificate in the from 
                                                           
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950 , for “Provincial Government” which had been subs. by the A.O. 1937 , for “L.G.”.  
2. Certain words omitted by the A.O. 1937.  
3. Subs. ,ibid., for certain words.  
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1950 (as amended by C.O. 29), for “Subject to such rules”.  
5. Subs. by Act 8  of 1895, s. 2, for certain words.  
6. Ins. by the A.O. 1937.  
7. For clause ( e), applicable to certain areas in the U.P., see U.P. Act 2 of 1944.   
8. As to enrolment, maintenance and discipline of – 
 (1) the Military Police -force employed in — 
 (a) the An daman and Nicobar Islands, see the Andaman and Nicobar Islands Military Police (Disbandment ) 
Regulation, 1946 (3of 1946);  
 (b) Assam, see the Assam Rifles Act, 1941 (5 of 1941);  
(c) Bengal, see the  Eastern Frontier Rifles (Bengal Battalion) Act, 1920 (Ben. 2 of 1920);  
(2) the Punjab Frontier Police -officers, see  the Punjab Frontier Police -officer Regulation, 1893 (7 of 1893);  
(3) the Calcutta and Suburban Police, see the Calcutta Police Act, 1866 (Ben. 4 of 1866) and the Calcutta Suburban 
Police Act, 1866 (Ben. 2 of 1866),  
(4) the Police establishment in municipal areas in the U.P., see the U.P. Municipalities Act, 1916 (U.P. 2 of 1916);  
(5) the Police establishment in municipal areas in the Punjab, see the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 (Pun. 3 of 1911);  
(6) the Rural Police in the SonthalParganas, see the SonthalParganas Rural Police Regulation, 1910 (4 of 1910);  
(7) the Rural Police in Chota Nagpur, see the Chota Nagpur Rural Police Act, 1914 (B. & O. 1 of 1914);  
(8)  the U.P. Special Armed Constabulary,  see  the U.P. Special Armed Constabulary Act, 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POLICE ACT, 1861.pdf - page 6]
f 1914);  
(8)  the U.P. Special Armed Constabulary,  see  the U.P. Special Armed Constabulary Act, 1942 (U.P. 5 of 1942);  
(9)  the Delhi Special Police Establishment, see the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 (25 of 1946); and  
(10) Delhi Police, see, Delhi Police Act, 1978 (34 of 1978)  
9. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “so appointed”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POLICE ACT, 1861.pdf - page 7]
 
 
7 annexed to this Act under the seal of the Inspector -General or such other officer as the Inspector -
General shall appoint, by virtue of which the person holding such certificate shall be vested with the 
powers, functions, and privileges of a police -officer.  
Surrender of certificate. —1[Such certificate shall cease to have effect whenever the person 
named in it ceases for any reason to be a police -officer, and, on his ceasi ng to be such an officer, shall 
be forthwith surrendered by him to any officer empowered to receive the same.  
A police -officer shall not by reason of being suspended from office cease to  be a police -officer. 
During the term of such suspension the powers, functions and privileges vested in him as a police -
officer shall be in abeyance, but he shall continue subject to the same responsibilities, discipline and 
penalties and to the same autho rities, as if he had not been suspended.]  
9. Police -officers not to resign without leave or two months ’ notice.  —No police -officer shall 
be at liberty to withdraw himself from the duties of his office unless expressly allowe d to do so by the 
District Super intendent or by some other officer authori sed to grant such permission or, without the 
leave of the District Superintendent, to resign his office unless he shall have given to his superior 
officer notice in writing, for a period of not less than two months , of his intention to res ign. 
10. Police -officers not to engage inother employment. —No police -officer shall engage in any 
employment or office whatever other than his duties under this Act, unless expressly permitted to do 
so in  writing by the Inspector -General.  
11.[Police superannuation fund .]Rep. by the Repealing Act, 1874 (16 of 1874) s. 1 
and Sch., Pt. I. 
12. Power of Inspector -General to make rules. —The Inspector -General of Police may, 
fromtime to time , subject to the approval of the 2[State Government ], frame such orders and rules as 
he shall deem
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POLICE ACT, 1861.pdf - page 7]
, subject to the approval of the 2[State Government ], frame such orders and rules as 
he shall deem expedient relative to the organization, classification and distribution of the police -force, 
the places at which the members of the force shall reside, and the particular services to be performed 
by them; the ir inspection, the description of arms, accoutrements and other necessaries to be furnished 
to them; the collecting and communicating by them of intelligence and information; and all such other 
orders and rules relative to the police -force as the Inspector -General shall, from time to time, deem 
expedient for preventing abuse or neglect of duty, and for rendering such force efficient in the 
discharge of its duties.  
13. Additional police -officeremployed at cost of individuals. —It shall be lawful for the 
Inspe ctor-General of Police, o r any Deputy Inspector -General, or Assistant Inspector -General, or for 
the District Superintendent, subject to the general direction of the Magistrate of the district, on the 
application of any person showing the necessity thereof,  to depute any additional number of police -
officers to keep the peace at any place within the general police -district, and for such time as shall be 
deemed proper. Such force shall be exclusively under the orders of the District Superintendent, and 
shall b e at the charge of the person making the application:  
Provided that itshall be lawful for the person on whose application such deputa tion shall have been 
made, on giving one month ’s notice in writing to the Inspector -General, Deputy  Inspector -General , or 
Assistant Inspector -General, or to the District Superintendent, to require that the police -officers so 
deputed shall be withdrawn; and such person shall be relieved from the charge of such additional force 
from the expiration of such notice.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 8 of 1895, s. 3, for the second paragraph.  
2. Su
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POLICE ACT, 1861.pdf - page 7]
                                 
1. Subs. by Act 8 of 1895, s. 3, for the second paragraph.  
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1950 , for “Provincial Government” which had been subs.  by the A.O. 1937 , for “L.G.”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POLICE ACT, 1861.pdf - page 8]
 
 
8 14. Appointment  of additional force in the neighbourhood of railway and other 
works. —Whenever any railway, canal or other public work, or any manufactory or commercial 
concern shall be carried on , or be in operation in any part of the country, and it shall appear to the 
Inspector -General that the employment of an additional police -force in such place is rendered 
necessary by the behaviour or reasonable apprehension of thebehaviour of the persons employed upon 
such work, manufactory or concern, it shall be lawful for the I nspector -General, with the consent of 
the 1[State Government ], to depute such additional force to such place, and to employ the same so 
long as such necessity shall continue, and to make orders, from time to time, upon the person having 
the control or cust ody of the funds used in carrying on such work, manufactory or concern, for the 
payment of the extra force so rendered necessary, and such person shall thereupon cause payment to 
be made accordingly.  
2[15. Quartering of additional police in disturbed or da ngerous districts .—(1) It 
shall be lawful for the 1[State Government ], by proclamation to be notified in the Official Gazette, and 
in such other manner as the 1[State Government ] shall direct, to declare that any area subject to its 
authority has been found to be in a disturbed or dangerous state, or that, from the conduct of the 
inhabitants of such areaor of any class or section of them, it is expedient to increase the number of 
police.  
(2) It shall thereupon be lawful for the Inspector -General of Police, or other officer authori sed by 
the 1[State Government ] in this behalf, with the sanction of the 1[State Government ], to employ any 
police -force in addition to the ordinary fixed complement to be quartered in the area specified in such 
proclamation as aforesaid . 
(3)Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 5) of this section, the cost of such additional police -
force shall be borne by the inhabit
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POLICE ACT, 1861.pdf - page 8]
ction ( 5) of this section, the cost of such additional police -
force shall be borne by the inhabitants of such area described in the pr oclamation.  
(4) The Magistrate of the district, after such enquiry as he may deem necessary, shall apportion 
such cost among the inhabitants who are, as aforesaid, liable to bear the same and who shall not have 
been exempted under the next succeeding sub -section. Such apportionment shall be made according to 
the Magistrate ’s judgement of the respective means within such area of such inhabitants.  
(5) It shall be lawful for the 1[State Government ] by order to exempt any persons or class or section 
of such inhabitants from liability to bear any portion of such cost.  
(6) Every proclamation issued under sub -section ( 1)of this section shall state the period for which 
it is to remain in force, but it ma y be withdrawn at any time or continued from time to time for a 
further period or periods as the 1[State Government ] may in each case think fit to direct.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, “inhabitants ” shall include persons who them selves 
or by their agents or servants occupy or hold land or other immoveable property within such area, and 
landlords who themselves or by their agents or servants collect rents direct from raiyats or occupiers 
in such area, notwithstanding that they do not actual ly reside therein .] 
3[15A. Awarding compensation to sufferers from misconduct of inhabitants or 
persons interested in land. —(1) If, in any area in regard to which any proclamation notified 
under the last preceding section is in force, death or grievous hurt or loss of, or damage to, property 
has been caused by or has ensued from the misconduct of the inhabitants of such area or any  class or 
section of them it shall be lawful for any person, being an inhabitant of such area, who claims to have 
suffered injury from such misconduct to make, within one month from the date of the injury or such 
           
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POLICE ACT, 1861.pdf - page 8]
jury from such misconduct to make, within one month from the date of the injury or such 
                                                           
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950 , for “Provincial Governme nt” which had been subs. by the A.O. 1937 , for “L.G.”.  
2. Subs. by Act 8 of 1895, s. 4, for the section 15.  
3. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POLICE ACT, 1861.pdf - page 9]
 
 
9 shorter period as may be prescribed, an app lication for compensation to the Magistrate of the district 
or of the sub -division of a district within which such area is situated.  
(2) It shall thereupon be lawful for the Magistrate of the district, with the sanction of the 1[State 
Government ] after suc h enquiry as he may deem necessary, and whether any additional police -force 
has or has not been quartered in such area under the last preceding section, to — 
(a) declare the persons towhom injury has been caused by or has ensued from such 
misconduct;  
(b) fix the amount of compensation to be paid to such persons and the manner in which it is to 
be distributed among them; and  
(c) assess the proportion in which the same shall be paid by the inhabitants of such area other 
than the applicant who shall not have been exempted from liability to pay under the next 
succeeding sub -section:  
Provided that the Magistrate shall not make any declaration or assessment under this sub -section, 
unless he is of opinion that such injury as aforesaid has arisen from a riot or un lawful assembly within 
such area, and that the person who suffered the injury was himself free from blame in respect of the 
occurrences which led to such injury.  
(3) It shall be lawful for the 1[State Government ], by order, to exempt any persons or class o r 
section of such inhabitants from liability to pay any portion of such compensation.  
(4)Every declaration or assessment made or order passed by the Magistrate of the district under 
sub-section ( 2) shall be subject to revision by the Commissioner of the Division or the 1[State 
Government ], but save as aforesaid shall be final.  
(5) No civil suit shall bemaintainable inrespectof any injury for which compensation has been 
awarded under this section.  
(6) Explanation. —Inthis section the word “inhabitants ” shall have the same meaning as in the last 
preceding section.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Orissa  
Amendment of section 15 -A.—I
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POLICE ACT, 1861.pdf - page 9]
aning as in the last 
preceding section.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Orissa  
Amendment of section 15 -A.—In the Police Act, 1861 (Act 15 of 1861), in its application to 
Amendment the State of Orissa, for section 15 -A, the following section shall be substituted, 
namely :— 
15-A. Awarding compensation to sufferers from misconduct of inhabitants of any area. —(1) 
If, any area, death or grievous hurt Awarding or loss of or damage to property (includin g public 
property ) has been caused by or has -ensued from sufferers the misconduct of the inhabitants of such 
area or any class or section of them or from the failure inhabitants on their part to render assistance in 
preventing such loss or damage, it shall  be lawful for any person who claims to have suffered injury, 
loss or case from such misconduct or failure, to make within one month from the date of the injury, 
loss or damage, as the case may be, an application for compensation to the Magistrate of the d istrict 
within which such area is Situated.  
        (2)It shall thereupon be lawful for the Magistrate of the district, with the sanction of the State 
Government, after such enquiry as he may deem necessary, and whether any additional Police Force 
has or, has not been quartered in such area under the last preceding section to — 
                                                           
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950 , for “Provincial Government” which had been subs. by the A.O. 1937 , for “L.G.”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POLICE ACT, 1861.pdf - page 10]
 
 
10 (a) declare the limits of the area the inhabitants of which have, in his opinion, been guilt y 
of such misconduct or failure ; 
(b) declare the persons to whom injury, loss or damage has  been caused by or has ensued 
from such misconduct  or failure , 
(c) fix the amount of compensation to be paid to such person and where there are More 
than one such person, the manner in which it is to be distributed among them ;and 
(d) assess the  proportion in which the same ' shall be paid by the inhabitants (other than the 
applicant) of such area who shall no t have been exempted under sub -Section (3) from the 
liability to pay:  
Provided that where the applicant is a private individual, the Magistrate shall not make any 
declaration unless he is of opinion that such injury, loss or damage as aforesaid has arisen from a riot 
or unlawful assembly within such area and that the applicant was himself free from blame in respect 
of the occurrence whi ch led to the injury, loss or damage.  
(3) It shall be lawful for the State Government, by order, to exempt any person or class or section 
of such inhabitants from the liability to pay any portion of such compensation.  
(4) Every declaration or assessment ma de or order passed by the Magistrate of the district under 
sub-section (2) shall be subject to revision by the Revenue Divisional Commissioner or the State 
Government, but save as aforesaid, shall be final.  
(5) No civil suit shall be maintainable in respec t of any injury, loss or damage for which 
compensation has been awarded under this section.  
Explanation I —in this section — 
(a) “inhabitants” shall have the same meaning as in section 15;  
(b)“person” shall include the Central Government, the Government of a ny State, any Local 
Authority, any Company, any Corporation and any Association or body of individuals, whether 
incorporated or not;  
(c)“Public property” shall have reference to any property owned by or belonging   to — 
(i)the Central Governmen
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POLICE ACT, 1861.pdf - page 10]
roperty” shall have reference to any property owned by or belonging   to — 
(i)the Central Government or the Gove rnment of any State;  
(ii) any local authority;  
(iii) Any corporation established under any is owned , controlled or managed, partly or 
wholly, by the Central Gove rnment or any State Government;  
(iv) any Company in which not less than fifty -one per cent of the share capital is held by 
the Central  Government or any State Government or Jointly by  more than one  such  
government; and  
(v) any autonomous body established under any law.  
Explanation II -An application under sub -section (1) maybe made — 
(a) In case of the Government, by such officer as the Government may authorize in that 
behalf , and  
(b) In the case of any local authority , Company, Corporation, Association or body, by the 
person who is in charge of the property.”  
 
[Vide the Orissa Act 5 of 1 976, s. 2]  
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POLICE ACT, 1861.pdf - page 11]
 
 
11 1[16. Recovery of moneys payable under sections 13, 14, 15 and 15A , and disposal of same 
when recovered. —(1) All moneys payable under sections 13 , 14, 15 and 15A shall be coverable  by 
the Magistrate of the district in the manner provided by sections 386 and 387 of the Code 
of Cr iminal Procedure, 18822(10 of 1882), for the recovery of fines, or by suit  any 
competen tCourt. 
3*   *   *   *   * 
(3) All moneys paid or recovered under section 15A shall be paid by the Magistrate of the district 
to the persons to whom and in the proportions in which the same are payable under that section .] 
17. Special police -officers. —When it shall appear that any unlawful assembly, or riot or 
distur bance of the pe ace has taken place, or may be reasonably apprehended, and that the police -force 
ordinarily employed for preserving the peace is not sufficient for its preservation and for the 
protection of the inhabitants and the security of property in the place where s uch unlawful assemb ly or 
riot or disturbance of the peace has occurred, or is apprehended, it shall be lawful for any police -
officer not below the rank of Inspector to apply to the nearest Magistrate to appoint so many of the 
residents of the neighbourhoo d as such police -officers may require to act as special police -officers for 
such time and within such limits as he shall deem necessary; and the Magis trate to whom such  
application is made shall, unless he see cause to the contrary, comply with the application.  
18. Powers of special police -officers. —Every  special police -officer so appointed shall have th e 
same powers, privileges and protection, and shall be liable to perform the same duties and shall be 
amenable to the same penalties, and be subordin ate to the same authorities, as the ordinary officers of 
police.  
19. Refusal to serve as special police -officers. —If any person being appointed a special police -
officer as aforesaid shall without sufficient excuse, neglect o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POLICE ACT, 1861.pdf - page 11]
n being appointed a special police -
officer as aforesaid shall without sufficient excuse, neglect or refuse to serve as such, or to  obey such 
lawful order or direction as may be given to him for the performance of his duties, he shall  be liable, 
upon conviction before a  Magistrate, to a fine not exceeding fifty rupees for every such neglect, 
refusal or disobedience.  
420. Authority to be exercised by police -officers. —Police -officers enrolled under this Act shall 
not exercise any authority, except the authority provided for a police -officer under this Act and any 
Act which shall hereafter be passed for regulating criminal procedure. 
21. Village police -officers. —Nothing in this Act shall affect any hereditary or other village 
police -officer, unless such officer shall be enrolled as a police -officer under this Act. When so 
enrolled, such officer shall be bound by the provisions of the last preceding section. No hereditary or 
other village police -officer shall be enrolled without his consent and the consent of those who have the 
right of nomination.  
Police -chaukidars in the Presidency of Fort William. —If any police -office r appointed under 
5Act XX of 1856 ( to make better provision .for the appointment and maintenance of Police -chaukidars 
in Cities, Towns, Stations, Suburbs and Bazars in the Presidency of Fort William in Bengal ) is 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 8 of 1895, s. 6, for section 16.  
2. See now ss. 421 and 422 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Act 2 of 1974).  
3. Subs -section ( 2) omitted by the A.O. 1937. See however, para. 4 of the India and Burma (Transitory Provisions) Order 
1937. 
4. For some cases in which the application of s. 20 has been restricted, see the Assam Police -officers Regulation, 1883 (2 of 
1883), and s. 2 of the Punjab Frontier Police -officer Regulation, 1893 (7 of 1893).  
5. The Bengal Chaukidari Act, 1856.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POLICE ACT, 1861.pdf - page 11]
tion, 1893 (7 of 1893).  
5. The Bengal Chaukidari Act, 1856.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POLICE ACT, 1861.pdf - page 12]
 
 
12 employed out of the district for which he shall have been appointed under that Act, he shall not be 
paid out of the rates levied under the said Act for that district.  
22. Police -officers always on duty and may be employed in, any part of district. —Every 
police -officer shall, for all purposes in this Act contained , be considered to be always on duty, and 
may at any time be employed as a police -offic er in any part of the general police -district . 
23. Duties of police -officers. —It shall be the duty of every police -officer promptly to obey and 
execute all orders and wa rrants lawfully issued to him by any competent authority; to collect and 
communicate intelligence affecting the public peace; to prevent the commission of offences and public 
nuisances; to detect and bring offenders to justice and to apprehend all persons whom he is legally 
authorized to apprehend, and for whose apprehension sufficient ground exists; and it shall be lawful 
for every police -officer, for any of the purposes mentioned in this section, with out a warrant, to enter 
and inspect any drinking -shop,  gaming -house or other place of resort of loose and disorderly 
characters.  
 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Orissa  
Insertion of new section 23 -A.—In the Police Act, 1861, after section 23, the following new 
section shall be inserted, namely: — 
23-A. Power in relation to cognizable offences in a running train .—Without prejudice to the 
provisions contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , a Sub -Inspector of police, 
posted to the mobile out -post of the Government Railway Police, shall, while  performing du ty in a 
running train, exercise the powers of the officer -in-charge of the local Government Railway Police -
station for the purposes of investigation into cognizable offences committed in a running train and 
when so exercising such powers, shall be deemed t o be the officer -in-charge of such police -station 
discharging the functions of such off
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POLICE ACT, 1861.pdf - page 12]
 deemed t o be the officer -in-charge of such police -station 
discharging the functions of such officer within the limits of that Police -station.  
[Vide the Orissa Act 21 of 1986, s. 2]  
24. Police -officers may lay information, etc. —It shall be lawful for any police -officer to lay any 
information before a Magistrate, and to apply for a summons, warrant, search warrant or such other 
legal process as may by law issue against any person committing an offence 1* * *.  
25. Police -officers to take charge of unclaimed property, and be subject to Magistrate’s 
orders as to disposal. —It shall be the duty of every police -officer to take charge of all unclaimed 
property, and to furnish an inventory thereof to the Magistrate of the district.  
The police -officers shall be guided as to th e disposal of such property by such orders as they shall 
receive from the Magistrate of the district.  
26. Magistrate may detain property and issue proclamation. —(1) The Magistrate of the district 
may detain the property and issue a proclamation, specifying  the articles of which it consists, and 
requiring any person who has any claim thereto to appear and establish his right to the same within six 
months from the date of such proclamation.  
                                                           
1. The words “and to prosecute such person up to final judgment” rep. by Act 10 of 1882, s. 2 and the Schedule 1( b). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POLICE ACT, 1861.pdf - page 13]
 
 
13 1[(2) The provisions of section 525 of the 2Code of Criminal Procedur e, 1882 (10of 1882), shall be 
applicable to property referred to in this section.] 
3[27. Confiscation of property if no claimant appears. —(1) If no person shall within the period 
allowed claim such property, or the proceeds thereof, if sold, it may, if not  already sold under sub -
section ( 2)of the last preceding section, be sold under the orders of the Magistrate of the district. 
(2)The sale -proceeds of property sold under the preceding sub -section and the proceeds of property 
sold under section 26 to which no claim has been established shall be 4[the disposal of the 5[State ] 
Government].]  
28. Persons refusing to deliver up certifica te, etc., on ceasing to be police -officers. —Every 
person, h aving ceased to be an enrolled police -officer under this Act, who shall not forthwith deliver 
up his certifi cate, and the clothing accoutrements, appointments and other necessaries which shall, 
have been supplied to him for the execution of his duty, sh all be liable, on conviction before a 
Magistrate, to a penalty not exceeding two hundred rupees, or to imprisonment with or without hard 
labour, for a period not exceeding six months, or to both.  
29. Penalties for neglect of duty, etc. —Every  police -officer who shall be guilty of any viola tion 
of duty or wilful breach or neglect of any rule or regulation or lawful order m ade by competent  
authority, or w ho shall withdraw from the duties of his office without permission, 6[or without having 
given previous notice for the period of two months ,]7[or who, being absent on leave sh all fail, without 
reasonable cause to report himself for duty on the expir ation of such le ave,] or who shall eng age 
without authority in any employment other than his police -duty, o r who sh all be guilty  
of cowardice, or who sh all offer any unwarrantable personal violence to any person in his custody, 
shall be liable, on conviction befor
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POLICE ACT, 1861.pdf - page 13]
 unwarrantable personal violence to any person in his custody, 
shall be liable, on conviction before a M agistrate,  to a penalty not exceeding three months ’ pay, or to 
imprisonment with or without hard labour, for a period not exceeding three months, or to both.  
8[30. Regulation of public assemblies and processions and licensing of the same. —(1) The 
District Superinten dent or Assistant District Superintendent of Police m ay, as occasion requires, direct 
the conduct of all assemblies and processions on the public roads, or in the public streets or 
thoroughfares, and prescribe the routes by which, and the times at which, s uch processions may pass.  
(2) He may also, on being satisfied that it is intended by any persons or class of persons to convene 
or collect an assembly in any such road, street or thorough fare, or to form a procession which would, 
in the judgment of the M agistrate of the district, or of the sub -division of a district, if uncontrolled, be 
likely to cause a  breach of the peace, require by gener al or speci al notice that the persons convening or 
collecting such assembly or directing or promoting such processio n shall apply for a licence.  
(3) On such application being made, he may issue a license specifying the names of the licensees 
and de fining, the conditions on which alone such assembly or such procession is to be permitted to 
take place and otherwise giving  effect to this section:  
Provided that no fee shall be charged on the application for, or grant of, any such licence . 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 8 of 1895, s. 7.  
2. See now the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), s. 459.  
3. Subs. by Act 8 of 1895, s. 8, for section 27. 
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “at the disposal of Govt.”  
5. Subs. by the A.O. 1950 , for “Provincial”.  
6. These words shall be deemed to have been rep. so long as the Police (Resignation of Office) Ordinance, 1942 (11 of 
1942), rema
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POLICE ACT, 1861.pdf - page 13]
 to have been rep. so long as the Police (Resignation of Office) Ordinance, 1942 (11 of 
1942), remains in force: see s. 2 and the Schedule of that Ordinance.  
7. Ins. by Act 8 of 1895, s. 9.  
8. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for section 30.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POLICE ACT, 1861.pdf - page 14]
 
 
14 (4) Music in the streets. —He may also regulate the extent to which music may be used in the 
streets on the occasion of festivals and ceremonies.]  
1[30A. Powers with regard to assemblies and processions violating conditions of license. —(1) 
Any Magistrate or District Superintendent of Police or Assistant District Superintendent of Police or 
Inspector of Police or any police -officer in cha rge of a station may stop any procession which violates 
the conditions of a licence granted under the last foregoing section, and may order it or any assembly 
which violates any such conditions as aforesaid to disperse.  
(2)Any procession or assembly which neglects or refuses to obey any order given under the last 
preceding sub -section shall be deemed to be an unlawful assembly.]  
31. Police to keep order in public roads, etc. —It shall be the duty of the police to keep order on 
the public roads, and in the pu blic streets, thoroughfares, ghats and landing -places, and at all other 
places of public resort, and to prevent obstructions on the occasions of assemblies and processions on 
the public roads and in the public streets, or in the neighbourhood of places of worship, during the 
time of public worship, and in any case when any road, street, thoroughfare, ghat or landing -place 
may be thronged or may be liable to be obstructed.  
32. Penalty for disobeying orders issued under last three sections, etc. —Every person opposing 
or not obeying the orders issued under the last 2[three] preceding sections, or violating the conditions 
of any license granted by the District Superintendent or Assistant District Superintendent of Police for 
the use of music, or for the conduct of assemblies and processions, shall be liable, on conviction 
before a Magistrate, to a fine not exceeding two hundred  rupees.  
33. Saving of control of Magistrate of district —Nothing in the last 3[four] preceding sections 
shall be deemed to interfere with  the general control of the Ma
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POLICE ACT, 1861.pdf - page 14]
he last 3[four] preceding sections 
shall be deemed to interfere with  the general control of the Magistrate of the district over the matters 
referred to therein.  
34. Punishment for certain offences on roads, etc. —Any person who, on any road or in any 
4[open place or ] street or thoroughfa re within the limits of any town to w hich this section shall be 
speci ally extended by the 5[State G overnment ], commits any of the following offences, to the 
obstruction, inconvenience, annoyance, risk, danger or damage of the 6[residents or passengers] sh all, 
on conviction before a M agistrate, be li able to a fine not exceeding fifty rupees, or to imprisonment  
7[with or without h ard labour] not exceeding eight days;  
Power of police -officers. —and it sh all be lawful for any police -officer to take into custody, 
without a warrant, any person who within his view commits any of such offences, namely: —  
First. —Slaughtering cattle, furious riding, etc. —Any person who slaughters any cattle or cleans 
any carcass; any person who rides or drives a ny cattle recklessly or furiously,  or trains  or breaks any 
horse or other cattle:  
Second.—Cruelty  to animals. —Any person who wantonly or cruelly beats, abuses or tortures any 
animal:  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 8 of 1895, s. 11.  
2. Subs. by s. 12,  ibid., for “two”  .  
3. Subs. by s. 12,  ibid., for “three”.  
4. Ins. by s. 13, ibid., 
5. Subs. by the A.O. 1950 for “Provincial Government” which had been subs. by the A.O. 1937 , for “L.G.”.  
6. Subs. by Act 8 of 1895, s. 13, for “residents and passengers”.  
7. Ins. by Act 1 of 1903, s. 3 and the Second Schedule.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POLICE ACT, 1861.pdf - page 15]
 
 
15 Third.—Obstructing passengers. —Any person who keeps any cattle or conveyance of any 
kind standing longer than is required for loading or unloading or for taking up or setting down 
passengers, or who leaves any conveyance in such a manner as to cause inconvenience or danger to 
the public:  
Fourth.—Exposing goods for sale. —Any person who exposes any goods for sale:  
Fifth .—Throwing dirt into street. —Any person who throws or lays down any dirt, filth, 
rubbish or any stones or building materials, or who constructs any cowshed, stable or the like, or who 
causes any offensive mat ter to run from any house, factory, dungheap, or the like:  
Sixth.—Being  found drunk or riotous. —Any person who is found drunk or riotous or who is 
incapable of taking care of himself:  
Seventh.—Indecent exposure of person. —Any person who wilfully and indecently exposes 
his person, or any offensive deformity or disease, or commits nuisance by easing himself, or by 
bathing or washing in any tank or reservoir not being a place set apart for that purpose:  
Eighth.—Neglect to protect dangerous places. —Any person who neglects to fence in or 
duly to protect any well, tank or other dangerous place or structure . 
 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment  of section 34 -A of Act No. 5 of 1861 — For section 34 -A of the Police Act, 1861, the 
following section  shall be  substituted, namely: — 
“34-A. Compounding of offences under sections 3 2 and 34 .—An offence punishable under 
section 32 or section 34 may, subject to any general or special order of the State Government in this 
behalf, be compounded by the District Superintendent of Police,  either before or after the institution of 
the prosecution, on realization of such amount of composition fee as he thinks fit, not exceeding the 
maximum amount of fine fixed for the offence, and when the offence is so compounded —” 
(i) before the institution of the prosecution, the offender shall not be liable to prosecution for
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POLICE ACT, 1861.pdf - page 15]
 
(i) before the institution of the prosecution, the offender shall not be liable to prosecution for such 
offence and shall, if in custody, be set at liberty ;  
(ii) before the institution of the prosecution, the composition shall amount to acquittal of the 
offender.”  
 
[Vide the Uttar Pradesh  Act 35 of 19 79, s. 5] 
Abatement of certain trials .—  Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the  time 
being in force, — 
(1) the trial of an accused for — 
 (a) an offence punishable under — 
“(i) the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988; or”   
(ii) the Public Gambling Act, 1867, not being an offence  punishable under section 3 of that 
Act or an offence in respect of  wagering punishable under section 13 of that Act; or   
(iii) section 34 of the Police Act, 1861; or  
(iv) section 160 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860; or  
  (b) any other offence punishable with fine only, or  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POLICE ACT, 1861.pdf - page 16]
 
 
16 (2) a procedure, under section 107 or section 109 of the Code of  Criminal Procedure, 1973, 
pending before a Magistrate on the date of  commencement of this Act  from before “December 31, 
2015” shall  abate.  
[Vide the Utt ar Pradesh Act 35 of 1979, s. 9, and amended by Utt ar Pradesh Act 29 of 2016 and 9 
of 2018 ] 
35. Jurisdiction. —1*** Any charge against a police -officer above the rank of a constable under 
this Act shall be enquired into and determined only by an officer exercising the powers of a 
2Magistrate.  
36. Power to prosecute under other law not affected. —Nothing contained in this  Act shall be 
construed to prevent any person from being prosecuted under any other Regulation or Act for any 
offence m ade punishable by this Act, or f rom being liable under an y other Regulation or Act or any 
other or higher penalty or punishment than is provided for such offence by this Act:  
Proviso. —Provided that no person shall be punished twice fo r the same offence.  
3[37. Recovery of penalties and fines imposed by Magistrates. —The provisions of sections 64 to 
70, b oth inclusive, of the Indian Penal Cod e (45 of 186 0), and of sections 386 to 389, both  inclusive, 
of the 4Code of Criminal Procedu re, 1882 (10 of 1882), with respect to fines, shall apply to penalties 
and fines imposed under this Act .on conviction before Magistrate:  
Provided that, notwithstanding anything contained in section 65 of the first -mentioned Code, any 
person sentenced to fine under section 34 of this Act may be imprisoned in default of payment of such 
fine for any period not exceeding eight days.]  
41. [Rewards to police an d informers payable to General Police Fund .] Rep. by the A. O. 1937.  
542 Limitation of actions. —All actions and prosecutions against any person, which may be 
lawfully brought for anything done or intended to be done under the provisions of this Act, or under 
the general police -powers hereby given shall be commenced within three months
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POLICE ACT, 1861.pdf - page 16]
f this Act, or under 
the general police -powers hereby given shall be commenced within three months after the act 
complai ned of shall have been committed, and not otherwise; and notice in writing of such action end 
of the cause thereof shell be given to the defendant, or  to the District Superintendent or an Assistant 
District Superintendent of the District in which the act was committed, one month at least before the 
commencement of the action. 
Tender of amends. —No plaintiff shall r ecover in any such action if tender of s ufficient amend 
shall have been made before such action brought, or if a sufficient sum of money shall have been p aid 
into Court after such action brought, by or on behalf of the defendant, and, though a decree shall be 
given for the plaintiff in any such action, such plaintiff shall not have costs against the defendant, 
unless the Judge before whom the trial is held shall certify his approbation of the action.  
                                                           
1. Certain words rep. by Act 10 of 1882, s. 2 and the Schedule I( b). 
2. I.e., by a Magistrate of the first class. See s. 3 (1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Act 2 of 1974).  
3. Subs. by Act 8 of 1895, s. 14, for sections 37 , 38, 39 and 40. 
4. See now sections 421 to 424 of the Code of Criminal Procedure , 1973 (Act 2 of 1974).  
1. See, however, paragraph 4 of the India and Burma (Transitory Provisions) Order, 1937. S. 41 Read as follows:  —“All 
sums paid for the service of process by police -officers, and all rewards, forfeitures and penalties or shares of rewards, 
forfeitures and penalties which by law are payable to informers shall, when the information is laid by a police -officer, be paid 
into the General Police Fund” . 
2. So much of s. 42 (the portion printed in italics) as rela tes to the limitation of suits rep. by Act 9 of 1871, s. 2 and the 
First Schedule.   
5.  I.e., by a Magistrate of the first class. See s. 3 (1) of the Code of Cri
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POLICE ACT, 1861.pdf - page 16]
he 
First Schedule.   
5.  I.e., by a Magistrate of the first class. See s. 3 (1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Act 2 of 1974).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POLICE ACT, 1861.pdf - page 17]
 
 
17 Proviso. —Provided always that no action shall in any case lie where such officers shall have been  
prosecuted criminally for the same act.  
43. Plea that act was done under warrant. —When any action or prosecution shall be brought or 
any proceedings held against any police -officer for any act done by him in such c apacity, it shall be 
lawful  for him to plead that such act was done by him under the authority of a warrant issued by a 
Magistrate.  
Such plea shall be proved by the production of the warrant directing the act, and purporting to be 
signed by such M agistrate and the defend ant shall thereu pon be entitled to a decree in his favour, 
notwithstanding any defect of jurisdiction in such M agistrate. No proof of the signature of such 
Magistrate shall be necessary, unless the Court sh all see reason to doubt its being genuine:  
Proviso. —Provided alway s that any remedy which the party may have against the authority 
issuing such warrant shall not be affected by anything contained in this section.  
44. Police -officers to keep diary. —It shall be the duty of every officer in charge of a police -
station to kee p a general diary in such form shall, from time to time, be prescribed by the 1[State 
Government ] and to record therein all complaints and charges preferred, the names of all persons 
arrested, the names of the complainants, the offences ch arged against them, the we apons or property 
that shall have been taken from their  possession or otherwise, and the names of the witnesses who 
shall have been examined.  
The Magistrate of the district shall be at liberty to call for and inspect such diary.  
45. State Gover nment may prescribe form of returns. —The 1[State Government ] may direct the 
submission of such returns by the Inspector -General and other police -officers as to such 1[State 
Government ] shall seem proper, and may prescribe the form in which such returns sha ll made.  
2[46.Scope of Act. —(1) This Act shall not by its o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POLICE ACT, 1861.pdf - page 17]
be the form in which such returns sha ll made.  
2[46.Scope of Act. —(1) This Act shall not by its own operation take effect in any 3presidency, 
4[State ] or place . But the 5[State Government] by an order to be published in the Official Gazette may 
extend the whole or any p art of this Act to any presidency, 4[State ] or place, and the  whole or such 
portion of this Act as sh all be specified in such order shall thereupon take effect in such presidency, 
4[State ] or place.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950 , for “Provincial Government” which had been subs. by the A.O. 1937 , for “L.G.”.  
2. Subs. by Act 8 of 1895, s. 15, for section 46.  
3.In the States of Madras and Bombay there are special Police Acts, see the Madras District Police Act, 1859 (24 of 1859) and the Bombay 
District Police Act, 1867 (Born. 7 of 1867). In the Lower Provinces of Bengal, Bengal Act 7 of 1869 is to be read and ta ken as part of Act 5 
of 1861, see s. 6 of the former Act.  
This Act has been extended under the power conferred by the original section to — 
(1) the U. P. including Ajmer -Merwara then under that Government, see Notification No. 964in theNorth -Western Provinc es 
Gazette, 1861, p. 634:  
[The orders as to enforcement of the Act in 27 districts in the U. P., in Hamirpur, Jalaun, Jhansi, Lalitpur, Naini Tal 
(including the TaraiParganas) and Almora and Garhwal, issued under the original s. 46, paragraph 2 (after the Act had been 
extended under paragraph 1 of that section to the whole province) arekept in force by s. 16 of Act 8 of 1895.]  
(2) Oudh, see Notification No. 34 in the North -Western Provinces Gazette, 1861, p. 1758 ;  
(3) the tract of land between Allahabad and Jubbulpore ceded in full sovereignty by certain Native States ;  
(4) the C. P., Districts of Nagpur, Raipur, Bhandara, Chanda and Chhindwara, Sironcha, Nimsar;  
(5) Bengal and Assam;  
(6) several districts in the Punjab, see Notification No. 9
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POLICE ACT, 1861.pdf - page 17]
oncha, Nimsar;  
(5) Bengal and Assam;  
(6) several districts in the Punjab, see Notification No. 971, dated 15 th May, 1861, Calcutta Gazette, 18th May1861, p. 1302.  
Under the power conferred by the section as it stood before the 1st April 1937, it ha s been extended as follows to — 
(1) Madras: ss. 15, 15A, 16, 30, 30A, 31 and 32 of the Act have been extended to the  whole of the Madras Presidency, see Notification 
No. 728, dated 31st October 1895, Gazette of India, 1895, Pt. I., p. 876.  
(2) Eastern Dooars in the Goalpara District, see Notification No. 230, Gazette of India, 1897, Pt. 1, p. 198.  
(3) the North and South  Lushai Hills and the tract known as Rutton  Puiya's villages including Demagri (now known as the Lushai Hills) 
see Gazette of India, 1898, Pt. 1, p. 370.  
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1950 , for “Province”.  
4.  Subs. by the A.O. 1950 , for “Provincial Government” which had been subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “G.G. in C.”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POLICE ACT, 1861.pdf - page 18]
 
 
18 (2)When the whole or any part of this Act shall have been extended, the 1[State Government ] may, 
from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules consistent with this Act — 
(a) to regulate the procedure to be followed by Magistrates and police -officers in the discharge 
of any duty imposed upon them by or under this Act;  
(b) to prescribe the time, manner and conditions within and under which claims for 
compensation under section 15A are to be made, the particulars to be stated in such claims, the 
manner in which the same are  to be verified, and the proceedings (including local enquiries  if 
necessary) which are to be taken consequent thereon; and  
(c) generally, for giving effect to the provisions of this Act.  
(3)All rules made under this Act may from time to time be amended, added to or cancelled by the 
1[State Government ].] 
47. Authority of District Superintendent of Police over village police. —It shall be lawful for the 
1[State Government ] in carrying this Act i nto effect in any part of the territories subject to such 1[State 
Government ], to declare that any authority which now is or may be exercised by the Magistrate of the 
district over any village -watchm an to or other village police -officer for the purposes of  police, sh all be 
exercised, subject to the general control of the Magistrate of the district, by the District Supe rintendent 
of Police.  
F O R M  
(See section 8)  
A. B. has been appointed a member of the police -force under Act 5 of 1861, and is vested with the 
powers, functions and privileges of a police -officer.  
_________  
 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “Provincial Government” which had been subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “L.G.”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POLICE, AGRA ACT, 1854.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE POLICE, AGRA ACT , 185 4 
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Sections III. and VII., Regulation XI. 1831, repealed.  
2. Darogahs of Police to be subject to Tehseeldars.  
3. Regulation XI. 1831, as amended, extended to Benares.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POLICE, AGRA ACT, 1854.pdf - page 2]
2 
 THE POLICE, AGRA ACT , 185 4 
ACT NO. XVI OF1854 
[Passed on the  28th July,1854.] 
1. Repeal ss. 3, and 7, of  B. R. 11, 1831. 
2.Places Darogahs in subordination to Tehseeldar in certain cases . 
3.Extends B.R. 11, 1831, as amended to N.W. Provinces.  
4. Qualification of Director, 5 shares in his own right . 
An Act to amend Regulation XI. of 1831 of the Bengal Code.  
Whereas the provisions of Section III. and Section VII. of Regulation XI. 1831, have been found 
inconvenient, and whereas it is expedient that Regulation XI. 1831, as amended by this Act, should be 
extended to the whole of the Provinces of Benares ; It is enacted as follows: — 
I. Sections III. and VII., Regulation XI. 1831, repealed. —Section III. and VII., Regulation XI. 
1831 of the Bengal Code are hereby repealed.  
II. Darogahs of Police to be subject to Tehseeldars. —Wherever any Tehseeldar  shall have Police 
jurisdiction under the provisions of Section II. of the said Regulation XI. 1831, every Darogah of Police 
hereafter appointed within the local limits of the police jurisdiction of such Tehseeldar, shall be 
subordinate to, and subject to the control of such Tehseeldar, in his capacity of Chief Police Thannadar.  
III.  Regulation XI. 1831, as amended, extended to Benares. —Regulation XI. 1831, as amended 
by this Act, shall extend to the whole of the Province of Benares, and all powers vested by the said 
Regulation in the Governor General in Council, may be exercised by the L ieutenant -Governor of the 
North -Western Provinces.  
__________  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POWERS-OF-ATTORNEY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE POWERS -OF-ATTORNEY  ACT, 1882  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
Local extent.  
Commencement.  
1A. Definition.  
2. Execution under power -of-attorney.  
3. Payment by attorney under power, without notice of death, etc.,  good.  
4. Deposit of original instruments creating powers -of-attorney.  
5. Power -of-attorney of married women.  
6. [Repealed .]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POWERS-OF-ATTORNEY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 2]
2 
 THE POWERS -OF-ATTORNEY ACT, 1882  
ACT NO. 7 OF 18821 
[24th February , 1882.]  
An Act to amend the law relating to Powers -of-Attorney.  
For the purpose of amending the law relating to Powers -of-Attorney. It is hereby enacted as 
follows:  — 
1. Short title. —This Act  may be called the Powers -of-Attorney Act, 1882.  
Local extent. —It applies to the whole of India 2[*[*** ]]; 
Commencement. —and it shall come into force on the first day of May, 1882.  
3[1A.  Definition. —In this Act, “Power -of-Attorney ” includes any instrument 
empowering a specified person to act for and in the name of the person executing it.] 
2. Execution under power -of-attorney. —The donee of a power -of-attorney may, if he 
thinks fit, execute or do any 4*** instrument or thing in and with his own name and signature, 
and his own seal, where sealing is required, by the authority of the donor of the power; and 
every  4*** instrument and thing so executed and done, shall be as effectual in law as if it had 
been executed or done by the donee of the power in the name, and with the signature and seal, 
of the donor thereof.  
This section applies to powers -of-attorney create d by in struments executed either before or after this 
Act comes into force.  
3. Payment by attorney under power, without notice of death, etc., good. —Any person 
making or doing any payment or act in good faith, in pursuance of a power -of-attorney, shall not  
be liable in respect of the payment or act by reason that, before the payment or act, the donor of 
the power had died or become 5*** of unsound mind, 6*** or insolvent, or had revoked the 
power, if the fact of death, 7*** unsoundness of mind, 8*** insolve ncy or revocation was not, at 
the time of the payment or act, known to the person making or doing the same.  
But this section shall not affect any right against the payee of any person interested in any 
money so paid; and that person shall have the like rem edy against the payee as he would ha
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POWERS-OF-ATTORNEY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 2]
 in any 
money so paid; and that person shall have the like rem edy against the payee as he would have 
had against the payer, if the payment had not been made by him.  
This section applies only to payments and acts made or done after this Act comes into force.  
4. Deposit of original instruments creating powers -of-attorney. — (a) An instrument 
creating a power -of-attorney, its execution being verified by affidavit, statutory declaration or 
other sufficient evidence, may, with the affidavit or declaration, if any, be deposited in the High 
Court 9[or District Court] within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the instrument may be.  
(b) A separate file of instruments so deposited shall be kept; and any person May search that 
file, and inspect every instrument so deposi ted; and a certified copy thereof shall be delivered 
out to him on request.  
                                                      
1. Extended to Dadra and Nagar Haveli by the Dadra and Nagar Haveli (Laws) Regulation, 1963 ( Reg. 6 of 1963);  s. 2 and the 
First Schedule  extended to L accadive, minicoy and Amindivi Islands (Laws) Regulation, 1957 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1974): vide Reg 8 
of 1956, s. 3 and the Schedule and to  Pondicherry by the Pondicherry (Extension of Laws) Act, 1968 (26 of 1968).  
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule , for “except Part B States ”. 
3. Ins. by Act 55 of 1982, s. 2  (w.e.f. 22 -10-1980).  
4. The word “assurance”  omitted by s. 3, ibid, (w.e.f. 22 -10-1980).  
5. The word “lunatic ,” omitted by s. 4, ibid.  (w.e.f. 22 -10-1980).   
6. The word “ lunacy ,” omitted by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 22 -10-1980).  
7. The word “or bankrupt” omitted by s. 4, ibid.  (w.e.f. 22 -10-1980).  
8. The word “bankrupt cy,” omitted by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 22 -10-1980).  
9. Ins. by s. 5, ibid.  (w.e.f. 22 -10-1980).  
* The words “ except the State of Jammu and Kashmir ” omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth  Schedule 
(w.e.f. 31 -10-2019).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POWERS-OF-ATTORNEY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 2]
ted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth  Schedule 
(w.e.f. 31 -10-2019).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE POWERS-OF-ATTORNEY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 3]
3 
 (c) A copy of an instrument so deposited may be presented at the office and may be stamped  
or marked as a certif ied copy, and, when so stamped or marked, shall become and be a certified 
copy.  
(d) A certified copy of an instrument so deposited shall, without further proof, be sufficient 
evidence of the contents of the instrument and of the dep osit thereof in the High Court 1[or 
District Court].  
(e) The High Court may, from time t o time, make rules for the purposes of this section, and 
prescribing, with the concurrence of the State Government, the fees to be taken under clauses  (a), (b) 
and ( c). 
2*           *              *              *              * 
(g) This section applies to  instruments creating powers -of-attorney executed either before or after this 
Act comes into force.  
5. Power -of-attorney of married women .—3[A married woman of full age shall, by virtue of this 
Act, have power, as if she were unmarried,] by a non -testament ary instrument, to appoint an attorney on 
her behalf, for the purpose of executing any non -testamentary instrument or doing any other act which she 
might herself execute or do; and the provisions of this Act, relating to instruments creating powers -of-
attorney, shall apply thereto.  
This section applies only to instruments executed after this Act comes into force.  
6. [Act 28 of 1866, section 39 repealed. ] Rep. by the Amending Act, 1891 (12 of 1891),  
s. 2 and the First Sch edule . 
 
 
________  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 55 of 1982, s. 5.  
2. Clause  (f) rep. by Act 6 of 1900 , s. 48 and the Second Schedule . 
3. Subs. by Act 55 of 1982, s. 6, for certain words (w.e.f. 22 -10-1982).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882  
__________  
ARRANG EMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
PREAMBLE  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
 Commencement.  
2. [Repealed .]. 
3.  [Repealed .]. 
4. “Small Cause Court” and “Registrar” defined.  
 
CHAPTER II  
CONSTITUTION AND  OFFICE RS OF THE COURT  
5. Courts of Small Causes established.  
6. Court to be deemed under superintendence, etc., of High Court.  
7. Appointment of Judges . 
8. Rank and precedence of Judges.  
8A. Performance of duties of absent Judge.  
9. Proce dure and practice of Small Cause Court.  
10. Chief Judge to distribute business of Court.  
11. Procedure in case of difference of opinion.  
12. Seal to be used.  
13. Appointment of Registrar and other officers.  
14. Registrar may be invested with powers of a Judge in suits not exceeding twenty rupees.  
15. Judge or other officer not to practise or trade.  
 
CHAPTER III  
LAW ADMINISTERED BY THE COURT  
16.   Questions arising in suits, etc., under Act to be decided according to law administered by High 
Court.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 2]
2 
 CHAPTER IV  
JURISDICTION IN RESPECT OF SUITS 
SECTIONS  
17. Local limits of jurisdiction of Court.  
18. Suits in which Court has jurisdiction.  
  18A.   Plaintiff may abandon suit against defendant resident out of jurisdiction.  
19. Suits in which Court has no jurisdiction.  
  19A.    Return of plaint.  
20. Court may by consent try suits beyond pecuniary limits of jurisdiction.  
21. Suits by and against  officers of Court.  
22. Costs when plaintiff sues in High Court in other cases cognizable by Small Cause Court.  
CHAPTER V  
PROCEDURE IN SUITS 
23. [Repealed .] 
24. No written statement except in cases of set -off. 
25. Return of documents admitted in evidence.  
26. Compensation payable by plaintiff to defendant in certain cases.  
27. Decree -holder to accompany officer executing warrant.  
28. Things attached to immovable property and removable by tenant to be deemed movable  
 in execution.  
29. Discharge  of judgment -debtor on sufficient security.  
30. Court may in certain cases suspend execution of decree.  
31. Execution of decree of Small Cause Court by other Courts.  
 Procedure when decree transferred.  
32. Minors may sue in certain cases as if of full age.  
33. Power to delegate non -judicial duties.  
34. Registrar to hear and determine suits like a Judge.  
Proviso.  
35. Registrar may execute all decrees with the same powers as a Judge.  
36. Decrees and orders of Registrar to be subject to new trial as if made by a Judge.  
CHAPTER VI  
NEW TRIALS  AND  APPEALS  
37. General finality of decrees and orders of Small Cause Court.  
38. New trial of contested cases.  
39. Removal of certain causes into High Court.  
40. Rules with respect to suits removed under the last foregoing section.  
CHAPTER VII  
RECOVERY OF POSSESSION OF IMMOVABLE  PROPERTY  
41. Summons against person occupying property without leave.  
42. Service of summons.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 2]
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 3]
3 
 SECTIONS  
43. Order for possession.  
44. Such order to justify bailiff entering on property and giving possession.  
Bar to proceedings against Judge or officer for issuing, etc., order or summons.  
45. Applicant, if entitled to possession, not to be deemed trespasser for any error in  proceedings.  
 Occupant may sue for compensation.  
46. Liability of applicant obtaining order when not entitled.  
Application for order in such case an act of trespass.  
47. Stay of proceedings on occupant giving security to bring suit against applicant.  
48. Proceedings to be regulated by  Code of Civil Procedure.  
49. Recovery of possession no b ar to suit to try title.  
CHAPTER VIII  
DISTRESSES  
50. Local extent of Chapter.  
Saving of certain rents.  
51. Appointment of bailiffs and appraisers.  
52. Appointees to be public servants.  
53. Application for distress -warrant.  
54. Issue of distress -warrant.  
55. Time for distress.  
56. What places bailiff may force open.  
57. Property which may be seized.  
58. Impounding distress.  
59. Inventory.  
 Notice of intended appraiseme nt and sale.  
 Copies of inventory and notice to be filed.  
60. Application to discharge or  suspend warrant.  
61. Claim to goods distrained made by a stranger.  
62. Power to award compensation to debt or or claimant.  
63. Power to transfer to High Court cases involving more than one thousand rupees.  
64. Appraisement.  
Notice of sale.  
65. Sale.  
 Application of proceeds.  
66. Costs of distresses.  
67. Account of costs and proceeds.  
68. Bar of distresses except under this Chapter.  
Penalty for making illegal distresses.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 4]
4 
 CHAPTER IX  
REFERENCES TO HIGH COURT  
SECTIONS  
69. Reference when compulsory . 
70. Security to be furnished on such reference by party against whom contingent judgment  
 given.  
 If no such security given, party to be deemed to have submitted to judgment.  
CHAPTER X  
FEES AND COSTS  
71. Institution -fee. 
72. Fees for processes.  
73. Repayment of half -fees on settlement before hearing.  
74. Fees and costs of poor persons.  
75. Power to vary fees.  
76. Expense of employing legal practitioners.  
77. Sections 3, 5 and 25 of Court -fees Act, 1870, saved.  
CHAPTER XI  
MISCONDUCT OF INFERIOR  MINISTERIAL  OFFICERS  
78. [Repealed .]. 
79. Default of bailiff or other officer in execution of order or warrant.  
80. Extortion or default of officers.  
81. Court empowered to summon witnesses, etc.  
82. Enforcement of order.  
CHAPTER XII  
CONTEMPT OF COURT  
83. [Repealed .]. 
84.   [Repealed .]. 
85. [Repealed .]. 
86.   [Repealed .]. 
87. Imprisonment or committal of person refusing to answer or produce document.  
88. Appeal from orders under section 87.  
CHAPTER XIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
89. Persons by whom process may be serve d. 
90. Registers and returns.  
91. Court to furnish records, etc., called for by State Government or High Court.  
92. Holidays and vacations.  
93. Certain persons exempt from arrest by Court.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 5]
5 
 SECTIONS  
94. No suit to lie upon decree of Court.  
95. Place of imprisonment.  
96. Tender in suit for anything done under Act.  
97. Limitation of prosecutions.  
 
THE FIRST SCHED ULE. —[Repealed .]. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE. —[Repealed .]. 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE. —FORMS OF AFFIDAVIT , WARRANT , INVENTO RY, ETC.  
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE . —FEES F OR SUMM ONSES AND OTHER PROCESSES.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 6]
6 
 THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882  
ACT NO. 15 OF 18821 
[17th March , 1882.]  
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to the Courts of Small Causes established in the 
Presidency towns.  
Preamble .—WHEREAS  it is expedient to consolidate and amend the law relating to the 
Courts of Small Causes established in the towns of Calcutta, Madras and Bombay; It is hereby 
enacted as follows: —  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMI NARY  
1. Short title . Commenc ement. —This Act may be called the Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 
1882; and it shall come into force on the first day of July, 1882.  
But nothing herein contained shall affect the provisions of the Army Act, 2*** (44 & 45 
Vict., c. 58) section 151, or the rights or liabilities of any person under any decree passed 
before that day.  
2. [Repeal of enactments. ]—Rep. by the Repealing Act, 1938 (1 of 1938), s. 2 and  
Schedule . 
3. [Amendment s of Acts .]—Rep. by s. 2 and Sch edule , ibid.  
4. “Small Cause Court ” and “Registrar ” defined. —In this Act, “the Small Cause Court ” 
means the Court of Small Causes constituted under this Act in the town of Calcutta, Madras or Bombay, 
as the case may be , 3[and the expression “Registrar ” includes a Deputy Registrar ]. 
CHAPTER II 
CONSTITUTION  AND OFFICERS  OF THE COURT  
5. Courts of Small Causes established. —There shall be in each of the towns of Calcutta, 
Madras and Bombay a Court, to be called the Court of Small Causes of Calcutta, Madras or  Bombay, as 
the case may be.  
6. Court to be deemed under superintendence, etc., of High Court. —The Small Cause Court 
shall be deemed to be a Court subject to the superintendence of the High Court of Judicature at Fort 
William, Madras or Bombay, as the case may be, within the meaning of the Letter s Patent, 
respectively, dated the twenty eighth day of December, 1865, for such High Courts, and within the 
meaning of the 4Code o f Civil Procedure (14 of 1882) 5[and to be a court subordinate to the High 
C
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 6]
meaning of the 4Code o f Civil Procedure (14 of 1882) 5[and to be a court subordinate to the High 
Court within the meaning of section 6 of the Legal Practitioners Act, 1879 (18 of 1879)],  and the 
High Court shall have, in respect of the Small Cause Court, the same powers as it has under the 
twenty -fourth and twenty -fifth of Victoria, Chapter 104, section 15, in respect of Courts subject 
to its appellat e jurisdiction.  
                                                      
1. For first Report of t he Select Committee, see Gazette of India, 1881, Pt. V, p. 381; for further Report of the Select Committee, 
see ibid., 1882, Pt. V., p. 3; for Proceedings in Council, see ibid., Supplement, 1880, pp 1394 and 1433; ibid., 1882, 
Supplement, p. 204; and ibid.. 1882, Extra Supplement, p.43.  
This Act has been amended in its local application by Bengal Acts 4 of 1922 and 20 of 1932, Bombay Act 5 of 1933 
and Madras Acts 5 of 1916, 3 of 1922 and 3 of 1927, in Bombay by Bombay Act 11 of 1959, in Madras by Madras Act 
9 of 1960, in its application to the City of Ahmedabad by Gujarat Act 19 of 1961, in Maharashtra by Maharashtra Acts 
35 of 1961, and 19 of 1976, in West Bengal by West Bengal Act 32 of 1969, in Gujarat by Gujarat Acts 28 of 1973 and 
31 of 1973.  
2. The figures “1881” rep.  were  by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and I Schedule.  
3. Added by Act 3 of 1899, s. 2.  
4. See now the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908).  
5. Ins. by Act 1 of 1895, s. 2.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 7]
7 
 1[7. Appointment of Judges. —There shall be appointed from time to time a Chief Judge of the Small 
Cause Court and as many other Judges as the State Government thinks fit.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 7 of Act XV of 1882. —In the Presidency Small Cause Courts act, 1882 (XV 
of 1882), section 7 shall be renumbered as sub -section (1) of that section, and after sub -section (1) so 
renumbered the following new sub -section shall be added, namely: -- 
“(2) The State Government m ay also appoint any person to be an additional Chief Judge; and the 
Additional Chief Judge shall exercise such powers and perform such duties of the Chief Judge under this 
Act or under any law for the time being in force  as the State  Government may direc t.” 
[Vide Bombay Act XV of 1966, s. 2]  
8. Rank and precedence of Judges. —The Chief Judge shall be the first of the Judges in rank and 
precedence.  
The other Judges shall have rank and precedence as the State Government may, from time to time, 
direct.  
2[8A.  Performance of duties of absent  Judge. —(1) During any absence of the Chief Judge or 
any Judge of the said Court, or during the period for which any Judge is acting as Chief Judge, the 
State Government may appoint any person, having 1[the requisite qualific ations], to act as Chief 
Judge or Judge of the said Court, as the case may be. 
(2) Every person so appointed shall be authori sed to perform the duties of the Chief Judge or a  
Judge of the said Court until the return of the absent Chief Judge or Judge, or o f the Judge acting 
as Chief Judge, or until the State Government sees cause to cancel the appointment of such acting 
Chief Judge or Judge, as the case may be.]  
3[9. Procedure and practice of Small Cause Court. —(1) The High Court may, from time to time, by 
rules having the force of law, —  
(a) prescribe the procedure to be followed and the practice to be observed by the Small 
Cause Court either in supersession of or in addition
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 7]
d and the practice to be observed by the Small 
Cause Court either in supersession of or in addition to any provisions which were prescribed 
with respect to the procedure or practice of the Small Cause Court on or before the thirty -first 
day of December, 1894, in or under this Act or any other enactment for the time being in 
force; and  
4[(aa)  empower the Registrar to hear and dispose of undefended suits and interlocutory 
applications or matters ; and] 
(b) cancel or vary any such rule or rules.  
Rules made under this section may provide, among other matters, for the exercise by one or more of 
the Judges of the Small Cause Court of any powers conferred on the Small Cause Court by this Act or any 
other enactment for the time being in force.  
(2) The law, and any rules and declarations made, or purporting to be made, thereunder, with 
respect to procedure or practice, in force or treated as in force in the Small Cause Court on the 
thirty -first day of December, 1894, shall be in force, unless and until cancelled or varied by rules 
made by the High Court under this section.]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1937.  
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1899, s. 3, for section 8A.  
3. Subs. by Act 1 of 1895, s. 5, for section 9.  
4. Ins. by Act 3 of 1899 , s. 4. 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 8]
8 
 10. Chief Judge to distribute business of Court. —Subject  to such rules, the Chief Judge may, 
from time to time, make such ar rangements as he thinks fit for the distribution of the business of 
the Court among the various Judges thereof.  
11. Procedure in case of difference of opinion. —Save  as hereinafter otherwise provided, when 
two or more of the Judges sitting together differ o n any question, the opinion of the majority shall 
prevail; and if the Court is equally divided, the Chief Judge, if he is one of the Judges so differing, 
or, in his absence, the Judge first in rank and precedence of the Judges so differing, shall have the 
casting voice.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 11 of Act XV of 1882. —In section 11  of the Presidency Small Causes 
Courts Act, 1882 (hereinafter referred to as “the principal Act”), for the portion beginning with the 
words “and if the Court is equally divided” and ending with the words “casting voice” the following 
shall be substituted, namely: -- 
“and if the Court is equally divided, the Judged shall state the point upon which they differ, 
and the case shall then to heard upon that point by another Judge nominated by the Chief Judge 
and the point shall be decided, according to the opinion  of the majority of the Judges, who have 
heard the case, including those who first heard it.”  
[Vide  Maharashtra Act XXXV of 1961, s. 2]  
12. Seal to be used. —The Small Cause Court shall use a seal of such form and dimensio ns as are  for 
the time being prescribed by the State Government.  
1[13. Appointment of Registrar and other officers. —There shall be appointed an officer to be 
called the Registrar of the Court who shall be the chief ministerial officer of the Court; there shall also  be 
appointed a Deputy Registrar and as many clerks, bailiffs and other ministerial officers as may be 
necessary for the administration of justice by the Court and for the exercise and performance of the 
powers and 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 8]
 the administration of justice by the Court and for the exercise and performance of the 
powers and duties conferred and imposed on it by thi s Act or any other law for the time being in force. 
The Registrar and other office rs so appointed shall exercise s uch powers and discharge such duties, of 
a ministerial nature, as the Chief Judge may, from time to time, by rule direct .] 
14. Registrar may b e invested with powers of a Judge in suits not exceeding twenty 
rupees. —The State Government may invest the Registrar with the powers of a Judge under this Act for 
the trial of suits in which the amount or value of the subject -matter does not exceed twenty  rupees. And, 
subject to the orders of the Chief Judge, any Judge of the Small Cause Court may, whenever he thinks fit, 
transfer from his own file to the file of the Registrar any suit which the latter is competent to try.  
2[Explanation. —For the purposes o f this section an application for possession under section 41 shall 
be deemed to be a suit.] 
15. Judge or other officer not to practise or trade. —No Judge or other officer appointed 
under this Act shall, during his continuance as such Judge or officer, eit her by himself or as a partner of 
any other person, practise or act, either directly or indirectly, as an advocate, attorney, vakil or other legal 
practitioner, or be concerned, either on his own account or for any other person, or as the partner of any 
other person, in any trade or profession.  
 
Any such Judge or officer so practising, acting or concerned shall be deemed to have committed an 
offence under section 168 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for s. 13.  
2. Added  by Act 1 of 1895, s. 6. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 9]
9 
 Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit  any such Judge or officer from being a member 
of any company incorporated or registered under Royal Charter, Letters Patent , 1[Act of Parliament of the 
United Kingdom or Central Act or Provincial Act or  2[State Act ]]. 
CHAPTER III  
LAW ADMINISTERED BY THE COURT  
16. Questions arising in suits, etc., under Act to be decided according to law 
administered by High Court. —All questions, other than questions relating to procedure or practice, 
which arise in suits or other proceedings under this Act in the Small Cau se Court shall be dealt with and 
determined according to the law for the time being administered by the High Court in the exercise of its 
ordinary original civil jurisdiction.  
CHAPTER IV  
JURISDICTION IN RESPECT OF SUITS  
17. Local limits of jurisdiction of Court. —The local limits of the jurisdiction of each of 
the Small Cause Courts shall be the local limits for the time being of the ordinary original civil 
jurisdiction of the High Court.  
18. Suits in which Court has jurisdiction. —Subject to the exceptions in section 19, 
the Small Cause Court shall have jurisdiction to try all suits of a civil nature — 
when the amount or value of the subject -matter does not exceed two thousand rupees; and  
(a) the cause of action has arisen, either wholly or in part, within th e local limits of the 
jurisdiction of the Small Cause Court, and the leave of the Court has, for reasons to  be recorded 
by it in writing, been given before the institution of the suit; or  
(b) all the defendants, at the time of the institution of the suit, actually and voluntarily reside, 
or carry on business or personally work for gain, within such local limits; or  
(c) any of the defendants at the time of the institution of the suit, actually and 
voluntarily resides, or carries on business or personally wor ks for gain, within such local 
limits, and either the leave of the Court has been given before the institu
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 9]
gain, within such local 
limits, and either the leave of the Court has been given before the institution of the suit, or 
the defendants who do not reside, or carry on business, or personally work for gain, as 
aforesaid, acquiesce in such institution:  
3[Provided that where the cause of action has arisen wholly within the local limits aforesaid, and the 
Court refuses to give leave for the institution of the suit, it shall record in writing its reason for such 
refusal.] 
Explanation I.—When  in any suit the sum claimed is, by a set -off admitted by both parties, reduced to 
a balance not exceeding two thousand rupees, the Small Cause Court shall have jurisdiction to try such 
suit. 
Explanation II.—Where  a person has a permanent dwelling at one place and also  a lodging at 
another place for a temporary purpose only, he shall be deemed to reside at both places in respect of 
any cause of action arising at the place where he has such temporary lodging.  
Explanation III.—A Corporation or Company shall be deemed to c arry on business at its sole 
or principal office in 4[India], or, in respect of any cause of action arising at any place where it 
has also a subordinate office, at such place.  
  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for certain words.  
2. Subs. by the A.O. (No. 2) 1956, for  “Act of the Legislature of a Part A State or a Part C State”.  
3. Added  by Act 1 of 1895, s. 7.  
4. Subs. by the A.O. (No. 2) 1956, for “a Part A State or a Part C State”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 10]
10 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 18 of Act XV of 1882 .—In section 18 of the Presidency Small Cause 
Court Act, 1882 (XV of 1882), in its application to the State of Maharashtra (hereinafter referred 
to as the “Principal Act”) after the first proviso, the following proviso shall be, and shall be 
deemed to have been , inserted with effect from the 3rd July 1975, namely: -- 
“Provided further that the Chief Judge may, subject to the direction and control of the High 
Court and to such conditions and limitations as he deems fit to impose, empower the Registrar to 
entertain  and dispose of applications for the purpose of giving such leave under clauses (a) and 
(c) and, when so empowered, the Registrar shall be deemed to be the Court for that purpose.”  
[Vide  Maharashtra Act XXVI of 1987, s. 2]  
1[18A.  Plaintiff may abandon suit  against defendant  resident out of jurisdiction. —The Small 
Cause Court may allow a plaintiff at or before the first hearing of a suit in which a joint and several 
liability is alleged on a cause of action arising either wholly or in part within the local l imits of the 
jurisdiction of the Court to abandon the suit as against any defendant who does not reside or carry on 
business or personally work for gain within such local limits, and to sue for a decree against such 
defendants only as do so reside, carry o n business or personally work for gain.] 
19. Suits in which Court has no jurisdiction .—The Small Cause Court shall have no jurisdiction 
in—  
(a)  suits concerning the assessment or collection of the revenue;  
2[(b) suits concerning any act done by or by order of the Central Government, 3*** or the State 
Government;] 
(c)  suits concerning any act ordered or done by any Judge or judicial officer in the execution of his 
office, or by any person in pursuance of any judgment or order of any Court or any such Judge or 
judicial officer;  
(d) suits for the recovery of immovable property;  
(e) suits f
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 10]
y such Judge or 
judicial officer;  
(d) suits for the recovery of immovable property;  
(e) suits for the partition of immovable property;  
(f) suits for the foreclosure or redemption of a mortgage of immovable property;  
(g) suits for the determination of any other right to or interest in immovable property;  
(h) suits for the specific performance or rescission of contracts;  
(i) suits to obtain an injunction;  
(j) suits for the cancellation or rectific ation of instruments;  
(k) suits to enforce a trust;  
(l) suits for a general average loss and suits on policies of insurance on sea going vessels;  
(m) suits for compensation in respect of collisions on the high seas;  
(n) suits for compensation for the infringement of a patent, copyright or trade -mark;  
(o) suits for a dissolution of partnership or for an account of partnership -transactions;  
(p) suits for an account of property  and its due administration under the decree of the Court;  
(q) suits for compensation for libel, slander,  malicious prosecution, adultery or breach of promise 
of marriage;  
                                                      
1. Added  by Act 1 of 1895, s. 8.  
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1937.  
3. The words “the Crown Representative” omitted by the A.O. 1950.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 11]
11 
 (r) suits for the restitution of conjugal rights , 1*** or for a divorce;  
(s) suits for declaratory decrees;  
(t) suits for possession of a hereditary office;  
(u) suits against Sovereign Princes or Ruling Chiefs, or against Ambassadors or  Envoys of Foreign 
States;  
(v) suits on any judgment of a High Court;  
(w) suits the cognizance whereof by the Small Cause Court is barred by any law for the time being 
in force.  
2[19A. Return of plaint. —Whenever the Court finds that for want of jurisdiction it cannot 
finally determine the question at issue in the suit, it may at any stage of the proceedings return the 
plaint to be presented to a Court having jurisdiction to determi ne the question. When the Court so 
returns a plaint, it shall comply with the provisions of the second paragraph of section 57 of the 
3Code of Civil Procedure (14 of 1882) and make such order with respect to costs as it may think 
just, and the Court shall for the purposes of the Indian Limitation Act, 1877 (15 of 1877) be 
deemed to have been unable to entertain the suit by reason of defect of jurisdiction. When a plaint 
so returned is afterwards presented to a High Court, credit shall be given to the plaint iff for the 
amount of the court -fee paid in the Small Cause Court in respect of the plaint in the levy of any 
fees which according to the practice of the High Court are credited to the Government.] 
20. Court may by consent try suits beyond pecuniary  limits  of jurisdiction. —When the  
parties to a suit, which, if the amount or value of the subject -matter thereof did not exceed two 
thousand rupees, would be cognizable by the Small Cause Court, have entered into an agreement in 
writing that the Small Cause Court  shall have jurisdiction to try such suit, the Court shall have 
jurisdiction to try the same, although the amount or value of the subject -matter thereof may exceed 
two thousand rupees.  
Every such agreement shall be filed in the Small C ause Court, and, whe
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 11]
ceed 
two thousand rupees.  
Every such agreement shall be filed in the Small C ause Court, and, when  so filed,  the parties to 
it shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the Court, and shall be bound by its decision in such suit.  
21. Suits by and against officers of Court. —All suits to which an officer of the Small Cause             
Court  is, as such, a pa rty, except suits in respect of property taken in execution of its process, 
or the proceeds or value thereof 4[and all suits whereof the amount or value of the subject -
matter exceeds one thousand rupees] may be instituted in the High Court at the election of the 
plaintiff as if this Act had not been passed.  
22. Costs when plaintiff sues in High Court in other cases co gnizable by Small Cause 
Court. —If any suit cognizable by the Small Cause Court other than a suit to which section 21 
applies, is instituted in  the High Court, and if in such suit the plaintiff obtains, in the case of a 
suit founded on contract, a decree for any matter of an amount or value less than 5[one 
thousand] rupees, and in the case of any other suit a decree for any matter of an amount or  
value of less than three hundred rupees, no costs shall be allowed to the plaintiff;  
and if in any such suit the plaintiff does not obtain a decree, the defendant shall be entitled to his costs 
as between attorney and client.  
The foregoing rules shall not  apply to any suit in which the Judge who tries the same certifies that it 
was one fit to be brought in the High Court.  
  
                                                      
1. The words “for the recovery of a wife” rep. by Act 10 of 1914, s. 3 and II Schedule.  
2.Added  by Act 1 of 1895, s. 9.  
3. See now the relevant provision of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908).  
4. Ins. by Act 1 of 1895, s. 10.  
5. Subs. by s. 1 1, ibid., for “two thousand”.   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 12]
12 
 CHAPTER V  
PROCEDURE IN SUITS 
23. [Portions of Civil Procedure Code extending to Court. ] Rep. by the Presidency Small 
Cause Courts Act, 1895, (1 of 1895 ), s. 12.  
24. No written statement except in cases of set -off.—Except in cases of set -off under the 
1Code of Civil Procedure (14 of 1882), section 111, no written statement shall be received 
unless required by the Court.  
25. Return of documents admitted in evidence. —When  a period of eight days from the 
decision of a suit has expired without any application for a new trial or re -hearing of such 
suit having been made, or when any such application has been made within such period and 
such application has been refused, or the new trial or re -hearing (as the case may be) has 
ended, any person, whether a party to the suit or not, desirous of receiving back any 
document produced by him in the suit and placed on the record, shall, unless the doc ument 
is impounded under section 143 of the 1Code of Civil Procedure (14 of 1882), be entitled to 
receive back the same:  
Provided that a document may be returned at any time before any of such events on such 
terms as the Court may direct: provided also tha t no document shall be returned which, by 
force of the decree, has become void or useless.  
On the return of a document which has been admitted in evidence, a receipt shall be 
given, by the party receiving it, in a receipt -book to be kept for the purpose.  
26. Compensation payable by plaintiff to defendant in certain cases. —In any suit in which 
the defendant appears and does not admit the claim, and the plaintiff does not obtain a decree for 
the full amount of his claim, the Small Cause Court may in its disc retion order the plaintiff to pay 
to the defendant, by way of satisfaction for his trouble and attendance, such sum as it thinks fit.  
When any claim preferred, or objection made, under section 278 of the 3Code of Civil 
Procedure (14 of 1882), is disallowed , the Small Cause Court may 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 12]
ection 278 of the 3Code of Civil 
Procedure (14 of 1882), is disallowed , the Small Cause Court may in its discretion order the 
person preferring or making such claim or objection to pay to the decree -holder, or to the 
judgment -debtor, or to both by way of satisfaction as aforesaid, such sum or sums as it thinks 
fit. 
And when any claim or objection is allowed the Court may award such compensation by  way 
of damages to the claimant or objector as it thinks fit; and the order of the Court awarding or refusing 
such compensation  shall bar any suit in respect of injury caused by the attachment.  
Any order under this section may, in default of payment of the amount payable thereunder, be 
enforced by the person in whose favour it is made against the person against whom it is made as if it were 
a decree of the Court.  
27. Decree -holder to accompany officer executing warrant. —Whenever the Small Cause 
Court issues a warrant for the arrest of a judgment -debtor on the attachment of his property, the 
decree -holder, or some other person on his behalf, shall accompany the officer of the Court 
entrusted with the execution of such warrant, and shall point out to such officer the judgment -debtor 
or the property to be attached, as the case may be.  
28. Things attached to immovable property and removable by tenant to be deemed movable 
in execution. —When  the judgment -debtor under any decree of the Small Cause Court is a tenant of 
immovable property, anything attached to such property, and which he might before the termination of 
his tenancy lawfully remove without the permission of his landlord, shall, for  the purpose of the 
execution of such decree 2[and for the purpose of deciding all questions arising in the e xecution of 
such decree], be de emed to be movable property, and may, if sold in such execution, be severed by the 
                                                      
1. See now the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908).  
2. Ins. by 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 12]
                        
1. See now the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908).  
2. Ins. by Act 4 of 1906, s. 2.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 13]
13 
 purchaser, but shall not be removed by him from the property until he has done to the property 
whatever the judgment -debtor would have been bound to do to it if he had removed such thing.  
29. Discharge of judgment -debtor on sufficient security .—Whenever any judgment -debtor, 
who has b een arrested or whose property has been seized in execution of a decree of the Small 
Cause Court, offers security to the satisfaction of such Court for payment of the amount which he 
has been ordered to pay and the costs the Court , may order him to be disc harged or the property to 
be released.  
30. Court may in certain cases suspend execution of decree. —Whenever  it appears to the 
Small  Cause Court that any judgment -debtor under its decree is unable, from sickness, poverty or 
other sufficient cause, to pay th e amount of the decree, or, if such Court has ordered the same to be 
paid in instalments, the a mount of any instalment thereof, it may, from time to time, for such time 
and upon such terms as it thinks fit, suspend the execution of such decree and discharge the debtor, 
or make such order as it thinks fit.  
31. Execution of decree of Small Cause Court by other Courts. —If the judgment -debtor under 
any decree of the Small Cause Court has not, within the local limits of its jurisdiction, movable 
property  sufficient to satisfy the decree, the Court may, on the application of the decree -holder, send 
the decree for execution —  
(a) in the case of execution against immovable property situate within such local limits —1[to the 
Madras City Civil Court or the High  Court of Judicature at Fort William or Bombay, as the case may 
be]; 
(b) in all other cases —to any Civil Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction such 
judgment -debtor, or any movable or immovable property of such judgment -debtor, may be found.  
Procedure when decree transferred. —The procedure prescribed by the 2Code of Civil Procedure       
(14 of 1882) for the execution of d
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 13]
—The procedure prescribed by the 2Code of Civil Procedure       
(14 of 1882) for the execution of decrees by Courts other than those which made them shall be the 
procedure followed in such cases.  
32. Minors may sue in cert ain cases as if of full age. —Notwithstanding anything contained in                    
the 2Code of Civil Procedure (14 of 1882) as applied by this Act, any minor may institute a suit for any 
sum of money, not exceeding five hundred rupees, which may be due  to him under  section 70 of the 
Indian Contract Act, 1872 (9 of 1872), for wages or piecework or for work as a servant, in the same 
manner as if he were of full age.  
33. Power to delegate non -judicial duties. —Any non-judicial or quasi -judicial act which               
the 2Code of Civil Procedure (14 of 1882) as applied by this Act requires to be done by a Judge, 
and any act which may be done by a Commissioner appointed to examine and adjust accounts 
under section 394 of that Code as so applied, may be don e by the Registrar of the Small Cause 
Court or by such other officer of that Court as that Court may, from time to time, appoint in this 
behalf.  
The High Court may, from time to time, by rule, declare what shall be deemed to be non -judicial and 
quasi -judic ial acts within the meaning of this section.  
34. Registrar to hear and determine suits like a Judge. —The suits cognizable by the Registrar 
under section 14 shall be heard and determined by him in like manner in all respects as a Judge of the 
Court might he ar and determine the same:  
Proviso .—Provided that, subject to the control of the Chief Judge, any Judge of the Court may, 
whenever he thinks fit, transfer to his own file any suit on the file of the Registrar.  
35. Registrar may execute all decrees with the  same powers as a Judge. —The Registrar may 
receive applications for the execution of decrees of any value passed by the Court, and may commit and 
                                                     
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 13]
value passed by the Court, and may commit and 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 1892, s. 12 , for “to the high court”.  
2. See now the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 14]
14 
 discharge judgment -debtors, and make any order in respect thereof which a Judge of the Court might 
make under this Act.  
36. Decrees and orders of Registrar to be subject to new trial as if made by a Judge. —Every 
decree and order made by the Registrar in any suit or proceeding shall be subject to the same provisions 
in regard to new trial as if made by a Judge of t he Court.  
1[CHAPTER VI  
NEW TRIALS AND APPEALS  
37. General finality of decrees and orders of Small Cause Court. —Save  as otherwise provided by 
this Chapter or by any other enactment for the time being in force, every decree and order of the Small 
Cause Court  in a suit shall be final and conclusive.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 37 of Act XV of 1882. —In section 37 of the Presidency Small Cause Courts 
Act, 1882 (XV of 1882), in its application to the State of Maharashtra (hereinafter to as “t he principal 
Act”), after the words “by this Chapter” the words “or by Chapter VII” shall be inserted.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act XIX of 1976, s. 2]  
38. New trial of contested cases. —Where a suit has been contested, the Small Cause Court may, 
on the application of either party, made within eight days from the date of the decree or order in the 
suit [not being a decree passed under section 522 of the 1Code of Civil Procedure (14 of 188 2)], order 
a new trial to be held, or alter, set aside or reverse the decree or order, upon such terms as it thinks 
reasonable, and may, in the meantime, stay the proceedings.  
Explanation. —Every suit shall be deemed to be contested in which the decree is m ade otherwise than 
by consent of or in default of appearance by the defendant.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 38 of Act XV of 1882 .—In section 38 of the principal act, -- 
(a) the Explanation  shall be renumbered as Explanation 1;  
(b) after Explanation I  so renumbered, the following Explanation shall be added, namely: -- 
“Explanation 2.—Nothing containe
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 14]
o renumbered, the following Explanation shall be added, namely: -- 
“Explanation 2.—Nothing contained in this section shall apply to suits under Chapter VII,”  
[Vide Maharashtra Act XIX of 1976, s. 3]  
39. Removal of certain causes into High Cou rt.—(1) In any suit instituted in a Small Cause 
Court in which the amount of value of the subject -matter exceeds the sum of one thousand rupees, 
the defendant or any one of the defendants may, before the day fixed by the summons for the 
appearance of the d efendant or within eight days after the service of the summons on him, whichever 
period shall last expire, apply ex parte on an affidavit setting forth the facts on which he relies for his 
defence  to a Judge of the High Court for an order removing the cause into the High Court.  
2[(2) Unless the Judge is of opinion that the application has been made solely for the purpose of delay, 
the applicant shall be entitled to such order as of right:  
Provided that the removal directed by such order shall, unless the Judge otherwise directs,  be 
conditional upon the applicant giving security, to the approval of the Judge, within a reasonable time to be 
prescribed in the order for the payment of the amount claimed  and of the costs which may become 
payable by him to the plaintiff in respect of the said suit.]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 1895, s. 13, for Chapter VI.  
2. Subs. by Act 4 of 1906, s. 3, for sub -section (2).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 15]
15 
 (3) If the applicant fail or neglect to complete the required security (if any) within the prescribed time 
(if any), the said order shall be discharged and the  suit shall proceed in the Small Cause Court as if such 
order had never been made.  
(4) If the plaintiff in any case which has been removed under this section into the High Court has 
abandoned a portion of hi s claim in order to be able to bring the suit wit hin the jurisdiction of a Small 
Cause Court, he shall be permitted to revive the portion of his claim so abandoned.  
40. Rules with respect to suits removed under the last foregoing section. —(1) When a suit 
has been removed into the High Court un der the last foregoing section,  it shall be heard and disposed of 
by su ch Court in the exercise of its original jurisdiction, and the said Court shall have all the same powers 
and jurisdiction in respect thereof as if it had been originally instituted such Court.  
(2) In every suit so removed as aforesaid the affidavit filed under section 39, sub -section  (1), shall be 
treated as a written statement of the defendant tendered under section 110 of the 1Code of Civil Procedure 
(14 of 1882) unless the Court shall otherwi se order.  
(3) In every suit so removed as aforesaid credit shall be given to the plaintiff for the amount of the 
court -fee paid in the Small Cause Court in respect of the plaint in the levy of any fees which according to 
the practice of the High Court are payable to the Government .] 
CHAPTER VII  
RECOVERY OF POSSESSION OF IMMOVABLE  PROPERTY  
41. Summons against person occupying property without leave. —When any person has had 
possession of  any immovable property situate  within the local limits, of the Small Cause Court ’s 
jurisdiction and of which the annual value at a rack -rent does not exceed 2[two] thousand rupees, 
as the tenant, or by permission, of  another person, or of some pers on through whom such other 
person clai ms, 
and such tenancy or pe rmission has
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 15]
on, or of some pers on through whom such other 
person clai ms, 
and such tenancy or pe rmission has determined or been withdrawn,  
and such tenant or occupier or any person holding under or by assignment from him (hereinafter called 
the occupant) refuses to deliver up such property in compliance with a request made t o him in this behalf 
by such other person,  
such other person (hereinafter called the applicant) may apply to the Small Cause Court for a 
summons against the occupant, calling upon him to show cause, on a day therein appointed, why he 
should not be compelle d to deliver up the property.  
42. Service of summons. —The summons shall be served on the occupant in the manner 
provided by the 1Code of Civil Procedure (14 of 1882) for the service of a summons on a defendant.  
43. Order for possession. —If the occupant does not appear at the time appointed and show cause 
to the contrary, the applicant shall, if the Small Cause Court is satisfied that he is entitled to apply under 
section 41, be entitled to an order addressed to a bailiff of the Court directing him to giv e possession of 
the property to the applicant on such day as the Court thinks fit to name in such order.  
Explanation. —If the occupant proves that the tenancy was created or permission granted  by virtue of 
a title which determined previous to the date of the application, he shall be deemed to have shown cause 
within the meaning of this section.  
44. Such order to justify bailiff entering on property and giving po ssession. Bar to 
proceedi ngs against Judge or officer for issuing, etc., order or summons. —Any s uch order 
shall justify the bailiff to whom it is addressed in entering after the hour of six in the morning and before 
the hour of six in the afternoon upon the property named therein, with such assistants, as he thinks 
necessary, and giving possession of  such property to the applicant ; and no suit or prosecution shall be 
                                          
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 15]
y to the applicant ; and no suit or prosecution shall be 
                                                      
1. See now the Code of Civi l Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908 ). 
2. Subs. by Act 9 of 1912, s. 2, for “one”.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 16]
16 
 maintainable against any Judge or officer of the Small Cause Court by whom any such order as aforesaid 
was issued, or against any bailiff or other person by whom the same was executed, or  by whom any such 
summons as aforesaid was served, for the issue, execution or service of any such order or summons, by 
reason only that the applicant was not entitled to the possession of the property.  
45. Applicant, if entitled to possession, not to be d eemed trespasser for any error in 
proceedings. Occupant may sue for compensation. —When the applicant, at the time of 
applying for any such order as aforesaid, was entitled to the possession of such property, neither he nor 
any person acting in his behalf s hall be deemed, on account of any error, defect or irregularity in the mode 
of proceeding to obtain possession thereunder, to be a trespasser; but any person aggrieved may bring a 
suit for the recovery of compensation for any damage which he has sustained by reason of such error, 
defect or irregularity:  
when no such damage is proved, the suit shall be dismissed; and when such damage is proved but the 
amount of the compensation assessed by the Court does not exceed ten rupees, the Court shall award to 
the pl aintiff no more costs than compensation, unless the Judge who tries the case certifies that in his 
opinion full costs should be awarded to the plaintiff.  
46. Liability of applicant obtaining order when not entitled. —Nothing herein contained 
shall be deemed  to protect any applicant obtaining possession of any property under this Chapter from a 
suit by any person deeming himself aggrieved thereby, when such applicant was not at the time of 
applying for such order as aforesaid entitled to the possession of suc h property.  
Application for order in such case an act of trespass. —And when the applicant was not, at 
the time of applying for any such order as aforesaid, entitled to the possession of such property, the 
application for such order, thoug
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 16]
er as aforesaid, entitled to the possession of such property, the 
application for such order, though no possession is  taken thereunder, shall be deemed to be an act of 
trespass committed by the applicant against the occupant.  
47. Stay of proceedings on occupant giving security to bring suit against 
applicant. —Whenever on an application being made under section 41 the occ upant binds himself, with 
two sureties, in a bond for such amount as the Small Cause Court thinks reasonable, having regard to the 
value of the property and the probable costs of the suit next hereinafter mentioned, to institute without 
delay a suit in the  High Court against  the applicant for compensation for trespass and to pay all the costs 
of such suit in case he does not prosecute the same or in case judgment therein is given for the applicant, 
the Small Cause Court shall stay the proceedings on such ap plication until such suit is disposed of.  
If the occupant obtains a decree in any such suit against the applicant, such decree shall supersede the 
order (if any) made under section 43.  
Nothing contained in  section 22 shall apply to suits under this section . 
48. Proceedings to b e regulated by Code of Civil Procedure. —In all proceedings under 
this Chapter, the Small Cause Court shall, as far as may be and except as herein otherwise provided, 
follow the procedure prescribed for a Court of first instance by the  1Code of Civil Procedure (14 of  1882).  
49. Recovery of possession no bar to suit to try title. —Recovery of the possession of any  
immov able property under this Chapter  shall be no bar to the institution of a suit in the High Court for 
trying the title thereto.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Substitution of Chapter VII of Act XV of 1882 .—For Chapter VII of the principal Act, the 
following Chapter shall be substituted, namel y:-- 
“CHAPTER VII  
RECOVERY OF POSSESSION OF CERTAIN IMMOVABLE PROPERTY AND CERTAIN LICENCE FEES AND RENT . 
                      
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 16]
POSSESSION OF CERTAIN IMMOVABLE PROPERTY AND CERTAIN LICENCE FEES AND RENT . 
                                                      
1. See now the Code of Civi l Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908 ). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 17]
17 
 “41. Suits or Proceedings between licensors and licenses or landlords and fenants for recovery of 
possession  of immovable property and licence  fees or rent, except to those to which other Acts apply 
to lie in Small Cause Court .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act or in any 
other law for the time being in force, but subject to the provisions of sub -section (2), the Court of Small 
Causes shall have jurisdiction to entertain  and try all suits and proceeding s between a licensor and 
licensee, or a landlord and tenant, relating to the recovery of possession of any immovable property 
situated in Greater Bombay, or relating to the recovery of the licence fee or charges or rent therefore, 
irrespective of the value  of the subject matter of such suits or proceedings.  
(2) Nothing contained in sub -section (1) shall apply to suits or proceedings for the recovery of 
possession of any immovable property, or of licence fee or charges or rent thereof, to which the 
provision s of the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947 (Bom. LVII of 
1947), the Bombay Government Premises (Eviction) act, 1955 (Bom. II of 1956), the Bombay Muncipal 
Corporation Act, the Bombay Housing Board Act, 1948 (Bom LXIX of 1948), o r any other law for the 
time being in force, applies.  
42. Appeal .—(1) An appeal shall lie from a decree or order made by the Small Cause Court 
exercising jurisdiction under section 41, to a bench of two Judges of the said Court, which shall not 
include the  Judge who made such decree or order:  
Provided that, no such appeal shall lie from a decree or order made in any suit or proceeding in 
respect of which no appeal lies under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (V of 1908).  
(2) Every appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be made within thirty days from the date of the deree or 
order, as the case may be.  
Provided that, in computing the period, of limitation prescribed by this sub -section, the provisio
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 17]

Provided that, in computing the period, of limitation prescribed by this sub -section, the provisions 
contained in section 4, 5 and 12 of the Limitation act, 1963 ( XXX of VI of 1963),shall, so far as may be 
apply.  
(4) Where no appeal lies under sub -section from a decree or order in any suit or proceeding, the 
bench of two Judges specified in sub -section (1) may, for the purpose of satisfying itself that the decree or  
order was according to law, call for the case in which such decree or order was made and pass such order 
with respect thereto as it thinks fit.  
43. Procedu re.—In all suit, appeals and proceedings under this Chapter, the Small Cause Court shall 
as far as p ossible and except as herein otherwise provided, follow the procedure prescribed by the Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908 (V of 1908).  
44. Court fees. —The court fees leviable in suits, appeals and proceedings under this Chapter shall be 
the same as are chargea ble under Chapter III of the Bombay Court -fees Act, 1959 (Bom. XXXVI of 
1959), and the provisions of that Act shall apply to the recovery of such court -fees. 
45. Savings of suits involving title .—Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be deemed to bar a 
party to a suit, appeal or proceeding mentioned therein in which a question of title to any immovable 
property arises and is determined, from suing in a competent court to establish his title to such property.  
46. Saving of pending proceedings .—(1) All suit s and other proceedings cognizable  by the Small 
Cause Court under this Chapter and pending in the high Court or the Bombay City Civil Court, on the 
date of coming into force of the Presidency Small Cause courts (Maharashtra Amendment) act, 1975 
(Mah. XIX o f 1976), shall be continued and disposed of by the High Court or the City Civil Court, as the 
case may be, as if this Act had not been passed.  
(2) All applications and other proceedings filed in the Small Cause Court under this Chapter and 
pending in that C
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 17]
tions and other proceedings filed in the Small Cause Court under this Chapter and 
pending in that Court, on the date aforesaid, shall be continued  and disposed of by the Small Cause Court, 
as if this Act had not been passed.”  
[Vide Maharashtra act XIX of 1976, s. 4]  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 18]
18 
 CHAPTER VIII  
DISTRESSES  
50. Local extent of Chapter. Saving of certain rents. —This Chapter extends to every place 
within the local limits of the ordinary original civil jurisdictions of the High Courts of Judicature 
at Fort William, Madras and Bombay. But nothing contained in this Chapter applies —  
(a) to any rent due to Government;  
(b) to any rent which has been due for more than twelve months before the application mentioned 
in section 53.  
1[51. Appointment of bailiffs and appraisers. —Four or more persons shall be appointed 
bailiffs and appraisers for the purposes of this Chapter .] 
52. Appointees to be public servants. —The persons so appointed  2*** shall be deemed to be 
public servants within the meaning of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
53. Application for distress -warrant. —Any person claiming to be entitled to arrears of rent of 
any house or premises to which this Chapter extends, or his duly constituted attorney, may apply to any 
Judge of the Small Cause Court, or to the Registrar of the Small Cause Court, for such warrant as is 
hereinafter mentioned.  
The application shall be supp orted by an affidavit or affirmation to the effect of the form (marked A) 
in the Third Schedule hereto annexed.  
STATE AMENDMEMT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 53 of Act XV of 1882 .—In section 53 of the principal Act, -- 
(a) the first paragraph shall be nu mbered as sub -section (1) of that section and to sub -section (1) 
as so numbered, the following proviso shall be added, namely: -- 
   “Provided that before making an application such person shall give 15 days’ notice to the 
person liable to pay the arrears o f rent making a demand of the said arrears.”  
(b) the second paragraph shall be numbered as sub -section (2) of that section and in sub -section (2) as so  
numbered, after the words “The application” the words, brackets and figure “made under sub -section ( )” 
shall be inserted.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act XXXV of 1961, s. 3] 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 18]
igure “made under sub -section ( )” 
shall be inserted.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act XXXV of 1961, s. 3]  
54. Issue of distress -warrant. —The Judge or Registrar may thereupon issue a warrant under his 
hand and seal and returnable within six days, to the effect of the form (marked B) contained in the same 
Schedule, addressed to any one of such bailiffs.  
The Judge or Registrar may at his discretion, upon personal examination of the person applying for 
such warrant, decline to issue the same.  
55. Time for distress. —Every distress under this Chapter shall  be made after sunrise and before 
sunset, and not at any other time.  
56. What places bailiff may force open. —The bailiff directed to make the distress may force 
open any stable, outhouse or other building, and may also enter any dwelling -house, the outer d oor of 
which may be open, and may break open the door of any room in such dwelling -house for the purpose of 
seizing property liable to be seized under this Chapter:  
Provided that he shall not enter or break open the door of any room appropriated for the zenana  or 
residence of wom en, which by the usage of the country is considered private.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for section  51. 
2. Certain words omitted, ibid.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 19]
19 
 57. Property which may be seized. —In pursuance of the warrant aforeasaid, the bailiff shall seize 
the movable property found in or upon the house or premises mentioned in the warrant and belonging to 
the person from whom the rent is claimed (hereinafter called the debtor), or such part th ereof as may, in 
the bailiff’ s judgment, be sufficient to cover the amount of the said rent, together with the costs of the said 
distress:  
Provided that the bailiff shall not seize —  
(a) things in actual use; or  
(b) tools and implements not in use, where there is other movable property in or upon the house or 
premises sufficient to cover such amount and costs; or  
(c) the debtor’ s necessary wearing apparel; or  
(d) goods in the custody of the law.  
58. Impounding distress. —The bailiff may impound or otherwise secure the property so seized 
in or on the house or premises chargeable with the rent.  
59. Inventory. Notice of intended appraisement and  sale. —On seizing any property 
under section 57 the bailiff shall make an inventory of such property and shall give a notice in writing to 
the effect of the form (marked C) in the third schedu le hereto annexed to the debtor,  or to any other 
person upon his behalf in or upon the said house or premises.  
Copies of inventory and notice to be filed .—The bailiff shall, as soon as  may be, file in the Small 
Cause  Court copies of the said in ventory and notice.  
60. Application to disch arge or suspend warrant. —The debtor or any other person 
alleging himself to be the owner of any property seized under this Chapter, or the duly constituted 
attorney of such debtor or other person, may, at any time within five days from such seizure, apply to any 
Judge of the said Court to discharge or suspend the warrant, or to release a distrained article, and such 
Judge may discharge or suspend such warrant or release such article accordingly, upon such terms as he 
thinks just,  
and any of the Judges of th e said Court m
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 19]
rticle accordingly, upon such terms as he 
thinks just,  
and any of the Judges of th e said Court may in his discretion give reasonable time to the debtor to pay 
the rent due from him.  
Upon any such application, the costs attending it and attending the issue  and execution of the warrant 
shall be in the discretion of the Judge, and shall be  paid as he directs.  
61. Claim to goods distrained made by a stranger. —If any claim is made to, or in respect 
of, any property seized under this Chapter, or in respect of the proceeds or value thereof, by any person 
not being the debtor, the Registrar of t he Small Cause Court, upon the application of the bailiff who 
seized the property, may issue a summons calling before the Court the claimant and the person who 
obtained the warrant.  
And thereupon any suit which may have been brought in the High Court in re spect of such claim shall 
be stayed, and any Judge of the High Court, on proof of the issue of such summons and that the property 
was so distrained, may order the plaintiff to pay the costs of all proceedings in such suit after the issue of 
such summons.  
And a Judge of the Small Cause Court shall adjudicate upon such claim and make such order between 
the parties i n respect  thereof and of the costs of th e proceedings as he thinks fit;  
and such order shall be enfor ced as if it were an order made in a suit br ought in such Court.  
The procedure in Small Cause Courts in cases under this section shall conform, as far as may be, to the 
procedure in an ordinary suit in such Courts.  
62. Power  to award compensation to debtor or claimant. —In any case under section 60 
or section 61 the Judge by whom the case is heard may award such compensation by way of damages to 
the applicant or claimant (as the case may be) as the Judge thinks fit,  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 20]
20 
 and may for that purpose make any inquiry he thinks necessary;  
and the order of the J udge awarding or refusing such compensation shall bar any suit for the recovery 
of compensation for any damage caused by the distress.  
63. Power to transfer to High Court cases  involving more than one thousand 
rupees. —In any case under section 60 or sectio n 61, if the value of the subject -matter in dispute exceeds 
one thousand rupees, the applicant o r claimant may apply to the High Court to transfer the case to itself, 
and the High Court, on being satisfied that it is expedient that the case should be dispo sed of by itself, 
may direct the case to be transferred accordingly, and may thereupon alter or set aside any order passed in 
the case by a Judge of the Small Cause Court, and may make such order therein as the High Court thinks 
fit. 
Every application unde r this section shall be made within seven days from the date of the seizure of 
the subject -matter in dispute.  
In granting applications under this section, the High Court may impose such terms as to 
payment of, or giving security for, costs or otherwise as it thinks fit.  
The procedure in cases transferred under this section shall conform, as far as may be, to the 
procedure in suits before the High Court in the exercise of its ordinary original civil jurisdiction; 
and orders made under this section may be exe cuted as if they were made in the exercise of such 
jurisdiction, and every such order awarding or refusing compensation shall bar any suit for the 
recovery of compensation for any damage caused by the distress which gave rise to the case 
wherein such order  was made.  
64. Appraisement. —In default of any order to the contrary by a Judge of the Small Cause 
Court or by the High Court, any two of the said bailiffs may, at the expiration of five days from a 
seizure of property under this Chapter, appraise the prop erty so seized, and give the debtor notice 
in writing to the effect of the fo
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 20]
er, appraise the prop erty so seized, and give the debtor notice 
in writing to the effect of the form (marked D) in the third schedu le hereto annexed.  
Notice of sale. —The bailiffs shall file in the Small Cause Court a copy of every notice given under 
this section.  
65. Sale. App lication of proceeds. —In default of any such order to the contrary, the 
distrained property shall be sold on the day mentioned in such notice, and the said bailiffs shall, 
on realizing the proceeds, pay over the amount thereof to the Registrar of the Small  Cause Court; 
and such amount shall be applied first in payment of the costs of the said distress and then in 
satisfaction of the debt; and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the debtor:  
Provided that the debtor may direct that the sale shall take p lace in any other manner, first giving 
security for any extra costs thereby occasioned.  
66. Costs of dis tresses. —No costs of any distress under this Chapter shall be taken or demanded 
except those mentioned in the p art (marked E) of the third schedule hereto annexed.  
1*         *         *         *         * 
67. Account of costs and proceeds. —The Registrar of the Small Cause Court shall keep a 
book in which all sums received as costs upon distresses made under this Chapter, and all sums 
paid as remuneration to the said bailiffs, and all contingent charges incurred in respect of such 
distresses, shall be duly entered.  
He shall also enter in the said book all sums realised by sale of the property distrained and paid over 
to landlords under the prov isions of this Chapter.  
68. Bar of distresses except under this Chapter. —No distress shall be levied for arrears of rent 
except under the provisions of this Chapter;  
                                                      
1. Second paragraph Rep.  by the A.O. 1937.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 21]
21 
 Penalty for making illegal distresses. —and any person, except a bailiff appointed under 
section 51, levying or attempting to levy any such distress, shall, on conviction before a 
Presidency Magistrate, be liable to be punished with fine which may extend to five hundred 
rupees and with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, in  addition to any 
other liability he may have incurred by his proceedings.  
CHAPTER IX  
REFERENCES TO HIGH COURT  
1[69. Reference when compulsory. —(1) If two or more Judges of the Small Cause Court sit 
together in any suit, or in any proceeding under Chapter VII of this Act, and differ in their 
opinion as to any question of law or usage having the force of law or the construction of a  
document, which construction may affect the merits, or  
if in any suit or in any such proceeding, in which the amount or value o f the subject -matter exceeds 
five hundred rupees, any such question arises upon which the Court entertains reasonable doubt, and 
either party so requires,  
the Small Cause Court shall draw up a statement of the facts of the case and the point on which 
there  is a difference of opinion or on which doubt is entertained, and refer such statement with its 
own opinion on the point for the opinion of the High Court; and the provisions of sections 619 to 621 
of the 2Code of Civil Procedure (14 of 1882), shall, so far as they are applicable, be deemed to apply 
as if such reference had been made under section 617 of the said Code.  
(2) When the Small Cause Court refers any question for the opinion of the High Court as provided in 
sub-section (1), it shall either reser ve judgment or give judgment contingent upon such opinion.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment  of section 69 of Act XV of 1882 .—In section 69 of the principal Act, in sub -section 
(1), the words and figures “Chapter  VII of “ shall be deleted.  
[Vide Maha rashtra act XIX of 1976, s. 5]  
70. Security to be furnished on such
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 21]
shall be deleted.  
[Vide Maha rashtra act XIX of 1976, s. 5]  
70. Security to be furnished on such reference by party against whom contingent judgment 
given. —When  judgment is given under section 69 contingent upon the opinion of the High Court, the 
party against whom such judgment is given shall at once furnish security, to be approved by the 
Small Cause Court, for the costs of the reference to the High Court and fo r the amount of such 
judgment:  
Provided that no security for the amount of such judgment shall be required in any case in which the 
Judge who tried the case has ordered such amount to be paid into Court, and the same has been paid 
accordingly.  
If no such s ecurity given, party to be deemed to have submitted to judgment .—Unless  such 
security as aforesaid is at once furnished, the party against whom such contingent judgment has been 
given shall be deemed to have submitted to the same.  
CHAPTER X  
FEES AND COSTS  
71. Institution -fee.—A fee not exceeding —  
(a) when the amount or value of the subject -matter does not exceed five hundred rupees —the 
sum of two annas in the rupee on such amount or value,  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 4 of 1906, s. 4, for s ection  69. 
2. See Now  the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 22]
22 
 (b) when the amount of value of the subject -matter exceeds five hundred rupees —the sum of 
sixty -two rupees eight annas, and one anna in the rupee on the excess of such amount or value over 
five hundred rupees,  
shall be paid on the plaint in every suit, and every application under 1*** section 41; and no such plaint or 
application shall be received until such fee has been paid.  
An additional fee of ten rupees shall be paid on the filing of every agreement under section 20.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 71 of Act XV of 1882 .—In section 71 of the principal Act, -- 
(a) for the words “A fee not exceeding” the words and figures “Save as otherwise provided 
in section 44, a fee not exceeding” shall be substituted.  
(b) for the portion beginning with the words “on the plaint in every suit,” and ending with  
the words “until such fee has been paid,” the following shall be substituted, namely: -- 
“on the plaint in every suit, and no such plaint shall be received until such fee has been 
paid.”  
[Vide Maharashtra Act XIX of 1976, s. 6]  
72. Fees for processes. —The fees specified in the third and fourth columns of the fourth schedule 
hereto annexed shall be paid previous to the issue in any suit or in any proceeding under Chapter VII 
of this Act of the processes, to which the said columns respectively relate, by the persons on whose 
behalf such processes ar e issued, when the amount or value of the subject -matter exceeds the sum 
specified in the first column, but does not exceed the sum specified in the second column of the said 
schedule.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Substitution of section 72 of Act XV of 1882. —For section 72 of the principal Act, the 
following section shall be substituted, namely: -- 
“72. Fees for process. —The fees specified in the third and fourth columns  of the Fourth 
Schedule hereto annexed shall be paid previous to the issue, in any suit or appeal or proceeding 
under this Act, of the proces
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 22]
ll be paid previous to the issue, in any suit or appeal or proceeding 
under this Act, of the processes, to which the said columns respective relate, by the persons in 
whose behalf such  processes, to which the said columns respectively relate, by the persons in 
whose behalf such proces ses are issued, when the amount or value  of the subject -matter exceeds 
the sum specified in the first column, but does not exceed the sum specified in the second column 
of the said Schedule, When the amount or value of the subject -matter exceeds Rs. 3000; the 
additional fees to  be paid for summonses  shall be at the rate of 10 paise for every Rs. 100 or part 
thereof in excess of Rs. 3,000 and the additional fees to be paid for other processes shall be at the 
rate of 40 paise  for every Rs. 100 or part thereof in excess of Rs. 3000.”  
[Vide  Maharashtra Act XIX of 1976, s. 7]  
73. Repayment of half fees on settlement before hearing. —Whenever any such suit or  
proceeding is settled by agreement of the parties before the hearing, hal f the amount of all fees paid up to 
that time shall be repaid by the Small Cause Court to the parties by whom the same have been 
respectively paid.  
 
 
                                                      
3. The words and figures “section 38 or” rep. by Act 7 of 1896 . 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 23]
23 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 78 of Act XV of 1882 .—In Section 73 of the Presidency Small  Cause  
Courts Act, 1882 (XV of 1882), shall be renumbered as sub -section (1) of that section, and in sub -
section (1) so renumbered after the words “have been respectively paid” the following proviso and 
sub-section shall be inserted, namely: -- 
“Provided t hat no such fees shall be repaid if the amount of institution fee on the plaint or 
application does not exceed five rupees or the claim for repayment is not made within one year from 
the date on which the suit or proceeding was so settled.  
(2) The State Go vernment may, from time to time, by order, provide for repayment to the 
plaintiff s, or applicant  of any part of the fees paid on plaints or applications by them in suits or 
proceedings, as the case may be, disposed of under such circumstances  and subject to such conditions 
as may be specified in the order.”  
(2) For the marginal note to the said section 73, the following shall be substituted, namely: -- 
“Repayment of fees under certain circumstances.”  
[Vide Bombay Act XLIV of 1955, s. 2]  
74. Fees and costs of poor persons. —The Small Cause Court may, whenever it thinks  fit, receive 
and register suits instituted, and applications under section 41 made by poor persons, and may issue 
processes on behalf of such persons, without payment or on a part -payment of the fees mentioned in 
sections 71 and 72.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 74 of Act XV of 1882. —In section 74 of the principal Act ,-- 
(a) the words, figures and letter “and applications under section 41 made, and appeals under 
section 42A made,” shall be deleted;  
(b) for the words and figures “section 71 and 72” the words and figures “section 44, 71 and 72,” 
shall be substituted.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act XIX of 1976, s. 8]  
75. Power to vary fees. —The State Government may from time to  time, by notification in  the Official 
Gazette, v
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 23]
ary fees. —The State Government may from time to  time, by notification in  the Official 
Gazette, vary  the amount of the fees payable under sections 71 and 72:  
Provided that the amount of such fees shall in no case exceed the amount prescribed by the said 
sections.  
76. Expense of  employing legal practitioners. —The expense of employing an advocate,  vakil, 
attorney or other legal practitioner incurred by any party shall not be allowed as costs in any suit or in 
any proceeding under Chapter VII of this Act, in the Small Cause Court, in which suit or proceeding 
the amount or value of the subject -matter does not exceed twenty rupees, unless the-Court is of 
opinion that the employment of such practitioner was under the circumstances reasonable.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 76 of Act X V of 1882 .—In section 76 of the principal Act, -- 
(a) the words and figures “or in any application or appeal under Chapter VII of this Act,” shall 
be deleted;  
(b) the words “or application or appeal” shall be deleted.  
[Vide  Maharashtra Act XIV of 1976, s. 9 ] 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 24]
24 
 77. Sections 3, 5 and 25 of Court -fees Act, 1870, saved. —Nothing contained in  this Chapter shall 
affect the provisions of sections 3, 5 and 25 of the Court -fees Act, 1870 (7 of 1870).  
CHAPTER XI  
MISCONDUCT  OF INFERIOR  MINISTERIAL  OFFICERS  
78. [Power to fine officers. ] Rep. by the A.O. 1937. 
79. Default of bailiff or other officer in execution of order or warrant. —If any clerk, bailiff  
or other inferior ministerial officer of the Small Cause Court who is employed as such in the 
execution of any order or w arrant, loses, by neglect, connivance or omission, an opportunity of 
executing such order or warrant, he shall be liable, by order of the Chief Judge, on the application of 
the person injured by such neglect, connivance or omission, to pay such sum, not ex ceeding in any 
case the sum for which the said order or warrant was issued, as, in the opinion of the Chief Judge, 
represents the amount of the damage sustained by such person thereby.  
80. Extortion or default of officers. —If any  clerk, baili ff or other in ferior ministerial officer of 
the Small Cause Court is charged with extortion or misconduct while acting under colour of its 
process, or with not duly paying or accounting for any money levied by him under its authority, the 
Court may inquire into such cha rge, and may make such order for the repayment or payment of any 
money so extorted, or of any money so levied as aforesaid, and of damages and costs, by such 
officer, as it thinks fit.  
81. Court empowered to summon witnesses, etc. —For the purposes of  any inquiry under this 
Chapter, the Small Cause Court shall have all the powers of summoning and enforcing the attendance 
of witnesses and compelling the production of documents which it possesses in suits under this Act.  
82. Enforcement of order. —Any order un der this Chapter for the payment or repayment of 
money may, in default of payment of the amount payable thereunder, be enforced by the person to 
whom such am
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 24]
, in default of payment of the amount payable thereunder, be enforced by the person to 
whom such amount is payable as if the same were a decree of the Small Cause Court in his favour.  
CHAPTER XII  
CONTEMPT  OF COURT  
83. [Procedure of Court in certain cases of contempt .] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act,  1914 
(10 of 1914), s. 3 and II Schedule . 
84. [Record in such cases .] Rep. by s. 3 and II Schedule , ibid. 
85. [Procedure where Court considers that case should not be dealt with under section 83 .] Rep. by   
s. 3 and II Schedule , ibid.  
86. [Discharge of offender on submission or apology .] Rep. by s . 3 and II Schedule , ibid. 
87. Imprisonment or committal of person refusing to answer or produce docum ent.—If any 
witness before the Small Cause Court refuses to answer such questions as are put to him, or to produce 
any document in his possession or power which the Court requires him to produce, and does not offer any 
reasonable excuse for such refusal, t he Court may sentence him to simple imprisonment, or commit him 
to the custody of an officer of the Court, for any term not exceeding seven days, unless in the meantime 
such person consents to answer such questions or to produce such document, as the case may be, after 
which, in the event of his persisting in his refusal, he may be dealt with according to the provisions of 
section 1[480 or section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 18982 (5 of 1898)].  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 1914, s. 2 and I Schedule . 
2. Now see Act 2 of 1974.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 25]
25 
 88. Appeal from orders under section 87. —Any person deeming himse lf aggrieved by an order 
under 1*** section 87 may appeal to the High Co urt, and the provisions of the 1[Code of Crim inal 
Procedure, 18982 (5 of 1898)], relating to appeal s shall, so far as may be, apply to appeals under' this 
section.  
CHAPTER  XIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
89. Persons by whom process may be served. —Notices to produce documents, summonses to 
witnesses, and all other processes issued in the exercise of any jurisdiction conferred on the Small Cause 
Court by this Act, except summonses to def endants and writs of execution, may, if the Court by general 
or special order so directs, be served by such persons as the Court, from time to time, appoints in this 
behalf.  
90. Registers and returns. —The Small Cause Court shall keep such registers, books and accounts, 
and submit to the High Court such statements and returns, as may, subject to the approval of the State 
Government, be prescribed by the High Court.  
91. Court to furnish records, etc., called for by State Government or High Court. —The Small 
Cause Court shall comply with such requisitions as may, from time to time, be made by the State 
Government or High Court for records, returns and statements in such form and manner as such 
Government or Court, as the case may be, thinks fit.  
92. Holidays and  vacations. —The Small Cause Cou rt shall, at the com mencement of each year, 
draw up a list of holidays and vacations to be observed in the Court, and shall submit the same for the 
approval of the State Government.  
Such list, when it has received such approv al, shall be published in the Official Gazette, and the said 
holidays and vacations shall be observed accordingly.  
93. Certain persons exempt from arrest by Court. —The President 2***, the Governors of   
3[Madras] , 4[Bombay and 5[West Bengal ], 6*** 7*** and the Chief Just ices and Judges of the High Courts 
8***, shall not be liable to arrest by order of th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 25]
he Chief Just ices and Judges of the High Courts 
8***, shall not be liable to arrest by order of the Small Cause Court.  
94. No suit to lie upon decree of Court. —No suit shall lie on any decree of the Small Cause Court.  
95. Place of imprisonment. —Any person  ordered by the Small Cause Court to be imprisoned may be 
imprisoned in such plac e as the State Government, from  time to time, appoints in this behalf.  
96. Tender in suit for anything done under Act .—If any person against whom any su it is brought 
for anyth ing purporting to be done by him under this Act has , before the institution of the suit, tendered 
sufficient amends to the plaintiff, the plaintiff shall not recover.  
97. Limitation of prosecu tions.—All prosecutions for anything purporting to be done under  this Act 
must be commenced within three months after the offence was committed.  
  
                                                      
1. The words and figures “section 83 or” rep. by Act 10 of 1914 , s. 3 and II Schedule.   
2. The words  “and Members of his Council” rep. by  the A.O. 1948.  
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1948, for “Fort St. George”.  
4. Subs. by Act 7 of 1912, s. 7 and the Schedule E, for “and Bombay”.  
5. Subs. by A.O. 1948, for “Fort William in Bengal”.  
6. The words “and the Members of their respective Councils ” rep, by the A O.1937.  
7. The words “the Lieutenant -Governor of Bengal” rep. by Act 7 of 1912, s. 7 and Schedule E.  
8. The words  and letter  “for Part A States” omitted by the A.O. (No. 2) 1956.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 26]
26 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE .—[Enactments repealed .] Rep. by the Repealing Act , 1938 (1 of 1938), s. 2 
and the Schedule . 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 27]
27 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE .—[Portions of Civil Procedure Code extending to Court .] Rep. by the  
Presidency Small Cause Courts  Act, 1895 (1 of 1895), s.  12. 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 28]
28 
 THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
FORMS  
A 
[See section 53 .] 
In the Small Cause Court for  
A. B. _____________   (plaintiff) , 
Versus  
C.D.________________   (Defendant ), 
A.B., of______________ , in the town of_______________, make  oath [or affirms ] and saith  that                    
C.D. ______________ , of________________ , is justly indebted to _______________ in the sum of  
Rs._______________ for arrears of rent of the house and premis es No ._____________ _______ , situated  
at______________,    in the town of __________________ , due for _______________    months, to wit  
from ____________  to____________ , at the rate of Rs. _____________  per mensem.  
Sworn [ or affirmed ] before me the ______________day of_______________1 88. 
Judge  [or Registrar ].  
 
B 
[See section 54 .]  
In the Small Cause Court for  
FORM oF WARRANT  
I hereby direct you to distrain the movable property of C.D., on the house and premises situa te at 
No.__________, in the town of _________, for the sum of __________ Rs. and the costs of the distress, 
according to the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Presidenc y Small Cause Courts Act, 1882.  
Dated                  day of             18     .  
(Signed and sealed ). 
 
To E.F., Bailiff  and Appraiser.  
C 
[See section 59 .] 
In the Small Cause Court for  
FORM OF INVENTORY  AND NOTICE  
(State particulars of property seized .) 
 
Take notice that I have this day seized the movable property contained in the above  
inventory for the sum _________ Rs., b eing the amount of __________  month ’s rent due to A.B. at 
_________ last, and that unless you pay the  amount thereof, together with the costs of this  distress, 
within five days from the date hereof, or obtain an order from one of the Judges or the 
Registrar of the Small Cause Court to the contrary, the same will be appraised and sold 
pursuant to the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Presidency Small Cau se Courts Act, 1882.  
Dated   the             day of       18 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 28]
ter VIII of the Presidency Small Cau se Courts Act, 1882.  
Dated   the             day of       18    . 
(Signed) E.F.,  
Bailiff and Appraiser.  
To C. D.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 29]
29 
 D 
[See section 64 .] 
In the Small Cause Court for  
Take notice that we have appraised the movable property seized on the  __________ day of 
__________, under the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882, of 
which seizure and property a notice and inventory were duly served upon you [ or upon on your behalf , as 
the case may be ] under date the  __________ , and  that the said property will be sold on the  __________ 
[two clear days at least after the date of the  notice ] at __________ pursuant to the provisions of the said 
Act. Dated this  __________ day of __________ 18 
(Signed )  E. F., 
G. H., 
Bailiffs and Appraisers.  
To  C. D.  
__________  
 
E 
[See section 66 .] 
In the Small Cause Court for  
SCALE  OF FEES TO BE LEVIED  IN DISTRAINTS  FOR HOUSE -RENT  
Sums sued for  Affidavit and 
warrant to distrain  Order to sell  Commission  Total  
Rs.        Rs. 
1 and under   5. . . 
5          ”        10 . .  
10        ”        15 . .  
15        ”       20 . .  
20       ”       25 . .  
25       ”       30 . .  
30       ”       35 . .  
35       ”       40 . .  
40       ”       45 . .  
45       ”       50 . .  
50       ”       60 . .  
60       ”       80 . .  
80       to      100 .  
Upwards of 100 . .  
 Rs.       A.       P.  
0         4         0  
0         8         0  
0         8         0  
0         8         0  
0        12        0  
1         0         0  
1         0         0  
1         0         0 
1         4         0  
1         8         0  
2         0         0  
2         8         0  
3         0         0  
3         0         0  Rs.       A.       P.  
0         8         0  
0         8          0  
0         8          0  
1         0          0  
1         0          0  
1         0          0  
1         0         0  
1         8         0  
2         0          0  
2         0          0  
2         0         0  
2         8         0  
3         0         0  
3         0   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 29]
          0  
2         0         0  
2         8         0  
3         0         0  
3         0         0 Rs.       A.       P.  
0         8         0 
1         0         0  
1         8         0  
2         0         0  
2         8         0  
3         0         0  
3         8         0  
4         0         0  
4         8         0  
5         0         0  
6          0         0  
6          8         0  
7         0          0  
7    per centum.  Rs.       A.       P.  
1         4         0  
2         0         0 
2         8         0 
3         8         0 
4         4         0 
5         0          0 
5         8         0 
6         8          0 
7         12        0 
8         8         0 
10        0         0 
11        8         0 
13        0         0 
… 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 30]
30 
 The above scale includes all expenses, except in suits where t he tenant disputes the landlord’ s claim, 
and witnesses have to be subpoenaed, in which case each subpoena for sums un der Rs. 40 must be paid 
for at four annas each, and twelve annas above that amount; and also where peons are kept in charge of 
property distrained, four annas per day must be paid per man.  
_______  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1882.pdf - page 31]
31 
 THE FOURTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 72]  
FEES FOR SUMMONSES  AND OTHER  PROCESSES  
When the amount or 
value of the subject -
matter exceeds        But does not exceed           Fee for summons  Fee for other processes  
Rs. 
0 
10 
20 
50 
100 
200 
300 
400 
500 
600 
700 
800 
900 
1,000  
1,100  
1,200  
1,300  
1,400  
1,500  
1,600  
1,700  
1,800  
1,900  Rs. 
10 
20 
50 
100 
200 
300 
400 
500 
600 
700 
800 
900 
1,000  
1,100  
1,200  
1,300  
1,400  
1,500  
1,600  
1,700  
1,800  
1,900  
2,000  Rs.       A.       P.  
0          2         0  
0          4         0  
0          8         0  
1          0         0  
1          4         0  
1         8          0 
1         12        0 
2          0         0 
2          4         0 
2          8         0 
2         12        0 
3          0         0 
3          4         0 
3           6         0 
3           8         0 
3          10        0 
3          12        0 
 3          14        0 
4          0         0 
4          2         0 
4          4         0 
4          6         0 
4          8         0 Rs.       A.       P.  
0         2         0  
0         4         0 
0         8         0  
1         0         0  
2         0         0 
3         0         0 
4         0         0 
5         0         0 
6         0         0 
7         0         0 
8         0         0 
9         0         0 
10        0         0 
10        8         0 
11        0         0 
11        8         0 
12        0         0 
12        8         0 
13       0         0 
13        8         0 
14        0         0 
14        8         0 
15        0         0 
 
 
_______  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND CONTAGIOUS DISEASES IN.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND CONTAGIOUS DISEASES IN 
ANIMALS ACT, 2009  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
CONTROL OF SCHEDULED DISEASES  
 
3. Appointment of Veterinary Officers.  
4. Reporting scheduled diseases obligatory.  
5. Duty to segregate infected animals.  
6. Notification of controlled areas and free areas.  
7. Prohibition of movement of animals from controlled area.  
8. Vaccination, marking and issue of vaccination certificate.  
9. Contents of vaccination certificate.  
10. Entry and exit of animals into controlled area and free area.  
11. Precautionary measures in relation to controlled areas.  
12. Prohibition of markets, fairs, exhibition, etc., in the controlled areas.  
13. Prohibition of bringing of infected animals into market and other places.  
14. Check Posts and Quarantine Camps.  
15. Inspection and detention of animals at Check Posts and Quarantine Camps.  
16. Entry and exit of vaccinated animals into controlled and free areas.  
17. Appointment of Competent Officers.  
18. Cleaning and disinfection of carriers.  
19. Powers of entry and inspection.  
 
CHAPTER III  
INFECTED AREAS  
20. Declaration of infected areas.  
21. Effect of declaration of infected areas.  
22. Denotification  of infected area.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
INFECTED ANIMALS  
23. Segregation, examination and treatment of infected animals.  
24. Drawing samples from animals.  
25. Resort to euthanasia for infected animals.  
26. Disposal of carcass.  
27. Powers of Veterinary Officer and Veterinarian to hold post -mortem examination s. 
28. Seizure and  removal of certain animals.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND CONTAGIOUS DISEASES IN.pdf - page 2]
2 
 CHAPTER V  
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES  
SECTIONS  
 
29. Enforcement of orders and recovery of expenses.  
30. Village Officers, etc., to assist.  
31. Penalty for issuing vaccination certificate without authority or administering defectiv e vaccine.  
32. Penalties.  
33. Penalty for placing infected animal or carcass in river, etc.  
34. Offences by  companies . 
 
CHAPTER VI  
PRECAUTIONARY MEASURES ON CAUSATIVE ORGANISM, ETC.  
35. Prevention of escape of causative organism.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
36. Power to delegate.  
37. Officers and authorities to function subject to Government control.  
38. Power to amend the Schedule.  
39. Power to issue directions.  
40. Certain persons to be public servants.  
41. Power to remove difficulties.  
42. Power of Central Government  to make rules.  
43. Power of State Government  to make rules.  
44. Laying of rules.  
45. Repeal and savings . 
THE SCHEDULE . 
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND CONTAGIOUS DISEASES IN.pdf - page 3]
3 
 THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND CONTAGIOUS DISEASES IN 
ANIMALS ACT, 2009  
ACT NO. 27 OF 2009  
[20th March , 2009 .]  
An Act to provide for the prevention, control and eradication of infectious and contagious 
diseases affecting animals, for prevention of outbreak or spreading of such diseases from one 
State to another, and to meet the international obligations of India fo r facilitating import and 
export of animals and animal products and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto.  
WHEREAS  economic losses due to infectious and contagious diseases of animals are enormous in the 
country with some of these diseases constituting a serious threat to the public;  
AND WHEREAS  many of such animal diseases can be largely prevented by judicious imple mentation 
of vaccination programmes or by taking other appropriate and timely measures on scientific lines;  
AND WHEREA S such measures are necessary to facilitate the import and export of animals and animal 
products and to keep in tune with international p ractices;  
AND WHEREAS  it has been realised that the prevention, control and eradication of infectious and 
contagious diseases of animals from India has to be tackled on a national basis so as to avoid adverse 
impact of such diseases on the economy of the country and for this purpose harmonise the control 
procedures and to prevent inter -State transmission of animal diseases;  
AND WHEREAS the national level handling has to be done with the active involvement of the State 
Governments, particularly in regard t o the precautionary measures required to  be taken within their 
jurisdiction in respect of certain infectious and contagious diseases and the regulation of movement of 
animals outside their respective areas by timely adoption of appropriate measures;  
AND WHEREAS  India is a Member Country of the Office International Des Epizooties, Paris  and it is 
necessary to implement the general obligations, decisions and recommen
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND CONTAGIOUS DISEASES IN.pdf - page 3]
Epizooties, Paris  and it is 
necessary to implement the general obligations, decisions and recommendations of the said Organisation 
and abide by the International Animal Health Code stipulated  by the said Organisation;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short ti tle, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Prevention and Control 
of Infectious and Contagious Diseases in Animals 1[Act, 2009 ].  
(2) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint; 
and different dates may be appointed for  different States or for different areas therein as well as for 
different provisions of this Act, and any reference in any such provision of this Act to the commencement 
of this Act shall be construed in relation to any State or area or provision as a refe rence to the coming into 
force of this Act or, as the case may be, of that provision, in such State or area.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requ ires,— 
(a) “animal ” means,— 
(i) cattle, buffalo, sheep, goat, yak, mithun;  
(ii) dog,  cat, pig, horse, camel, ass, mule, poultry, bees; and  
(iii) any other animal or bird as the Central Government may, by notification, 3specify;  
(b) “Check Post ” means any place established as such by the Director to carry out checking of 
animals for the p urpose of this Act;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 2018,  s. 3 and the Second Schedule, for “Bill, 2009” (w.e.f.  5-1-2018 ). 
2. 25th August, 2009, vide notification No S. O. 2158(E), dated 24th August, 2009, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec.  3(ii). 
This Act shall come into force in all the States and Union territories except the State of Uttar Pradesh . 
3. The ‘fish, molluse, crustacean and amphibian’ shall be  aquatic animals within the definition of ‘animal’ defined 
under clause ( a) 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND CONTAGIOUS DISEASES IN.pdf - page 3]
d amphibian’ shall be  aquatic animals within the definition of ‘animal’ defined 
under clause ( a) vide notification No. S.O. 995(E), dated 1st April, 2014.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND CONTAGIOUS DISEASES IN.pdf - page 4]
4 
 (c) “Competent Officer ” means any person or officer of the Government notified as a Competent 
Officer under section 17;  
(d) “compulsory vaccination ” means vaccination of any animal against any scheduled disease in 
respect of which vaccination is made mandatory under the provisions of this Act;  
(e) “controlled area ” means any local area which has been declared as such by the State 
Government under sub -section ( 1) of section 6;  
(f) “defective vaccine ” means any vaccine which is expired, breach in seal, contaminated, 
improperly stored, unlabelled or with mutilated label;  
(g) “Director ”, in relation to a State, means any officer in charge of the Departm ent of Animal 
Husbandry or Veterinary Services, or both, notified by the State Government as such for the purpose 
of this Act;  
(h) “free area ” means any controlled area which has been declared as such under sub -section ( 5) 
of section 6;  
(i) “infected ani mal” means an animal which is infected with any scheduled disease;  
(j) “infected area ” means an area declared as such under section 20;  
(k) “notification ” means notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(l) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules m ade under this Act;  
(m) “publication ” includes propagation of information through the media or newspaper or any 
other mass media and the means of local communication such as declaration in loud voice and by 
beating drums in the area;  
(n) “Quarantine Camp ” means any place declared to carry out quarantine of animals and birds for 
the purpose of this Act;  
(o) “scheduled disease ” means any disease included in the Schedule;  
(p) “Veterinarian ” means a person having a recognised veterinary qualification who, u nder the 
law for the time being in force, is allowed to treat animal diseases;  
(q) “Veterinary Officer ” means any officer, appointed as such by the State Government under 
clause ( b) of section 3;  
(r) “Village Officer ”, in relation to a village, means any per
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND CONTAGIOUS DISEASES IN.pdf - page 4]
t under 
clause ( b) of section 3;  
(r) “Village Officer ”, in relation to a village, means any person who is authorised or designated as 
such in accordance with the qualifications prescribed by the State Government.  
CHAPTER II  
CONTROL OF SCHEDULED DISEASES  
3. Appoin tment of Veterinary Officers .—The State Governmen t may, by notification, appoint — 
(a) such number of persons, as it deems proper, to be Veterinarians to undertake inspection and 
specifying the local limits of their respective jurisdiction; and  
(b) such number of Veterinarians, as it deems proper , to be Veterinary Officers, who shall 
exercise their powers and discharge their duties within the local limits of their jurisdiction as may be 
specified in the said notification.  
4. Reporting scheduled diseases obligatory .—(1) Every owner, or any other p erson,                     
non-governmental organisation, public bodies or the village panchayat, in charge of any animal which he 
or it has reason to believe to be infective of a scheduled disease shall report the fact to the Village Officer 
or village pa nchayat in -charge, who may report the same in writing to the nearest available Veterinarian.  
(2) The Village Officer shall visit the area falling within his jurisdiction for reporting any outbreak of 
the disease.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND CONTAGIOUS DISEASES IN.pdf - page 5]
5 
 (3) Every Veterinarian shall, on receipt o f a report under sub -section ( 1), or otherwise, if he has 
reason to believe that any animal is infected with a scheduled disease, report the matter to the Veterinary 
Officer.  
(4) Where in any State there is any occurrence of scheduled disease in relation to any animal, the 
Director shall send an intimation to the Directors of the States which are in the immediate neighbourhood 
of the place where there is such occurrence, for taking appropriate preventive measures against the spread 
of the disease.  
5. Duty  to segregate infected animals. —(1) Every owner or person in charge of an animal, which he 
has reason to believe is infective of a scheduled disease, shall segregate such animal and have it kept in a 
place away from all other animals which are healthy, and take all possible steps to preven t the infected 
animal from coming in contact with any other animal.  
(2) The owner or other person in charge of, or having control over, the animal referred to in             
sub-section ( 1) shall confine that animal and prevent it from grazing in a common  place or to drink water 
from any common source including a vessel, pond, lake or river.  
(3) All other infected animals shall be segregated by the Municipality, Panchayat or other local 
administration.  
6. Notification of controlled areas and free areas. —(1) The State Government may, with the object 
of preventing, controlling or eradicating any scheduled disease, by notification, declare any area to be a 
controlled area in respect of any scheduled disease affecting any species of animal and any other speci es 
that may be susceptible to the disease specified in the said notification.  
(2) The State Government shall also cause the substance of the notification issued under                 
sub-section ( 1) to be published in a local newspaper in the vernacular language and by declaration in loud 
voice and by beating drums in the area.  
(3) Where a notifi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND CONTAGIOUS DISEASES IN.pdf - page 5]
ar language and by declaration in loud 
voice and by beating drums in the area.  
(3) Where a notification has been issued under sub -section ( 1), all animals of the species in the 
controlled area shall be subjected to compulsory vaccination against that disease, and be subjected to such 
other measures against the disease, in such manner and within such time as the State Government, may, 
by public  notice, direct.  
(4) The State Government shall make available necessary vaccine and it shall be obligatory on the 
part of every owner, or the person in charge of an animal which is required to be vaccinated under                
sub-section ( 3), to get th e animal compulsorily vaccinated.  
(5) Where the State Government is satisfied, on a report received from the Director or otherwise, that, 
in any controlled area, any of the scheduled diseases affecting any species of animal is no longer 
prevalent, it may,  by notification, declare the area to be a free area in respect of that disease in relation to 
the particular species of animal.  
(6) Where a notification has been issued under sub -section ( 5), no animal of the species or of any 
other susceptible species w ith regard to which it is a free area shall be allowed to enter the free area unless 
duly immunized by vaccination against that particular disease.  
7. Prohibition of movement of animals from controlled area .—(1) Where a notification has been 
issued under sub-section ( 1) of section 6 declaring any area as a controlled area in relation to any disease 
affecting any species of animals, no animal belonging to that species shall be moved from the place where 
it is kept.  
(2) The Director may, for the purpose of control, prevention or eradication of any scheduled disease, 
in respect of any area, by order published in the Official Gazette, prohibit the movement of all animals 
belonging to any species specified therein, from th e place where it is kept, to any other place.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND CONTAGIOUS DISEASES IN.pdf - page 5]
 specified therein, from th e place where it is kept, to any other place.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND CONTAGIOUS DISEASES IN.pdf - page 6]
6 
 (3) Nothing contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall be deemed to prohibit — 
(a) the movement of any animal referred to therein, from the place where it is kept, to the nearest 
place where it can be got va ccinated, so long as the animal is being moved for the purpose of its 
immunization by vaccination; or  
(b) the movement of any such animal, so long as it is accompanied by a valid certificate of 
vaccination to indicate that the animal is duly immunized agai nst the particular disease and it bears 
proper mark of such vaccination.  
8. Vaccination, marking and issue of vaccination certificate. —(1) The vaccine to an animal may 
be administered by any person competent under the law for the time being in force to ad minister it, and 
issue a certificate of administration of vaccination.  
(2) Where any animal has been vaccinated for any scheduled disease in compliance with the 
provisions of sub -section ( 1), the person vaccinating the animal shall cause to put a mark by branding, 
tattooing or ear tagging, or in such other manner as the Director may, by general or special order, direct 
and the same shall, unless otherwise specified by the Director, shall not be removed.  
(3) The authority issuing a certificate of vaccination shall specify the date of vaccination, dates of 
manufacture and expiry of the vaccine and the date up to which the vaccination of the animal with the 
particular vaccine shall be valid.  
9. Conte nts of va ccination certificate. —Every vaccination certificate issued under this Act shall be 
in such form and shall contain such particulars as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
10. Entry and exit of animals into controlled area and free area .—(1) Where  any area has been 
declared as a controlled area under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 in respect of any disease affecting any 
species of animals, no animal belonging to that species shall be taken out of, or brought into that area save 
as provided in section  16.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND CONTAGIOUS DISEASES IN.pdf - page 6]
to that species shall be taken out of, or brought into that area save 
as provided in section  16.  
(2) The Director may, by notice duly published in the Official Gazette and at least in one daily local 
newspaper in vernacular language, extend the prohibition contained in sub -section ( 1) to any other species 
of animals, if animals belonging to that  species are also likely to be infected with that disease.  
(3) No carrier of goods or animal shall carry any animal from or out of a controlled area, free area or 
infected area by land, sea or air unless he complies with the provisions of section 16.  
(4) Nothing contained in sub -sections ( 1) to ( 3) shall apply to the carriage by railway of any animal 
referred to in those sub -sections through any area which, for the time being, is declared as a controlled 
area or infected area so long as the animal is not unloaded (for whatsoever purpose or duration ) in any 
place within that area:  
Provided that the State Government may, by notification, declare that any species of animal so carried 
through any local area within the State shall be duly immunized against such scheduled disease, in such 
manner and with in such time as may be specified in that notification and a certificate of vaccination shall 
be a pre -requisite for the transportation of the animals by the railways through that area:  
 Provided further that, where any notification as referred to in the fi rst proviso has been issued, it shall 
be incumbent on the State Government to intimate that fact to the concerned railway authorities so as to 
enable them to satisfy themselves about the immunization of the animal before transporting it through the 
local a rea of the State.  
11. Precautionary measures in relation to controlled areas .—No person shall t ake out of the 
controlled area — 
(a) any animal, alive or dead, which is infected with, or reasonably suspected to have been 
infected with, any scheduled disease  notified under sub -section ( 1
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND CONTAGIOUS DISEASES IN.pdf - page 6]
onably suspected to have been 
infected with, any scheduled disease  notified under sub -section ( 1) of section 6;  
(b) any kind of fodder, bedding or other material which has come into contact with any animal 
infected with such disease or could, in any manner, carry the in fection of the notified disease;  or 
(c) the carcass,  skin or any other part or product of such animal.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND CONTAGIOUS DISEASES IN.pdf - page 7]
7 
 12. Prohibition of ma rkets, fairs, exhibition, etc., in the controlled areas .—No person, 
organisation  or institution shall hold any animal market, animal fair, animal exhibition and carry on any 
other activity which involves grouping or gathering of any species of animals within a controlled area:  
Provided that the Competent Officer may, suo motu or on ap plication made to him in this behalf, 
relax the prohibition in relation to any species of animals, in a case where animals belonging to that 
species are not susceptible to the scheduled disease and are incapable of carrying it, if he is satisfied that 
in the public interest it is necessary to accord such relaxation.  
13. Prohibition of bringing of infected animals into market and other places. —No person shall 
bring or attempt to bring into market, fair, exhibition or other congregation of animals or to any public 
place, any animal which is known to be infected with a scheduled disease.  
14. Chec k Posts and Quarantine Camps .—(1) The Director may establish as many Quarantine 
Camps and Check Posts withi n the State as may be required — 
(a) for the detention of an imals suffering from any scheduled disease or of animals which have 
come into contact with or have been kept in the proximity of any such infected animal;  
(b) for ensuring the prevention of entry into or exit from any controlled area or infected area or 
free area, of any animal belonging to the species of animals in respect of which a notification, issued 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 6, or an order issued under sub -section ( 2) of section 7, is in force.  
(2) Any animal which is required to be detained, inspected, vaccinated, or marked, may be kept in the 
Quarantine Camp for such period as the Competent Officer may direct.  
(3) Every animal detained at a Quarantine Camp shall be under the custody of the perso n in charge of 
the camp, and shall be vaccinated and marked.  
(4) The officer in charge of the Quarantine Camp s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND CONTAGIOUS DISEASES IN.pdf - page 7]
 
the camp, and shall be vaccinated and marked.  
(4) The officer in charge of the Quarantine Camp shall, at the time of release of an animal from the 
station, grant a permit, in such form as may be prescribed by the State Government, to the pe rson taking 
charge of the animal, and every such person shall be bound to produce the permit whenever required to do 
so by any Competent Officer.  
15. Inspection and detention of animals at Chec k Posts and Quarantine Camps .—(1) Every 
person in charge of any Check Post or Quarantine Camp shall inspect any animal stopped at the Check 
Post, or detained therein or at the Quarantine Camp.  
(2) The manner of inspection and the period of detention of the animal at the Check Post or at  the 
Quarantine Camp for the purpose of inspection or for the administration of compulsory vaccination, the 
marking of animals and the form and manner in which permit for entry in respect of any animal may be 
issued, shall be such as may be prescribed by t he State Government.  
16. Entry and exit of vaccinated animals i nto controlled and free areas .—Notwithstanding 
anything contained in section 10, an animal belonging to the species of animals  in respect of which an 
area has been declared as a controlled or free area in relation to any scheduled disease, which has been 
duly vaccinated against that disease, shall be allowed to enter into or be taken out of the controlled area or 
free area, or to  be taken out of any other place on the production of a certificate to the effect that vaccine 
against that disease has been administered and a period of not less than twenty -one days has elapsed 
thereafter.  
17. Appoi ntment of Competent Officers. —The Stat e Government may, for the proper 
implementation of the provisions of this Act, by notification, authorise any person to exercise any power 
or discharge any duty as a Competent Officer, under this Act, who shall exercise such powers and such 
duties within t he local limits of his ju
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND CONTAGIOUS DISEASES IN.pdf - page 7]
, under this Act, who shall exercise such powers and such 
duties within t he local limits of his jurisdiction as may be specified in the notification.  
18. Cleaning and disinfection of carriers .—(1) Every common carrier whether a vessel or vehicle 
shall be cleaned and disinfected immediately before and after the transportation of  any animal in that 
vessel or vehicle, and so also any other place where the animal has been kept in transit.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND CONTAGIOUS DISEASES IN.pdf - page 8]
8 
 (2) Where any area has been declared as a controlled area or free area in respect of any scheduled 
disease affecting any species of animal, the D irector may, by an order duly published in the Official 
Gazette and in a local newspaper in the vernacular language, direct the owner of every vehicle in which 
any animal belonging to that species is carried, to have the vehicle properly cleaned and disinf ected.  
19. Powers of entry and inspection .—Any Veterinary Officer or other Competent Officer may enter 
upon and inspect any land or building or place, vessel or vehicle, for the purpose of ensuring compliance 
of the provisions of this Act or the rules or orders made thereunder, by the persons respo nsible for such 
compliance.  
CHAPTER III  
INFECTED AREAS  
20. Declaratio n of infected areas. —If the Veterinary Officer, upon receipt of a report from a 
Veterinarian or otherwise, is satisfied that, in any place or premises falling within his jurisdiction, an  
animal has been infected with any scheduled disease, or that an animal, which he has reason to believe 
has been so infected, is kept, may, by notification and publication in at least one local newspaper in the 
vernacular language and by declaration in lou d voice and by beating drums, declare such area as he may 
deem fit (including the place or premises aforesaid) to be an infected area.  
21. Effect of d eclaration of infected areas .—(1) Where an area has been declared as an infected 
area under section 20, all provisions of this Act which are applicable in relation to a controlled area shall 
mutatis mutandis  apply thereto as if for the words “controlled area ”, the words “infected area ” have been 
substituted.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), the following 
further provisions shall apply in relatio n to an infected area, namely: — 
(a) in respect of every animal in that area which is infec ted or reasonably believed to be infected, 
wi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND CONTAGIOUS DISEASES IN.pdf - page 8]
n respect of every animal in that area which is infec ted or reasonably believed to be infected, 
with any scheduled disease, the owner or other person in charge of the animal, shall forthwith get it 
treated b y a Veterinarian;  
(b) all articles, which are likely to have come into contact with any animal referr ed to in                 
clause ( a), shall be treated or disposed off in such a manner as the Veteri narian may direct;  
(c) every Veterinarian shall, for the purpose of  inspection, have the power to enter any place or 
premises where any animal is kept or is likely to be kept;  
(d) the owner or any other person in charge of the animal referred to in clause ( a) shall keep the 
animal in isolation forthwith, and also  take such other measures as may be necessary for the 
prevention, treatment and control of the disease as the Veterinarian may direct.  
22. Denotificatio n of infected area .—If the Veterinary Officer, after such enquiry as he may deem 
fit, is satisfied that  there is no longer the threat or danger of any animal being infected with the scheduled 
disease in any infected area, by notification and publication in a local newspaper in vernacular language, 
declare that the area is no longer an infected area as afore said, whereupon all the restrictions referred to in 
section 21 shall cease to apply.  
CHAPTER IV  
INFECTED ANIMALS  
23. Segregation, examination and t reatment of infected animals. —(1) Where the Veterinarian 
has, on receipt of a report or otherwise, reason to  believe that any animal  is infected with a scheduled 
disease, he may, by order in writing, direct the owner or any other p erson in charge of such animal — 
(a) to keep it segregated from other apparently healthy animals; or  
(b) to subject it to such treatme nt as may be required under the circumstances.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND CONTAGIOUS DISEASES IN.pdf - page 9]
9 
 (2) Where any action has been taken in pursuance of sub -section ( 1), the Veterinarian shall forthwith 
give a detailed report of the incidence of the disease to the Veterinary Officer.  
(3) On receipt of a r eport from the Veterinarian, the Veterinary Officer shall, as soon as possible, 
examine that animal as well as any other animal which could have come in contact with it, and for that 
purpose, submit the animal to such test and medical examination as may be  required under the 
circumstances.  
(4) If, after such test and examination, the Veterinary Officer is of the opinion that an animal is not 
infected with any of the scheduled diseases, he shall issue a certificate in writing that the animal is not 
infected with any such disease.  
24. Drawing s amples from animals. —(1) Where the Veterinary Officer considers it necessary for 
the purpose of ascertaining whether the animal which is suspected to have been infected with any 
scheduled disease or susceptible to such infection is actually infected, or fo r the purpose of ascertaining 
the nature of the scheduled disease with which an animal is infected, he may draw such samples, as may 
be required, from the animal for the purpose of carrying out such investigations as he may deem 
necessary under the circums tances.  
(2) The Veterinary Officer or any other Competent Officer shall draw samples from any animal for 
the purposes of ascertaining whether the animal h as been vaccinated against any disease, or whether the 
vaccination of the animal has been effective in  conferring it immunity and have the samples examined, in 
such manner as he may deem necessary.  
25. Resort to euthanasia for infected animals .—If the Veterinary Officer deems it necessary that an 
animal, which is infected with a scheduled disease, euthanasia has to be resorted to, for preventing the 
spread of the disease to other animals in the area or to protect public health if the disease is of zoonotic 
importance, he may, notwith
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND CONTAGIOUS DISEASES IN.pdf - page 9]
s in the area or to protect public health if the disease is of zoonotic 
importance, he may, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, by 
an order in writing, direct euthanasia of the animal and the carcass disposed of immediately to his 
satisfaction.  
26. Disposal of carcass. —Every person in possession of carcass (or any part thereof) of any animal, 
which, at the time of its death,  was infected with any scheduled disease or was suspected to have been 
infected, shall dispose it of in such manner as may be prescribed . 
27. Powers of Veterinary Officer and Veterinarian to hold post -mortem examination. —(1) 
Where the Veterinary Officer or any Veterinarian has reason to believe that the death of an animal has 
been caused by an infection of any scheduled disease, he may make or cause to be made a post -mortem 
examination of the animal and for that purpose he m ay cause the carcass of any such animal to be 
exhumed where required followed by proper disposal after necessary examination and post -mortem.  
(2) Every examination and post -mortem referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be conducted in such 
manner, and the r eport of post -mortem shall be in such form, as may be prescribed.  
28. Seizure an d removal of certain animals. —Where any animal which is infected or suspected to 
have been infected is found without any person claiming to be its owner, or where a valid order or 
direction given in relation to any such animal is not promptly complied with by the owner or other person 
in control of the animal, it shall be open to the Veterinary Officer or any other Competent Officer, to seize 
the animal and remove it to a place of isolation or segregation, as he may deem proper.  
CHAPTER V  
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES  
29. Enforcement of or ders and recovery of expenses .—(1) Where by any rule, notification, notice, 
requisition, order or direction made under this Act, any person is required to take any measure or to 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND CONTAGIOUS DISEASES IN.pdf - page 9]
quisition, order or direction made under this Act, any person is required to take any measure or to do 
anything— 
(a) in respect of any animal, carcass of any animal or other thin g in his custody or charge, the 
same shall be promptl y complied with by that person;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND CONTAGIOUS DISEASES IN.pdf - page 10]
10 
  (b) in case of any stray or ownerless animal, carcass of such animal or parts thereof, the same 
shall be promptly complied with by the municipality or Panchayat, as the c ase may be, at its cost.  
(2) If the measures as referred to in sub -section ( 1) are not taken within such time as may be allowed 
for the purpose, the authority issuing the notice, requisition, order or direction, may cause the measures to 
be taken at the c ost of the person or municipality or Panchayat, as the case may be, who or which was 
required to take the measures.  
(3) The costs of any measures taken under sub -section ( 2), shall be recoverable from the person or the 
municipality or Panchayat, as the case may be, concerned in the manner provided by the C ode of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)  for the recovery of fines imposed by a Court, as if such costs were a 
fine imposed by a Court.  
30. Village Officers, etc., to assist. —All Municipal, Panchayat  or Village Officers and all officers of 
the rural and dairy development, revenue, agriculture, animal husbandry and veterinary departments of 
the St ate Government, shall be bound — 
(a) to give immediate information to the Veterinary Officer and to the Vete rinarian having 
jurisdiction in the area regarding the prevalence of a scheduled disease amongst any animal or s pecies 
of animals, in the area;  
(b) to take all necessary measures to prevent the outbreak or spread of any scheduled disease; and  
(c) to assist  the Veterinary Officer and the Veterinarian in the discharge of their duties or in the 
exercise of their powers under this Act.  
31. Penalty for issuing vaccination certificate without authority or administering defective 
vaccine .—If any person iss ues a vaccination certificate, — 
(a) without authority or competence in that behalf, or  
(b) after administering the vaccine which is known to be defective in any manner,  
he shall be guilty of an offence punishable with a fine of five thousand rupees or
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND CONTAGIOUS DISEASES IN.pdf - page 10]
 in any manner,  
he shall be guilty of an offence punishable with a fine of five thousand rupees or in case of non -payment 
of fine with imprisonment which may extend to one month, and in the case of any subsequent offence, 
with fine of ten thousand rupees or with imprisonm ent which may extend to three months.  
32. Penalties .—Any person who contravenes the provisions of this Act or obstructs the Competent 
Officer in performing his duties shall be guilty of an offence punishable with fine which may extend to 
one thousand rupe es, and in case of failure to pay the penalty with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to one month; and in the case of any subsequent offence (whether under the same provision or any 
other provision of this Act except in case of sections 31 and 33) w ith a fine of two thousand rupees, or 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two months in case of non -payment of the penalty.  
33. Penalty for placing infected animal or carcass in river, etc .—Whoever places or causes or 
permits to be placed in any river, lake, canal or any other water body, the carcass or any part of the 
carcass of any animal which at the time of its death was known to be infected, shall be guilty of an 
offence and, on conviction, be punished, in the case of a first offence with  fine of two thousand rupees or 
with imprisonment of one month in case of non -payment of fine and in the case of subsequent conviction 
with a fine of five thousand rupees or imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months or with 
both.  
34. Offenc es by companies. —(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proc eeded and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND CONTAGIOUS DISEASES IN.pdf - page 10]
hall be liable to be proc eeded and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render such person liable to any punishment 
provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had 
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND CONTAGIOUS DISEASES IN.pdf - page 11]
11 
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a  company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(a)  “company ” means any body corporate and includes a co -operative society regi stered or 
deemed to be registered under any law for the time being in force, a firm or other association of 
individuals; and  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
CHAPTER VI  
PRECAUTIONARY MEASURES ON CAUSATIVE ORGANISM, ETC.  
35. Prevention of  escape of causative organism. —(1) In every institution, laboratory or clinic, 
engaged in the manufacture, testing or research, related to  vaccines, sera, diagnostics or chemotherapeutic 
drugs and aimed at the prevention or treatment of a ny scheduled disease, adequate precaut ionary 
measures shall be taken — 
(a) to ensure that the causative organism of any scheduled disease does not escape or otherwise 
get released;  
(b) to guard against any such escape or release; and  
(c) to warn and to protect everyone concerned in the event of any escape.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the tim e being in force, every animal — 
(a) used for the manufacture, testing or research as referred to sub -section ( 1), or 
(b) which is likely to carry or transmit any scheduled disease,  
shall be promptly administered euthanasia and disposed of by the person in charge of or having control of 
the institution, laboratory or clinic, as the case may be, referred to in that sub -section.  
(3) Every person who is in charge of or having cont
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND CONTAGIOUS DISEASES IN.pdf - page 11]
case may be, referred to in that sub -section.  
(3) Every person who is in charge of or having control of an institution, laboratory or clinic referred 
to in sub -section ( 1) comply with the provisions of sub -section ( 1) and sub -section ( 2); and in the event of 
non-compliance h e shall be guilty of an offence punishable with fine which may extend to twenty 
thousand rupees or imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with both, and in case the 
establishment is in commercial manufacturing of vaccines or medicine, a temporary suspensi on of licence 
up to a period of one year may also be imposed.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
36. Power to delegate. —The State Government may, by notification, delegate to any officer or 
authority subordinate to it, all or any of the powers conferred on it by or under this Act, except the powers 
to make rules under sub -section ( 2) of section 42.  
37. Officers and authorities to function su bject to Government control. —All officers and 
authorities under this Act shall exercise their powers and discharge their dut ies conferred or imposed on 
them by or under this Act, in accordance with such orders, not inconsistent with the provisions of this 
Act, as the Central Government or the State Governmen t may, from time to time, make.  
38. Power to amend the Schedule .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, add to, or 
omit from the Schedule any animal disease and the said disease shall, as from the date of the notification, 
be deemed to have been added to, or omitted from, the Schedule.  
(2) Every notification issued  under sub -section ( 1) shall, as soon as may be after it is issued, be laid 
before each House of Parliament.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND CONTAGIOUS DISEASES IN.pdf - page 12]
12 
 39. Power to issue directions .—The Central Government may, with the object of prevention, control 
and eradication of any infectious or contagious d isease of animals, issue such directions to the State 
Government or other authorities under this Act, from time to time, including directions for furnishing 
such returns and statistics on scheduled diseases, and vaccination, as it may deem fit and every su ch 
direction shall be complied with.  
40. Certain persons to be public servants. —Every Competent Officer, Director and Veterinary 
Officer, while exercising any power or performing any duty under this Act, shall be deemed to be a public 
servant within the m eaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) .  
41. Power to remove difficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or ex pedient for removing 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the date of 
commencement of this Act.  
 (2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid  before each 
House of Parliament.  
42. Power of Central Government to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, subject to 
the condition of previous publication, by notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this 
Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the form of vaccination certificate and the particulars which such certificate shall contain, 
under section 9;  
(b) the manner of disposal of carcass, under section 26;  
(c) the manner of conducting examination and post -mortem under sub -section ( 1) and the form of 
report of post -mortem u
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND CONTAGIOUS DISEASES IN.pdf - page 12]
cting examination and post -mortem under sub -section ( 1) and the form of 
report of post -mortem under sub -section ( 2) of section 27;  
(d) any other matter which may be prescribed or  in respect of which rules are required to be made 
by the Central Government.  
43. Power of St ate Government to make rules .—(1) The State Government may, by notification 
and with the prior approval of the Central Government, make rules for carrying out the  purposes of this 
Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the form of permit to be granted by the officer in charge of a Quarantine Camp, under                 
sub-section ( 4) of section 14;  
(b) the manner of inspection and the period of detention of an animal at a Check Post or at a 
Quarantine Camp for the adm inistration of compulsory vaccination and marking of animals and the 
form and manner of issue of entry permit, under sub -section ( 2) of section 15;  
(c) any other matter in respect of which rule is to be or may be made by the State Government.  
44. Laying of rules .—(1) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in  two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND CONTAGIOUS DISEASES IN.pdf - page 13]
13 
 be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule.  
(2) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before the State Legislature.  
45. Repeal and savings. —On the commencement of this Act — 
(i) The Glanders and Farcy Act, 1899  (13 o f 1899) ; 
(ii) The Dourine Act, 1910  (5 of 1910) ; and  
(iii) any other corresponding law of any State, so far as it is inconsistent with the provisions of 
this Act,  
shall stand repealed:  
Provided that nothing c ontained in this section shall — 
(a) affect the previous operatio n of any such provision of law or anything duly done or suffered 
thereunder;  
(b) affect any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under any such 
provision of law;  
(c) affect any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence committed 
against any such provision of law; or  
(d) affect any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, 
obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid; and every suc h investigation, legal 
proceeding or remedy may be continued, instituted or enforced, and any such penalty, forfeiture and 
punishment may be imposed, as if the aforesaid p rovisions of law had continued:  
Provided further that, anything done or any action ta ken under any such provision of law, including 
any notification, order, notice or receipt issued or declaration made, shall in so far as it is not inconsistent 
with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done, taken, issued or made under the 
corresponding provisions of this Act, and shall continue in force accordingly, unless and until superseded 
by anything done or any action taken under this Act.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND CONTAGIOUS DISEASES IN.pdf - page 14]
14 
  
THE SCHEDULE  
[See sections 2 ( o) and 38]  
(a) Multiple species diseases  
1. Anthrax.  
2. Aujeszky's dis ease.  
3. Bluetongue.  
4. Brucellosis.  
5. Crimean Congo haemorrhagic fever.  
6. Echinococcosis/hydatidosis.  
7. Foot and mouth disesase.  
8. Heartwater.  
9. Japanese encephalitis.  
10. Leptospirosis.  
11. New world screwworm ( Cochliomyia homini vorax ).  
12. Old world screwworm ( Chrysomya bezziana ).  
13. Paratuberculosis.  
14. Q fever.  
15. Rabies.  
16. Rift Valley fever.  
17. Rinderpest.  
18. Trichinellosis.  
19. Tularemia.  
 20. Vesicular stomatitis.  
21. West Nile fever.  
(b) Cattle diseases  
1. Bovine anaplasmosis.  
2. Bovine babesiosis.  
3. Bovine genital campylobacteriosis.  
4. Bovine spongiform encephalopathy.  
5. Bovine tuberculosis.  
6. Bovine viral diarrhoea.  
7. Contagious bovine pleuropneumonia.  
8. Enzootic bovine leucosis.  
9. Haemorrhagic septicaemia.  
10. Infectious bovine rhinotracheitis/infectious pustular vulvovaginitis.  
11. Lumpy skin disease.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND CONTAGIOUS DISEASES IN.pdf - page 15]
15 
 12. Malignant catarrhal fever.  
13. Theileriosis.  
14. Trichomonosis.  
15. Trypanosomosis.  
(c) Sheep and goat diseases  
1. Caprine arthritis/ence phalitis.  
2. Contagious agalactia.  
3. Contagious caprine pleuropneumonia.  
4. Enzootic abortion of ewes (ovine chlamydiosis).  
5. Maedi -visna.  
6. Nairobi sheep disease.  
7. Ovine epididymitis ( Brucella ovis ). 
8. Peste des petits ruminants.  
9. Salmonellosis (S. abortusovis).  
10. Scrapie.  
11. Sheep pox and goat pox.  
(d) Equine diseases  
1. African horse sickness.  
2. Contagious equine metritis.  
3. Dourine.  
4. Equine encephalomyelitis (Eastern).  
5. Equine encephalomyelitis (Western).  
6. Equine infe ctious anaemia.  
7. Equine Influenza.  
8. Equine piroplasmosis.  
9. Equine rhinopneumonitis.  
10. Equine viral arteritis.  
11. Glanders.  
12. Surra ( Trypanosoma evansi).  
13. Venezuelan equine encephalomyelitis.  
(e) Swine diseases  
1. African swine fever.  
2. Classical swine fever.  
3. Nipah virus encephalitis.  
4. Porcine cysticercosis.  
5. Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome.  
6. Swine vesicular disease.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND CONTAGIOUS DISEASES IN.pdf - page 16]
16 
 7. Transmissible gastroenteritis.  
(f) Avian diseases  
1. Avian chlamydiosis.  
2. Avian infectious bronchitis.  
3. Avian infectious laryngotracheitis.  
4. Avian mycoplasmosis ( M. gallisepticum ). 
5. Avian mycoplasmosis ( M. synoviae ). 
6. Duck virus hepatitis.  
7. Fowl cholera.  
8. Fowl typhoid.  
9. Highly pathogenic avian influenza and low pathogenic avian inf luenza in poultry.  
10. Infectious bursal disease (Gumboro disease).  
11. Marek's disease.  
12. Newcastle disease.  
13. Pullorum disease.  
14. Turkey rhinotracheitis.  
(g) Lagomorph diseases  
 1. Myxomatosis.  
 2. Rabbit haemorrhagic disease.  
(h) Bee diseases  
 1. Acarapisosis of honey bees.  
 2. American foulbrood of honey bees.  
3. European foulbrood of honey bees.  
4. Small hive bettle infestation ( Aethina tumida ). 
5. Tropilae laps infestation of honey bees.  
6. Varroosis of honey bees.  
1[(i) Fish diseases  
1. Ep izootic haematopoietic necrosis  
2. Inf ectious haematopoietic necrosis  
3. Spring viraemia of carp  (SVC)  
4. Viral haemorrhagic septicaemia  (VHS)  
5. Epizootic ulcerative syndrome  (EUS)  
6. Red seabream iridoviral disease (RSID)  
7. Koi herpesvirus disease (K HV) 
8. Grouper iridoviral disease  
9. Viral encephalopathy and retinopathy  
                                                           
1. Subs. by notification No. S.O. No. 996(E), dated 1st April, 2014.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND CONTAGIOUS DISEASES IN.pdf - page 17]
17 
 10. Enteric septicaemia of catfish  
11. Infection with Aeromonas hydrophila  
12. Infection with Edwardsiella tarda  
13. Infection with Vibrio anguillarum  
14. Infection with Flavobacterium columnare  
15. Infection with Streptococus iniae in Tilapia  
16. Infectious  pancreatic necrosis (cold water)  
17. Infection with Myxobolus  spp. 
18. Infection with Ichthyophthirius multifilis  
19. Infection with Saprolegnia parasitica  
20. Infestation with Argulus spp. 
21. Infestation with Dactylogyrus  spp. 
22. Infestation with Lernaea spp 
23. Infestation with Caligus  spp. 
(j) Mollusc diseases  
1. Infection with Bonamia exitiosa  
2. Infection with Perkinsus olseni  
3. Infection with abalone herpesvirus  
4. Infection with Xenohaliotis californiensis  
5. Infection with Marteilioides chungmuensis  
6. Acute viral necrosis (in scallops)  
7. Akoya oyster disease  
8. Infection with Bomania ostreae  
9. Infection with Marteilia regringens  
10. Infection with Perkinsus marinu s 
11. Infection with ostreid herpes virus  
(k) Crustacean diseases  
1. Taura syndrome  (TS). 
2. White spot disease  (WSD) . 
3. Yellowhead disease  (YHD) . 
4. Infectious hypodermal and haematopoietic necrosis (IHHN).   
5. Infectious myonecrosis (IMN).  
6. White tail  disease (MrNV).  
7. Necrotising hepatopancreatitis (NHP)  
8. Milky haemolymph disease of spiny lobster (Panulirus spp.)  
9. Monodon slow growth syndrome  
10. Acute hepatopancreatic necrosis syndrome (AHPNS)  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF INFECTIOUS AND CONTAGIOUS DISEASES IN.pdf - page 18]
18 
 11. Hepatopancreatic parvovirus  
12. Monodon baculovi rus 
13. Loose shell syndrome  
14. Soft shell syndrome  
15. Gaffkemia  
(l) Amphibian disease   
1. Infection with Ranavirus . 
2. Infection with Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis  
(m) Other disease  
1. Camel pox.  
2. Leishmaniosis. ] 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960  
______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_____  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Duties of persons having charge of animals.  
CHAPTER II  
ANIMAL  WELFARE  BOARD  OF INDIA   
4. Establishment of Animal  Welfare Board of India.  
5. Constitution of the Board.  
5A. Reconstitution of the Board.  
6. Term of office and conditions of service of members of the Board.  
7. Secretary and  other employees of the Board.  
8. Funds of the B oard.  
9. Functions of the Board .  
10. Power of Board to make regulations.  
CHAPTER III  
CRUELTY TO ANIMALS GENERALLY  
11. Treating animals cruelly.  
12. Penalty for practising phooka  or doom dev . 
13. Destruction of suffering animals.  
CHAPTER IV  
 EXPERIMENTATIO N ON ANIMALS  
14. Experiments on animals.  
15. Committee for control and supervision of experiments on animals.  
15A. Sub -committees.  
16. Staff of the Committee.  
17. Duties of the Committee and power of the Committee to make rules relating to experiments 
on animals.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.pdf - page 2]
2 
 SECTIONS  
18. Power of entry and inspection.  
19. Power to prohibit experiments on animals.  
20. Penalties.  
CHAPTER V  
PERFORMING ANIMALS  
21. “Exhibit ” and “train” defined.  
22. Restriction on exhibition and training of performing animals.  
23. Pr ocedure for registration.  
24. Power of court to prohibit or restrict exhibition and training of performing animals.  
25. Power to enter premises.  
26. Offences . 
27. Exemptions . 
 CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
28. Saving as respects manner of killing prescribed by  religion.  
29. Power of court to deprive person convicted of ownership of  animal.  
30. Presumption as to guilt in certain cases.  
31. Cognizability of offences.  
32. Power of search and seizure.  
33. Search warrants.  
34. General power of seizure for examinat ion. 
35. Treatment and care of animals.  
36. Limitation of prosecutions.  
37. Delegation of powers.  
38. Power to make rules.  
38A. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.  
39. Persons authorised under section 34 to be public servants.  
40. Indemnit y. 
41. Repeal of Act 11 of 1890.  
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.pdf - page 3]
3 
 THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS  ACT, 1960  
ACT NO. 59 OF 1960  
[26th December , 1960.]  
An Act to prevent the infliction of unnecessary pain or suffering on animals and for that 
purpose to amend the law relating to the  prevention of cruelty to animals.  
 BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: ―  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .―(1) This Act may be called the Prevention of 
Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India  1***.  
(3) It shall come into force on s uch date as the Central Govern ment m ay, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates2 may be appointed for different States and for the 
different provisions contained in this Act.   
2. Definitions .―In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, ― 
(a) “animal ” mean s any living creature other than a human being;  
                                                           
1. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule  
(w.e.f. 31 -10-2019).  
2. 1st April, 1961 , vide Notification No.S.O.823, dated the 1st April, 1961,  in respect of the State of Punj ab and the Union 
territory of Andaman and Nicobar Island , see Gazette of India 1961, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
1st September, 1961, vide Notification No. S.O.  2061, dated the 25th August, 1961,  for Chapters I and II in respect of the 
States of Assam, Andhra Pr adesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Kerala, Madras, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Mysore, Orissa, Uttar 
Pradesh and West Bengal and the Union territories  of Delhi, Manipur and Tripura,  see Gazette of India, 1961, Part II,               
sec. 3(ii).  
2nd October, 1961, vide Notific ation No. S.O. 2286, dated 15 th September 1961,  Chapters I and II in  respect of the  Union 
territory of Himachal Pradesh, Gazette of India, P art II, sec. 3( ii).  
26th January, 1962, vide Notification No. S.O. 21,
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.pdf - page 3]
adesh, Gazette of India, P art II, sec. 3( ii).  
26th January, 1962, vide Notification No. S.O. 21, dated 28th December, 1961, provis ions of Chapters I and II in respect 
of the State of Rajasthan, see Gazette of India, Part II, sec. 3( ii).  
15th July, 1963 , vide Notification No.  S.O. 2000, dated 11 th July, 1963, Chapter IV in  respect of the States of Assam, 
Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujara t, Kerala, Madras, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Mysore, Orissa, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh 
and West Bengal and in respect of the Union territories of Delhi, Himachal Pradesh, Manipur and Tripura, see Gazette of 
India, Part II, sec. 3 (ii).  
20th November, 1963, vide Notification No. S.O. 3160 , dated 29th  October, 1963, Chapters III and VI in respect of the 
States of Assam, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Kerala, Madras, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Mysore, Orissa, 
Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh and in  respect of  the Union territories of Delhi, Himachal Pradesh, Manipur and Tripura,       
see Gazette of India. Part II, sec. 3 (ii). 
24th May, 1977, vide Notif ication No. S.O. 1902, dated 24th May 1977 , provisions of Chapter V in respect of all the 
States and  the Unio n territories to which this Act extends (except the State of Jammu and Kashmir).  
This Act has been extended to  Goa, Daman and Diu by Reg. 11 of 1963, s. 3 and Sch. and comes into force in Pondicherry 
vide Reg. 7 of 1963, s. 3 and Sch.I (w.e.f. 1 -10-1963).  and brought into force in Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 
1963, s. 2 and Sch. I (w.e.f. 1 -7-1965) .  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.pdf - page 4]
4 
 1[(b) “Board ” means  the Board established under section 4, and as reconstituted from time to 
time under section 5A;]  
(c) “captive animal ” means any animal (not being a domestic animal) which is in captivit y or 
confinement, whether permanent or temporary, or which is subjected to any appliance or 
contrivance for the purpose of hindering or preventing its escape from captivity or confinement or 
which is pinioned or which is or appears to be maimed;  
(d) “dome stic animal ” means any animal which is tamed or which has been or is being 
sufficiently tamed to serve some purpose for the use of man or which, although it neither has been 
nor is being nor is intended to be so tamed, is or has become in fact wholly or pa rtly tamed;  
(e) “local authority ” means a municipal committee, district board or other authority for the 
time being invested by law with the control and administration of any matters within a specified 
local area;  
(f) “owner ”, used with reference to an a nimal, includes not only the owner but also any other 
person for the time being in possession or custody of the animal, whether with or without the 
consent of the owner;  
(g) “phooka ” or “doom dev ” includes any process of introducing air or any substance i nto the 
female organ of a milch animal with the object of drawing off from the animal any secretion of 
milk;  
(h) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(i) “street ” includes any way, road, lane, square, court, alley, passage or open space, whether a 
thoroughfare or not, to which the public have access.  
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 2. ―In section 2 of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960 
(Central Act 59 of 1960) (hereinafter referred to as the Principal Act ),― 
(i) after clause (a), the following shall be inserted, namely:―  
“(aa) “ Bulls race or Bullock cart race ” means any form of bulls race including race of Bullock 
cart as a traditional sports involving Bul
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.pdf - page 4]
” means any form of bulls race including race of Bullock 
cart as a traditional sports involving Bulls whether tied to cart with the help of wooden yok e or not (in 
whatever name called) normally held as a part of tradition and culture in the state on such days and 
places, as may be notified by the State Government.”; and  
(ii) after clause (d), the following shall be inserte d, namely:―  
“(dd) “Kambala”  means the traditional sports event involving Buffalo’s (male) race normally 
held as a part of tradition and culture in the state on such days and places, as may be notified by the 
State Government.”  
[Vide Karnataka Act 2 of 2018, s. 2].  
 
 
                                                           
1.  Subs.  by Act 26 of 1982, s.  2, for clause  (b) (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.pdf - page 5]
5 
 Maharashtra  
Amendmen t of section 2 of 59 of 1960 .―In section 2 of the Prevention of Cruelty to animals 
Act, 1960  (59 of 1960) , in its  application to the State of Maharashtra (hereinafter referred to as “the 
principal Act” ), after cla use ( b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely: ― 
“(bb) “bullock  cart race” means an event involving bulls or bullocks to conduct a race, whether 
tied to cart with the help of wooden yoke or not (by whatever name called), with or without a cartman 
with a view to follow tradition and culture on such days and in any Dist rict where it is being 
traditionally held at such places, as may be previously approved by the District Collector, and also 
known as “ Bailgada Sharyat ”, “Chhakadi ” and “ shankarpat ” in the State of Maharashtra;”.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act 45 of 2017, s. 2].  
3. Duties of persons having charge of animals .―It shall be the duty of every person having the 
care or charge of any animal to take all reasonable measures to ensure the well -being of such animal 
and to prevent the infliction upon such animal of unnecessary p ain or suffering.  
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 3. ―Section 3 of the principal Act, shall be re -numbered as sub -section 
(1) of that section and after sub -section (1) as so renumbered, the following sub -section shall be 
inserted, namely: ― 
“(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1) conduct of “Kambala” or “Bulls race 
or Bullock cart race” shall be permitted, subject to condition that no unnecessary pain or suffering is 
caused to the animals, by the person incharge of that anim al used to conduct “Kambala” or “Bulls 
race or Bullock cart race” as the case may be and subject to such other conditions as may be specified, 
by the State Government, by notification.”  
[Vide Karnataka Act 2 of 2018, s. 3].  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section  3 of 59 of 1960 .―Section 3  of the principal Act shall be re -numbered as 
sub-section ( 1)
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.pdf - page 5]
ection  3 of 59 of 1960 .―Section 3  of the principal Act shall be re -numbered as 
sub-section ( 1) thereof; and after sub -section ( 1) as so re -numbered , the following sub -sections shall 
be added, namely: ― 
“(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1), t he bullock cart race may be 
conducted with the prior permission of the Collector, subject to the condition that no pain or suffering 
as envisaged by or under the Act is cause d to the animal by any person or person in charge of the 
animal used  to conduct bu llock cart race and subject to such other conditions as may be prescribed by 
rules under section 38B by the State Government.  
(3) If any person or person in charge of the animals conducts bullock cart race in contravention of 
the conditions laid down in su b-section (2) or rules made thereunder relating to the bullock cart race 
or causes  pain or suffering to the animal, he shall be punished with fine which may extend upto rupees 
five lakhs or imprisonment for a term which may extend upto three years.”.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act 45 of 2017, s. 3].  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.pdf - page 6]
6 
 CHAPTER II  
 1[ANIMAL  WELFARE  BOARD  OF INDIA ] 
4. Establishment of Animals Welfare Board of India .―(1) For the promotion of animal 
welfare generally and for the purpose of protecting an imals from being subjected to unnecessary pain 
or suffering, in particular, there shall be established by the Central Government, as soon as may be 
after the commencemen t of this  Act, a Board to be called the 2[Animal Welfare Board of India].  
(2) The Board shall be a body cor porate having perpetual succes sion and a common seal with 
power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property and  may by its 
name sue and be sued.  
5. Constitution of the Board .―(1) The Board shall consist of the following persons, namely: ― 
(a) the Inspector -General of Forests, Government of India, ex officio ;  
(b) the Animal Husbandry Commissioner to the Government of India, ex officio ;  
3[(ba) two persons to represent respectiv ely the Ministries of the Central Government dealing 
with home affairs and education, to be appointed by the Central Government;  
(bb) one person to represent the Indian Board for Wild Life, to be appointed by the Central 
Government;  
(bc) three persons wh o, in the opinion of the Central Government, are or have been actively 
engaged in animal welfare work and are well -known humanitarians, to be nominated by the 
Central Government;]  
(c) one person to represent such association of veterinary practitioners as  in the opinion of the 
Central Government ought to be represented on the Board, to be elected by that association in the 
prescribed manner;  
(d) two persons to represent practitioners of modern and indigenous systems of medicine, to 
be nominated by the Cen tral Government;  
4[(e) one  person to represent each of such two municipal corporations as in the opinion of the 
Central Government ought to be represented on the Board, to be elected by each of the said 
corporations in the prescribed manner;]  
(f) o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.pdf - page 6]
ted on the Board, to be elected by each of the said 
corporations in the prescribed manner;]  
(f) one per son to represent each of such three organisations actively interested in animal 
welfare as in the opinion of the Central Government ought to be represented on the Board, to be 
chosen by each of the said organisations in the prescribed manner;  
(g) one pers on to represent each of such three societies dealing with prevention of cruelty to 
animals as in the opinion of the Central Government ought to be represented on the Board, to be 
chosen in the prescribed manner;  
(h) three persons to be nominated by the Ce ntral Government;  
(i) six members of Parliament, four to be elected by the House of the People (Lok Sabha) and 
two by the Council of States (Rajya Sabha).  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 26 of 1982, s. 3, for “Animal Welfare Board”  (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982) . 
2. Subs. by s.  4, ibid., for “Animal Welfare Board”  (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982) . 
3. Ins. by  s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982) . 
4. Subs. by  s. 5, ibid., for clause ( e) (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.pdf - page 7]
7 
 (2) Any of the persons referred to in clause ( a) or 1[clause ( b) or clause ( ba) or clause ( bb)] of 
sub-section ( 1) may depute any other person to attend any of the meetings of the Board.  
2[(3) The Central Government shall nominate one of the members of the Board to be its Chairman 
and another member of the Board to be its Vice -Chairman.]  
3[5A. Reconsti tution of the Board .―(1) In order that the Chairman and other members of the 
Board hold office till the same date and that their terms of office come to an end on the same date, the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, reconstit ute, as soon as may be after 
the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Amendment) Act, 1982 (26 of 1982)  comes into force, the 
Board.  
(2) The Board as reconstituted under sub -section ( 1) shall be reconstituted from time to time on 
the expiration of every thir d year from the date of its reconstitution under sub -section ( 1).  
(3) There  shall be included amongst the members of the Board reconstituted under                              
sub-section ( 1), all persons who immediately before the date on which such reco nstitution is to take 
effect, are members of the Board but such persons shall hold office only for the unexpired portion of 
the term for which they would have held office if such reconstitution had not been made and the 
vacancies arising as a result of the ir ceasing to be members of the Board shall be filled up as casual 
vacancies for the remaining period of the term of the Board as so reconstituted:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall apply in relation to any person who ceases to be a 
member o f the Board by virtue of the amendment made in sub -section ( 1) of section 5 by                         
sub-clause ( ii) of clause ( a) of section 5 of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Amendment)  
Act, 1982 (26 of 1982)].  
4[6. Term of office and conditio ns of service of members of the Board .―(1) The term for
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.pdf - page 7]
 1982)].  
4[6. Term of office and conditio ns of service of members of the Board .―(1) The term for 
which the Board may be reconstituted under section 5A shall be three years from the date of the 
reconstitution and the Chairman and other members of the Board as so reconstituted shall hold office 
till the expiry of the term for which the  Board has been so reconstituted.  
(2) Notwithstanding  anything contained in sub -section ( 1),―  
(a) the term of office of an ex officio  member shall continue so long as he holds the office by 
virtue of which he is such a member;  
(b) the term of office of a member elected or chosen under clause ( c), clause ( e), clause ( f), 
clause ( g), clause ( h) or clause ( i) of section 5 to represent any body of persons shall come to an 
end as soon as he ceases to be a member of the body which elected him or in respect of which he 
was chosen;  
(c) the term of office of a member appointed, nominated, elected or chosen to fill a casual 
vacancy shall continue for the remainder of the term of office of the member in whose place he is 
appointed, nominated, elected or chosen;  
(d) the Central Government may, at any time, remove for reasons to be recorded in writing a 
member from office after giving him a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the 
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 26 of 1982, s. 5, for “clause ( b)” (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  
2. Subs. b y s. 5, ibid., for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  
3. Ins. by s.  6, ibid. (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  
4. Subs. b y s.7, ibid.,  for section 6 (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.pdf - page 8]
8 
 proposed removal and any vacancy caused by such removal shall be treated as casual vacancy for 
the purpose of clause ( c).  
(3) The members of the Board shall receive such allowances, if any, as the Board may, subject to 
the previous approval of the Central Government, provide by regulations made in this behalf.  
(4) No act done or  proceeding taken by the Board shall be questioned on the ground merely of the 
existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution of, the Board and in particular, and without 
prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, during the period interveni ng between the expiry of the 
term for which the Board has been reconstituted under section 5A and its further reconstitution under 
that section, the ex officio  members of the Board shall discharge all the powers and functions of the 
Board.]  
7. Secretary an d other employees of the Board. ―(1) The Central Government shall appoint 
1*** the Secretary of the Board.  
(2) Subject to such rules as may  be made by the Central Govern ment in this behalf, the Board 
may appoint such number of other officers and employees as may be necessary for the exercise of its 
powers and the discharge of its functions and may determine the terms and conditions of service of 
such officers and other employees by regulations made by it with the previous approval of the Central 
Government.   
8. Funds of the Board .―The funds of the Board shall consist of grants made to it from time to 
time by the Government and of contributions, donations, subscriptions, bequests, gifts and the like 
made to it by any local authority or by any other person.  
9. Functions of the Board .―The functions of the Board shall be ― 
(a) to keep the law in force in India for the prevention of cruelty to animals under constant 
study and advise the Government on the amendments to be undertaken in any such law from time 
to time;  
(b) to advise the Cen tral Government on the making of rules under this Act with a view
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.pdf - page 8]
 
to time;  
(b) to advise the Cen tral Government on the making of rules under this Act with a view to 
preventing unnecessary pain or suffering to animals generally, and more particularly when they 
are being transported from one place to another or when they are used as performing animals or 
when they are kept in captivity or confinement;  
(c) to advise the Government or any local authority or other person on improvements in the 
design of vehicles so as to lessen the burden on draught animals;  
(d) to take all such steps as the Board may th ink fit for 2[amelioration of animals] by 
encouraging, or providing for, the construction of sheds, water -troughs and the like and by 
providing for v eterinary assistance to animals ;  
(e) to advise the Government or any local authority or other person in th e design of              
slaughter -houses or in the maintenance of slaughter -houses or in connection with slaughter of 
animals so that unnecessary pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, is eliminated in the 
pre-slaughter stages as far as possible, and animals are killed, wherever necessary, in as humane a 
manner as possible;  
                                                           
1. The words “ one of its officers to be” omitted by  Act 26 of 1982 , s. 8 (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  
2. Subs . by s. 9, ibid., for “ameliorating the  condition of beasts of burden” (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.pdf - page 9]
9 
 (f) to take all such steps as the Board may think fit to ensure that unwanted animals are 
destroyed by local authorities, whenever it is necessary to do so, either instantaneou sly or after 
being rendered insensible to pain or suffering ;  
(g) to encourage, by the grant of fin ancial assistance or otherwise 1[the formation or 
establishment of pinjrapoles , rescue homes, animal shelters, sanctuaries and the like] where 
animals and bi rds may find a shelter when they have become old and useless or when they need 
protection;  
(h) to co -operate with, and co -ordinate the work of, associations or bodies established for the 
purpose of preventing unnecessary pain or suffering to animals or fo r the protection of animals 
and birds;  
(i) to give financial and other assistance to animal welfare organisations functioning in any 
local area or to encourage the formation of animal welfare organisations in any local area which 
shall work under the gene ral supervision and guidance of the Board;  
(j) to advise the Government on matters relating to the medical care and attention which may 
be provided in animal, hospitals and to give  financial and other assistance to animal hospitals 
whenever the Board thin ks it necessary to do so;  
(k) to impart education in relation to the humane treatment of animals and to encourage the 
formation of public opinion against the infli ction of unnecessary pain or su ffering to animals and 
for the promotion of animal welfare by  means of lectures, books, posters, cinematog raphic 
exhibitions and the like ;  
(l) to advise the Government on any matter connected with animal welfare or the prevention 
of infliction of unnecessary pain or suffering on animals.  
10. Power of Board to make regulations .―The Board may, subject to the previous approval of 
the Central Government, make such regulations as it may think fit for the administration of its affairs 
and for carrying out its functions.  
CHAPTER III  
CRUELTY TO ANIMALS GEN
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.pdf - page 9]
istration of its affairs 
and for carrying out its functions.  
CHAPTER III  
CRUELTY TO ANIMALS GENERALLY  
11. Treating animals cr uelly .―(1) If any person ― 
(a) beats, kicks, over -rides, over -drives, over -loads, tortures or otherwise treats any animal so 
as to subject it to unnecessary pain or suffering or causes or, being the owner permits, any animal 
to be so treated; or  
(b) 2[empl oys in any work or labour or for any purpose any animal which, by reason of its age 
or any disease],  infirmity, wound, sore or other cause, is unfit to be so employed or, being the 
owner, permits any such unfit animal to be so employed;  
(c) wilfully and u nreasonably administers any injurious drug or injurious substance to 3[any 
animal] or wilfully and unreasonably causes or attempts to cause any such dr ug or substance to be 
taken by 3[any animal] ; or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 26 of 1982 , s. 9, for “the formation of pinjrapoles , sanctuaries and the like”  (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  
2. Subs. by  s.10, ibid., for certain words  (w.e.f.  30-7-1982).  
3. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for “ any domestic or captive animal”  (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.pdf - page 10]
10 
 (d) conveys or carries, whether in or upon any vehicle or not, any animal in such a manner or 
position as to subject it to unnecessary pain or suffering; or  
(e) keeps or confines any animal in any cage or other receptacle which does not measure 
sufficiently in height, length and breadth to permit the animal a  reasonable oppor tunity for 
movement; or  
(f) keeps for an unreasonable time any animal chained or tethered upon an unreasonably short 
or unreasonably heavy chain or cord ; or  
(g) being the owner, neglects to exercise or cause to be exercised reasonably an y dog 
habitually chained up or kept in close confinement; or  
(h) being the owner of 1[any animal] fails to provide such animal with sufficient food, drink 
or shelter; or  
(i) without reasonable cause, abandons any animal in circumstances which render it l ikely that 
it will suffer pain by reason of starvation or thirst; or  
(j) wilfully  permits any animal, of which he is the owner, to go at large in any street while the 
animal is affected with contagious or infectious disease or, without reasonable excuse p ermits any 
diseased or disabled animal, of which he is the owner , to die in any street ; or  
(k) offers for sale or, without reasonable cause,  has in his possession any animal which is 
suffering pain by reason of mutilation, starvation, thi rst, overcrowding  or other ill -treatment; or  
2[(l) multilates any animal or kills any animal (including stray dogs) by using the method of 
strychnine injections in the heart or in any other unnecessarily cruel manner; or]  
3[(m) solely with a view to providing entertainmen t— 
(i) confines or causes to be confined any animal (including tying of an animal as a bait in 
a tiger or other sanctuary) so as to make it an object of prey for any other animal; or  
(ii) incites any animal to fight or bait any other animal; or]  
(n) 4*** organises, keeps, uses or acts  in the management of, any place for animal 
fighting or for the purpose of b
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.pdf - page 10]
s, keeps, uses or acts  in the management of, any place for animal 
fighting or for the purpose of baiting any animal or permits or offers any place to be so used 
or receives money for the admission of any other person to any place kept or used for any 
such purposes; or  
(o) promotes or takes part in any shooting match or competition wherein animals are released 
from captivity for the purpose of such shooting;  
he shall be punishable, 5[in the case of a first offence, with fine which shall not be les s than ten rupees 
but w hich may extend to fifty  rupees and in the case of a second or subsequent offence committed 
within three years of the previous offence, with fine which shall not be less than twenty -five rupees 
but which may extend to one hundred rup ees or with imprisonment for a term which may exten d to 
three months, or with both ].  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 26 of 1982, s. 10,  for “any captive animal”  (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  
2. Subs. by s. 10,  ibid., for clause ( l) (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  
3. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for clause ( m)  (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  
4. The words “for the purposes of his business”  omitted by  s.10, ibid. (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  
5. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for certain words  (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.pdf - page 11]
11 
 (2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), an owner shall be deemed to have committed an offence if 
he has failed to exercise reasonable care and supervision with a view to  the prevention of such 
offence:  
Provided that where an owner is convicted of permitting cruelty by reason only of having failed to 
exercise such care and supervision, he shall not be liable to imprisonment without the option of a fine.  
(3) Nothing in th is section shall apply to ―  
(a) the dehorning of cattle, or the castration or branding or nose -roping of any animal, in the 
prescribed manner; or  
(b) the destruction of st ray dogs in lethal chambers or 1[by such othe r methods as may be 
prescribed] ; or  
(c) the extermination or destruction of any animal under the authority of any law for the time 
being in force; or  
(d) any matter dealt with in Chapter IV; or  
(e) the commission or omission of any act in the course of the destruction or the preparation 
for destruction of any animal as food for mankind unless such destruction or preparation was 
accompanied by the infliction of unnecessary pain or suffering . 
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 11. ―In section 11 of the  principal Act, in sub -section (3), after clause 
(e), the following shall be inserted, namely: ― 
“(f) the conduct of “Kambala” with a view to follow and promote  tradition and culture  and ens ure 
preservation of native breed of buffalos a s also their safety, security and wellbeing.  
(g) the conduct of “Bulls race or Bullock cart race” with a view to follow and promote tradition 
and culture and ensure preservation of native breed of cattle as also their safety, security and 
wellbeing.”  
[Vide Karnataka Act 2 of 2018, s. 4].  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 11 of 59 of 1960 .―In section 11  of the principal  Act, in sub -section (3), 
after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely: ― 
“(c-1) the conduct  of bullock cart race in accordance with the provisions o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.pdf - page 11]
be inserted, namely: ― 
“(c-1) the conduct  of bullock cart race in accordance with the provisions of sub -section (2) of 
section 3 or participation therein w ith a view to follow and promote tradition and culture and ensure 
preservation of native breeds of bulls as also their purity, safety, security and well being; or”.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act 45 of 2017, s. 4].  
12. Penalty  for practising phooka  or doom dev .―If any person performs upon any cow or other 
milch animal the operation called phooka or 2[doom dev  or any other operation (including injection of 
any substance) to improve lactation which is injurious to the health of the animal] or permits such 
operation be ing performed upon any such animal in his possession or under his control, he shall be 
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 26 of 1982, s. 10 , for “by other metho ds with a minimum of suffering” (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  
2. Subs. by  s. 11,  ibid., for “doom dev ” (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.pdf - page 12]
12 
 punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to two years, or with both, and the animal on which the op eration was performed 
shall be forfeited to the Government.  
13. Destruction of suffering animals .―(1) Where the owner of an animal is convicted of an 
offence under section 11, it shall be lawful for the court, if the court is satisfied that it would be cru el 
to keep the animal alive, to direct that the animal be destroyed and to assign the animal to any suitable 
person for that purpose, and the person to whom such animal is so assigned shall, as soon as possible, 
destroy such animal or cause such animal to be destroyed in his presence without unnecessary 
suffering, and any reasonable expense incurred in destroying the animal may be ordered by the court 
to be recovered from the owner as if it were a fine:  
Provided that unless the owner assents thereto, no ord er shall be made under this section except 
upon the evidence of a veterinary officer in charge of the area.  
(2) When any magistrate, commissioner of police or district superintendent of police has reason to 
believe that an offence under section 11 has bee n committed in respect of any animal, he may direct 
the immediate destruction of the animal, if in his opinion, it would be cruel to keep the animal alive.  
(3) Any police officer above the rank of a constable or any person authorised by the State 
Governme nt in this behalf who finds any animal so diseased or so severely injured or in such a 
physical condition that in his opinion it cannot be removed without cruelty, may, if the owner is 
absent or refuses his consent to the destruction of the animal, forthwi th summon the veterinary officer 
in charge of the area in which the animal is found, and if the veterinary office certifies that the animal 
is mortally injured or so severely injured or in such a physical condition that it  would be cruel to keep 
it ali ve, th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.pdf - page 12]
r so severely injured or in such a physical condition that it  would be cruel to keep 
it ali ve, the police officer or the person  authorised, as the case may be  may, after obtaining orders 
from a magistrate, destroy the animal injur ed or cause it to be destroyed 1[in such manner as may be 
prescribed].  
(4) No appeal shall lie from any order of a magis trate for the destruction of an animal.  
CHAPTER IV  
 EXPERIMENTATION ON ANIMALS  
14. Experiments on animals .―Nothing contained in this Act shall render unlawful the 
performance of experiments (including experiments involving operations) on animals for the purpose 
of advancement by new discovery of physiological knowledge or of knowledge which will be useful 
for saving or for prolonging life or alleviating suffering or for combating any disease, whether of 
human beings, animals or plants.  
15. Committee  for control and supervision of experiments on animals .―(1) If at any time, on 
the advice of the Board, the Centra l Government is of opinion that it is necessary so to do for the 
purpose of controlling and supervising experiments on animals, it may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, constitute a Committee consisting of such number of officials and non -officials , as it may 
think fit to appoint thereto.  
(2) The Central  Government shall nominate one of the members of the Committee to be its 
Chairman.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 26 of 1982, s.12 (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.pdf - page 13]
13 
 (3) The Committee shall have power to regulate its own procedure in relation to the performance 
of its duties.  
(4) The funds of the Committee shall consist of grants made to it from time to time by the 
Government and of contributions, donations, subscriptions, bequests, gifts and the like made to it by 
any person.  
1[15A. Sub -committees .―(1) The Committee may constitu te as many sub -committees as it 
thinks fit for exercising any power or discharging any duty of the Committee or for inquiring into or 
reporting and advising on any matter which the Committee may refer.  
(2) A sub -committee shall consist exclusively of the members of the Committee.]  
16. Staff of the Committee .―Subject to the control of the Central Government, the Committee 
may appoint such number of officers and other employees as may be necessary to enable it to exercise 
its powers and perform its duties, and may determine the remuneration and other terms and conditions 
of service of such officers and other employees.  
17. Duties of the Committee and power of the Committee to make rules relating to 
experiments on animals. ―(1) It shall be the duty of the Committee to take all such measures as may 
be necessary to ensure that animals are not subjected to unnecessary pain or suffering before, during 
or after the performance of experiments on them, and for that purpose it may, by notification in the 
Gazette of India and subject to the condition of previous publication , make such rules as it may think 
fit in relation to the conduct of such experiments.  
2[(1A) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules 
may provide for the following matters, namely: ― 
(a) the registration of persons or institutions carrying on experiments on animals;  
(b) the reports and other information which shall be for warded to the Committee by persons 
and institutions carrying on experiments on animals.]  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.pdf - page 13]
 institutions carrying on experiments on animals.]  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, rules made by the 
Committee shall be designed to secure the following objects, namely: ―  
(a) that in cases where experiments are performed in any institution, the responsibility 
therefor is placed  on the person in charge of the institution and that, in cases where experiments 
are performed outside an institution by individuals, the individuals are qualified in that behalf and 
the experiments are perform ed on their full responsibility ;  
(b) that  experiments are performed with due care and humanity, and that as far as possible 
experiments involving operations are performed under the influence of some anaesthetic of 
sufficient power to prevent the animals feeling pain;  
(c) that animals which, in the c ourse of experiments under the influence of anesthetics, are so 
injured that their recovery would involve serious suffering, are ordinarily destroyed while still 
insensible ; 
 (d) that  experiments on animals are avoided w herever it is possible to do so ; as for example, 
in medical schools, hospitals, colleges and the like, if other teaching devices such as books, 
models, films and the like may equally suffice;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 26 of 1982, s.  13 (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  
2. Ins. by s.  14, ibid. (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982) . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.pdf - page 14]
14 
 (e) that experiments on larger animals are avoided when it is possible to achieve the same 
results by experiments upon small laboratory animals like guinea -pigs, rabbits, frogs and rats;  
(f) that, as far as possible, experiments are not performed merely for the purpose of acquiring 
manual skill;  
(g) that animals intended for the performance of experim ents are properly looked after both 
before and after experiments;  
(h) that suitable records are maintained with respect to experiments performed on animals.  
(3) In making any rules under this section, the Committee shall be guided by such directions as 
the Central Government (consistently with the objects for which the Committee is set up) may give to 
it, and the Central Government is hereby authorised to give such directions.  
(4) All rules made by  the Committee shall be binding on all individuals perfor ming experiments 
outside institutions and on persons in charge of institutions in which experiments are performed.  
18. Power of entry and inspection .―For the purpose of ensuring that the rules made by it are 
being complied with, the Committee may authorise any of its officers or any other person in writing to 
inspect any institution or place where experiments are being carried on and report to it as a result of 
such inspection, and any officer or person so authorised may ― 
(a) enter at any time considered reasonable by him and inspect any institution or place in 
which experiments on animals are being carried on; and  
(b) require any person to produce any  record kept by him with respect to experiments on 
animals.  
19. Power to prohibit experiments on animals .―If the Committee is satisfied, on the report of 
any officer or other person made to it as a result of any inspection under section 18 or otherwise, th at 
the rules made by it under section 17 are not being complied with by any person or institution 
carrying on experiments on animals, the Committee may, after giving an opportun
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.pdf - page 14]
rson or institution 
carrying on experiments on animals, the Committee may, after giving an opportunity to the person or 
institution of being heard in the matter, by order, prohib it the person or institution from carrying on 
any such experiments either for a specified period or indefinitely, or may allow the person or 
institution to carry on such experiments subject to such special conditions as the Committee may think 
fit to impos e. 
20. Penalties. ―If any person ― 
(a) contravenes any order made by  the Committee under section 19 ; or  
(b) commits a breach of any condition imposed by t he Committee under that section ;  
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred rupe es, and, when the 
contravention or breach of condition has taken place in any institution, the person in charge of the 
institution shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be punishable accordingly.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.pdf - page 15]
15 
 CHAPTER V  
PERFORMING ANIMALS  
21. “Exhibit ” and “train ” defined .―In this Chapter, “exhibit ” means exhibit at any 
entertainment to which the public are admitted throu gh sale of tickets and “train” means train for the 
purpose of any such ex hibition, and the expressions “exhibitor ” and “trainer ” have respectively the 
corresponding meanings.  
22. Restriction on exhibition and training of performing animals .―No person shall exhibit or 
train― 
 (i) any performing animal unless he is registered in accordance with the provisions of this 
Chapter;  
(ii) as a performing animal, any animal which the Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, specify as an animal which shall not be exhibited or trained as a performing 
animal.  
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 22.― In section 22  of the principal Act, a t the end, the following proviso 
shall be inserted, namely: ― 
“Provided that  nothing contained in this section shall apply to conduct of “Kambala” or “Bulls 
race or Bullock cart race” as the case may be.”  
[Vide Karnataka Act 2 of 2018, s. 5].  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 22 of 59 of 1960 .―In section 22 of the principal Act, the following 
proviso shall be added, namely:―  
“Provided that, nothing contained in this section shall apply to the conduct of bullock cart race in 
accordance with the provisions of s ub-section (2) of section 3.”.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act 45 of 2017, s. 5].  
23. Procedure for registration .―(1) Every person desirous of exhibiting or training any 
performing animal shall, on making an application in the prescribed form to the prescribed autho rity 
and on payment of the prescribed fee, be registered under this Act unless he is a person who, by 
reason of an order made by the court under this Chapter, is not entitled to be so registered.  
(2) An application for registration under this Chapter shal l contain such particulars as to the 
animals and as to the general nature of t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.pdf - page 15]
er this Chapter shal l contain such particulars as to the 
animals and as to the general nature of the performances in which the animals are to be exhibited or 
for which they are to be trained as ma y be prescribed, and the parti culars so given shall be entered in 
the register m aintained by the prescribed authority.  
(3) The prescribed authority shall give to every person whose name appears on the register kept 
by them, a  certificate of registra tion in the prescribed form containing the particulars entered in the 
register.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.pdf - page 16]
16 
 (4) Every register kept under this Chapter shall at all reasonable times be open for inspection on 
payment of the prescribed fee, and any person shall, on payment of the prescribed fee, be entitled to 
obtain copies thereof or make extracts therefrom.  
(5) Any p erson whose name is entered in the register shall, subject to the provisions of any order 
made under this Act by any court, be entitled, on making an application for the purpose, to have the 
particulars entered in the register with respect to him varied, a nd where any such particulars are so 
varied, the existing certificate shall be cancelled and a new certificate issued.  
24. Power of court to prohibit or restrict exhibition and training of performing 
animals .―(1) Where it is proved to the satisfaction of any magistrate on a complaint made by a 
police officer  or an officer authorised in writing by the prescribed authority referred to in section 23, 
that the training or exhibition of any performing animal has be en accompanied by unnecessary pain or 
suffering and should be prohibited or allowed only subject to conditions,  the court may make an order 
against the person in respect of whom the complaint  is made, prohi biting the training or exhibition or 
imposing such  conditions in rela tion thereto, as may be specified by the order.  
(2) Any court by which an order is made under this section shall cause a copy of the order to be 
sent, as soon as may be after the order is made, to the prescribed authority by which the p erson against 
whom the order is made is registered, and shall cause the particulars of the order to be endorsed upon 
the certificate held by that person, and that person shall produce his certificate on being so required by 
the court for the purposes of en dorsement, and the prescribed authority to which a copy of an order is 
sent under this section shall enter the particulars of the order in that register.  
25. Power to enter premises .―(1) Any person authorised in
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.pdf - page 16]
ticulars of the order in that register.  
25. Power to enter premises .―(1) Any person authorised in writing by the prescribed authority 
referred to in section 23 and any police officer not below the rank of a sub -inspector may ― 
(a) enter at all reasonable times and inspect any premises in which any performing animals 
are bei ng trained or exhibited or kept for training or exhibition, and any such animals found 
therein; and  
(b) require any person who, he has reason to believe, is a trainer or exhibitor of performing 
animals to produce his certificate of registration.  
(2) No pe rson or police officer referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be entitled under this section to 
go on or behind the stage during a public performance of performing animals.  
26. Offences .―If any person ― 
(a) not being registered under this Chapter, exhibits or trains a ny performing animal;  or 
(b) being registered under this Act, exhibits or trains any performing animal with respect to 
which, or in a manner with respect to which, he is not r egistered; or  
(c) exhibits or trains as a performing animal, any animal which is not to be used for the 
purpose by reason of a notification issued under  clause ( ii) of section 22 ; or 
(d) obstructs or wilfully delays any person or police officer referred to  in section 25 in the 
exercise of powers under this Act as to entry and inspecti on; or 
(e) conceals any animal with a view t o avoiding such inspection ; or 
(f) being a person registered under this Act, on being duly required in pursuance of th is Act to 
produce his certi ficate under this Act, fails without reasonable excuse so to  do; or  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.pdf - page 17]
17 
 (g) applies to be registered under this Act when n ot entitled to be so registered ; 
he shall be punishable on conviction with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or w ith 
imprisonment which may extend to three months, or with both.  
27. Exemptions .―Nothing contained in this Chapter shall apply to ― 
(a) the training of animals for bona fide  military or police purposes or the exhibitio n of any 
animals so trained; or  
(b) any animals kept in any zoological garden or by any society or association which ha s for 
its principal  object the exhibition of animals for educational or scientific purposes.  
 
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Karnataka  
Amendment of section 27 .―In section 27 of the principal Act, after clause (b), the following 
shall be inserted, namely:―  
“(c)” the cond uct of “Kambala” with a view to follow and promote tradition and culture and 
ensure survival and continuance of native breeds of buffaloes.  
(d) the conduct of “Bulls race or Bullock cart race” with a view to follow and promote tradition 
and culture and ens ure survival and continuance of native breeds of cattle.”  
[Vide Karnataka Act 2 of 2018, s. 6].  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 27 of 59 of 1960 .―In section 27 of the principal Act,  after clause ( a), the 
following clause shall be inserted, namely:―  
“(a-1) the conduct of bullock cart race in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 3, with a view to follow and promote tradition a nd culture and ensure survival and 
continuance of native breeds of bulls; or”.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act 45 of 2017, s. 6].  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
28. Saving as respects manner of killing prescribed by religion .―Nothing contained in this 
Act shall render it  an offence to kill any animal in a manner required by the religion of any 
community.  
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Karnataka  
Insertion of new section 28A .―After section 28 of the principal Act, the following shall be 
inserted, namely:―  
“28A.  Savings in
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.pdf - page 17]
fter section 28 of the principal Act, the following shall be 
inserted, namely:―  
“28A.  Savings in respect of “Kam bala” or “Bulls race or Bullock cart race”. ―Nothing 
contained in this Act, shall apply to “Kambala” or “Bulls race or Bullock cart race” conducted to 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.pdf - page 18]
18 
 follow and promote tradition and culture and such conduct of “Kambala” or “Bulls race or Bullock 
cart race ” shall not be an offence under this Act.”  
[Vide Karnataka Act 2 of 2018, s. 7].  
Maharashtra  
Insertion of section 28A in 59 of 1960 .―After section 28 of the principal Act, the following 
section shall be inserted, namely:―  
“28A. Saving in respect of bullock  cart race .―Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to the 
bullock cart  race conducted in accordance with the provisions or sub -section (2) of section 3 to follow 
and promote tradition and culture and such conduct shall not be an offence under this Act.” . 
[Vide Maharashtra Act 45 of 2017, s. 7].  
29. Power of court to deprive person convicted of ownership of animal .―(1) If the owner of 
any animal is found guilty of any offence under this Act, the court, upon his conviction thereof, may, 
if it thinks fit, i n addition to any other punishment, make an order that the animal with respect to 
which the offence was committed shall be forfeited to Government and may, further, make such order 
as to the disposal of the animal as it thinks fit under the circumstances.  
(2) No order under sub -section ( 1) shall be made unless it is shown by evidence as to a previous 
conviction under this Act or as to the character of the owner or otherwise as to the treatment of the 
animal that the animal, it left with the owner,  is likely  to be exposed to further cruelty.  
(3) Without prejudice to t he provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), the court may also order that 
a person convicted of an offe nce under this Act shall, either  permanently or during such period as is 
fixed by the order,  be prohibited from having the custody of any animal of any kind whatsoever, or, as 
the court thinks fit, of any animal of any kind or species specified in the order.  
(4) No order under sub -section ( 3) shall be made unless ― 
(a) it is shown  by evidence as to a previous conviction or as to the charac
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.pdf - page 18]
shall be made unless ― 
(a) it is shown  by evidence as to a previous conviction or as to the character of the said person 
or otherwise as to the treatment of the animal in relation to which he has been convicted that an 
animal in the custody of the said person is likely to be e xposed to cruelty ; 
(b) it is stated in the complaint upon which the conviction was made that it is the intention of 
the complainant upon the conviction of the accused to request that an order be made as aforesaid; 
and 
(c) the offence for which the convicti on was made was committed in an area in which under 
the law for the time being in force a licence is necessary for the keeping of any such animal as 
that in respect of which the conviction was made.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in  any law for the time being in force, any 
person in respect of whom an order is made under sub -section ( 3) shall have no right to the custody of 
any animal contrary to the provisions of the order, and if he contravenes the provisions of any order, 
he shall  be punishable with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees, or with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to three months, or with both.  
(6) Any court which has made an order under sub -section ( 3) may at any time, either on its own 
motion or on app lication made to it in this behalf, rescind or modify such order.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.pdf - page 19]
19 
 30. Presumption as to guilt in certain cases .―If any person is charged with the offence of 
killing a goat, cow or its progeny contrary to the provisions of clause ( l) of sub -section ( 1) of              
section 11, and it is proved that such person had in his possession, at the time the offence is alleged to 
have been committed, the skin of any such animal as is referred to in this section with any part of the 
skin of the head attached thereto , it shall be presumed until the contrary is proved that such animal 
was killed in a cruel manner.  
31. Cognizability of offences .―Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898), an offence punishable under clause ( l), clause ( n) or clause ( o) of                 
sub-section ( 1) of section 11 or under section 12 shall be a cognizable offence wit hin the meaning of 
that Code.  
32. Power of search and seizure .―(1) If a police officer not below the rank of sub -inspector or 
any person authorised by the State Government in this behalf has reason to believe that an offence 
under clause ( l) of sub -section  (1) of section 11 in respect of any such animal as is referred to in 
section 30 is being, or is about to be, or has been, committed in any place, or that any person has in 
his possession the skin of any such animal with any part of the skin of the head at tached thereto, he 
may enter and search such place or any place in which he has reason to believe any such skin to be, 
and may seize such skin or any article or thing used or intended to be used in the commission of such 
offence.  
(2) If a police officer no t below the rank of sub -inspector, or any person authorised by the State 
Government in this behalf, has re ason to believe that phooka  or 1[doom dev  or any other operation of 
the nature referred to in section 12] has just been, or is being, performed on any  animal within the 
limits of his jurisdiction, he may enter any place in which he has reason
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.pdf - page 19]
on any  animal within the 
limits of his jurisdiction, he may enter any place in which he has reason to believe such animal to be, 
and may seize the animal and produce it for examination by the veterinary officer in charge of the area 
in which the animal is seized . 
33. Search warrants .―(1) If a magistrate of the first or second class or a presidency magistrate 
or a sub -divisional magistrate or a commissioner of police or district superintendent of police, upon 
information in writing, and after such inquiry as he th inks necessary, has reason to believe that an 
offence under this Act is being, or is about to be, or has been committed in any place, he may either 
himself enter and search or by his warrant authorise any police officer not below the rank of                    
sub-inspector to enter and search the place.  
(2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), relating to searches shall, 
so far as those provisions can be made applicable, apply to searches under this Act.  
34. General power of seizure for examination .―Any police officer above the rank of a 
constable or any person authorised by the State Government in this behalf, who has reason to believe 
that an offence against this Act has been or is being, committed in respect of any animal, may, if in his 
opinion the circumstances so require, seize the animal and produce the same for examination by the 
nearest magistrate or by such veterinary officer as may be prescribed, and such police officer or 
authorised person may, when seizing the anim al, require the person in charge thereof to accompany it 
to the place of examination.  
35. Treatment and care of animals .―(1) The State Government may, by general or special 
order, appoint infirmaries for the treatment and care of animals in respect of whic h offences against 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1982, s.15 , for “ doom dev ” (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.pdf - page 19]
         
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1982, s.15 , for “ doom dev ” (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.pdf - page 20]
20 
 this Act have been committed, and may authorise the detention therein of any animal pending its 
production before a magistrate.  
(2) The magistrate before whom a prosecution for an offence against this Act has been instituted 
may direct t hat the animal concerned shall be treated and cared for in an infirmary, until it is fit to 
perform its usual work or is otherwise fit for discharge, or that it shall be sent to a pinjrapole , or, if the 
veterinary officer in charge of the area in which the  animal is found or such other veterinary officer as 
may be authorised in this behalf by rules made under this Act certifies that it is incurable or cannot be 
removed without cruelty, that it shall be destroyed.  
(3) An animal sent for care and treatment to  an infirmary shall not, unless the magistrate directs 
that it shall be sent to a pinjrapole  or that it shall be destroyed, be released from such place except 
upon a certificate of its fitness for discharge issued by the veterinary officer in charge of the  area in 
which the infirmary is situated or such other veterinary officer as may be authorised in this behalf by 
rules made under this Act.  
(4) The cost of transporting the animal to an infirmary or pinjrapole , and of its maintenance and 
treatment in an in firmary, shall be payable by the owner of the animal in accordance with a scale of 
rates to be prescribed by the district magistrate, or, in presidency -towns, by the commissioner of 
police:  
Provided that when the magistrate so orders on account of the pove rty of the owner of the animal 
no charge shall be payable for the treatment of the animal.  
(5) Any amount, payable by an  owner of an animal under sub -section ( 4) may be recovered in the 
same manner as an arrear of land revenue.  
(6) If the owner refuses or neglects to remove the animal within such time as a magistrate may 
specify, the magistrate may direct that the animal be sold and that the proceeds of the sale be applied 
to the pa
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.pdf - page 20]
agistrate may direct that the animal be sold and that the proceeds of the sale be applied 
to the payment of such cost.  
(7) The surplus , if any, of the proceeds of such sale sh all, on application made by the owner 
within two months from the date of the sale, be paid to him.  
36. Limitation of prosecutions .―A prosecution for an offence against this Act shall not be 
instituted after the expiration of three months from the date of t he commission of the offence.  
37. Delegation of powers .―The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, direct that all or any of the powers exercisable by it under this Act, may, subject to such 
conditions as it may think fit to impos e, be also exercisable by any State Government.  
38. Power to make rules .―(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, and subject to the condition of previous publication, make rules to carry out the purposes of 
this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the Central 
Government may make rules providing for all or any of the following matters, namely: ― 
(a) the 1*** conditions of service of members of the Board, the allowances payab le to them 
and the manner in which they may exercise their powers and discharge their functions;  
2[(aa) the manner in which the persons to represent municipal corporations are to be elected 
under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) of section 5;]  
                                                           
1. The words “terms and” omitted by Act 26 of 1982, s.16  (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  
2.  Ins. by s.16, ibid.  (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.pdf - page 21]
21 
 (b) the maximum  load (including any load occasioned by the weight of passengers) to be 
carried or drawn by any animal;  
(c) the conditions to be ob served for preventing the over -crowding of animal;  
(d) the period during which, and the hours between which, any class of ani mals shall not be 
used for draught purposes;  
(e) prohibiting the use of any bit or harnes s involving cruelty  to animals ; 
 1[(ea) the other methods of destruction of stray dogs referred to in clause ( b) of                     
sub-section ( 3) of section 11;  
(eb) the methods by which any animal which cannot be removed without cruelty may be 
destroyed under sub -section ( 3) of section 13;]  
(f) requiring persons carrying on the business of a farrier to be licensed and registered by such 
authority as may be prescr ibed an d levying a fee for the purpose ; 
(g) the precautions to be taken in the capture of animals for purposes of sale, export or for any 
other purpose, and the different appliances or devices that ma y alone be used for the purpose ; and 
the licensing of su ch capture and the levying of fees for such licences;  
(h) the precautions to be taken in the transport of animals, whether by rail, road, inland 
waterway, sea or air and the manner in which and the cages or other receptacles in which they 
may be so transpo rted.  
(i) requiring persons owning or in charge of premises in which animals are kept or milked to 
register such premises, to comply with such conditions as may be laid down in relation to the 
boundary walls or surroundings of such premises, to permit the ir inspection for the purpose of 
ascertaining whether any offence under this Act is being, or has been, committed therein, and to 
expose in such  premises copies of section 12 in a language or languages commo nly understood in 
the locality;  
(j) the form in w hich applications for registration under Chapter V may be made, the 
particulars to be contained therein, the fees payable for such reg
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.pdf - page 21]
under Chapter V may be made, the 
particulars to be contained therein, the fees payable for such registration and the authorities to 
whom  such applications may be made;  
 1[(ja) the fees which may be charged by the Committe e constituted under section 15 for the 
registration of persons or institutions carrying on experiments on animals or f or any other 
purpose;]  
(k) the purposes to which fines realised under this Act may be applied, including such 
purposes as the maintenance of infirmaries, pinjra poles  and veterinary hospitals;  
(l) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) If any person contravenes, or abets the contravention of, any rules made under this section, he 
shall be punishable with fine which may e xtend to one hundred rupees, or with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to three months, or with both.  
2*   *   *   *   * 
3[38A. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament .―Every rule made by the Central 
Government or by the Committee consti tuted under section 15 and every regulation made by the 
Board shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in 
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 26 of 1982, s.16 (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  
2. Sub-section (4) omitted by s.16, ibid. (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  
3.  Ins. by s.  17, ibid. (w.e.f. 30 -7-1982).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.pdf - page 22]
22 
 session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or m ore 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation 
as the case may be, or both Houses agree that t he rule or regulation, as the case may be, should not be 
made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, 
as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment, shall be without pre judice 
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.]  
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Maharashtra  
Insertion of section 38B in 59 of 1960 .―After section 38A of the principal Act, the following 
section shall be inserted, namely:―  
“38B. Power of  State Government to make rules .―(1) The State Government may, subject to 
the condition of previous publication, by  notification in the  Official Gazette , make the rules, not 
inconsistent with the rules made by the Central Government, if any, for carrying i nto effect the 
provisions of sub -section (2) of section 3 of the Act.  
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be, after it is made, before 
each House of the State Legislature, while it is in session for a total period of thirty  days, which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session in which it is so laid or the session  immediately following, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in rule or both Houses ag ree that the rule should not be made, and notify such decision  in 
the Official Gazette , the rule shall, from the date of publication of such notification , have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any  such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960.pdf - page 22]
case may be; so, however, that any  such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done or omitted to be 
done under that rule.”.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act 45 of 2017, s. 8].  
39. Persons authorised under section 34 to be public servants .―Every pe rson authorised by 
the State Government under section 34 shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of 
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
40. Indemnity .―No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any pers on who 
is, or who is deemed to be, a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code 
(45 of 1860) respect of anything in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
41. Repeal of Act 11 of 1890 .―Where in pursuance of a n otification under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 1 any provision of this Act comes into force in any State, any provision of the Prevention of 
Cruelty to Animals Act, 1890  (11 of 1890) , which corresponds to the provision so coming into force, 
shall thereupon s tand repealed.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’  RIGHTS  ACT, 2001  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTION S 
_________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, exten t and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
PROTECTION OF PLANT  VARIETIES AND FARMERS ’ RIGHTS  AUTHORITY  AND REGISTRY  
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’  Rights Authority  
3. Establishment of Authority.  
4. Meeting s of Authority.  
5. Committee s of Authority.  
6. Officers and  other  employees of Authority.  
7. Chairperson to be Chief Executive.  
8. General functions of Authority.                            
9. Authentication of orders, etc., of Authority.  
10. Delegation.  
11. Power of Authority.  
Registry  
12. Registry and office s thereof.  
13. National Register  of Plant Varieties.  
 
CHAPTER III  
REGISTRATION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND ESSENTIALLY DERIVED VARIETY  
Application for registration  
14. Application for registration.  
15. Registrable varieties.  
16. Persons who may make application.  
17. Compulsory variety denomination.  
18. Form of application.  
19. Test to be conducted.  
20. Acceptance of application or amendment thereof.  
21. Advertisement of application.  
22. Registrar to consider grounds of opposition.  
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 2]
2 
 Registration of essentially derived variety  
SECTIONS  
23. Registration of essentially derived variety.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
DURATION AND EFFECT OF REGISTRATION AND BENEFIT SHARING  
24. Issue of certificate of registration.  
25. Publication of list of varieties.  
26. Determination of benefit sharing by Authority.  
27. Breeder to deposit seeds or propagating material.  
28. Registration to confer right.  
29. Exclusion of certain varieties.  
30. Researcher’s rights.  
31. Special provisions relating to application for registration from citizens of convention countries.  
32. Provisions as to reciprocity.  
 
CHAPTER V  
SURRENDER AND REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE AND RECTIFICATION AND CORRECTION  OF REGISTER  
33. Surrender of certificate of registration.  
34. Revocation of protection on certain grounds.  
35. Payment of annual fees and forfeiture of registration in default thereof.  
36. Power to cancel or change registration and to rectify the Register . 
37. Correction of Register . 
38. Alteration of denomination of a registered  variety.  
 
CHATER VI  
FARMERS ’ RIGHTS  
39. Farmers’  rights.  
40. Certain information to be given in application for registration.  
41. Rights of communities.  
42. Protection of innocent infringement.  
43. Authorisation of farmers’  variety.  
44. Exemption from fees. 
45. Gene Fund.  
46. Framing of schemes, etc.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
COMPULSORY  LICENCE  
47. Power of Authority to make order for compulsory licence in certain circumstances.  
48. When requirement of public deemed to have not been satisfied.  
49. Adjournment of application for grant of compulsory licence.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 3]
3 
 SECTIONS  
50. Duration of compulsory licence . 
51. Authority to settle terms and condition s of licence.  
52. Revocation of compulsory licence.  
53. Modification of compulsory licence.  
CHAPTER VIII  
APPEALS  
54. [Omitted .] 
55. [Omitted .] 
56. Appeal s to High Court . 
57. Orders of High Court . 
58. [Omitted .] 
59. [Omitted .] 
CHAPTER IX  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
60. Grants by Central Government.  
61. Authority Fund.  
62. Budget, accounts and audit.  
63. Financial and administrative powers of Chairperson.  
 
CHAPTER X  
INFRINGEMENT, OFFENCES, PENALTIES AND PRO CEDURE  
Infringement  
64. Infringement.  
65. Suit for infringement, etc.  
66. Relief in suits for infringement.  
67. Opinion of scientific adviser.  
Offences, penalties and procedure  
68. Prohibition to apply denomination of a registered  variety.  
69. Meaning of  falsely  applying denomination of a registered  variety.  
70. Penalty for applying false denomination, etc.  
71. Penalty for selling varieties to which false denomination is applied, etc.  
72. Penalty for falsely representing a variety as registered . 
73. Penalty for subsequent offence.  
74. No offence in certain cases.  
75. Exemption of certain pers ons employed in ordinary course  of business.  
76. Procedure where invalidity of registration is pleaded by the accused.  
77. Offences by companies.  
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 4]
4 
 CHAPTER XI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
SECTIONS  
78. Protection of security of India.  
79. Implied warranty on sale of registered  variety, etc.  
80. Death of party to a proceeding.  
81. Right of registered  agent and the registered  licensee to institute suit.  
82. Evidence of entry in Register , etc., and things done by t he Authority and the Registrar.  
83. Authority, Registrar and other officers no t compellable to production of Register , etc.  
84. Document open to  public inspection.  
85. Report of Authority to be placed before Parliament.  
86. Government to be bound.  
87. Proceedings before Authority or Registrar.  
88. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
89. Bar of jurisdiction.  
90. Members and staff of Authority, etc., to be public servants.  
91. Exemption from tax on wealth and income.  
92. Act to have overriding effect.  
93. Power of Central Government to give directions.  
94. Power to remove difficulties.  
95. Power to make regulations.  
96. Power of  Central Government to make rules.  
97. Rules, regulations and schemes to be laid before Parliament.  
 
 
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 5]
5 
 THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’  RIGHTS ACT, 2001  
ACT NO. 53 OF 2001  
[30th October , 2001.]  
An Act to provide for the establishment of an effective system for protection of plant  varieties, 
the right s of farmers and plant breeders  and to encourage the develop ment of new varieties of 
plants.  
WHEREAS  it is considered necessary to recognise and protect the rights of the farmers in respect of 
their contribution made at any time in conserving, improving and making available plant genetic 
resources for the  development of new plant varieties ; 
AND WHEREAS  for accelerated agricultural development in the country, it is necessary to protect plant 
breeders'  rights to stimulate investment for research and development, both in the public and private 
sector, for the  development of new plant varieties;  
AND WHEREAS  such protection will facilitate the growth of the seed industry in the country which 
will ensure the  availability of high quality seeds and plant ing material to the farmers;  
AND WHEREAS , to give effect to the aforesaid objectives, it is necessary to undert ake measures for the 
protection of  the rights of farmers and plant breeders;  
AND WHEREAS  India, having ratified the Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual 
Property Rights  should , inter  alia, make provision for giving effect to sub -paragraph ( b) of paragraph 3 of 
article 27 in Part II of  the said Agreement relating to protection of plant varieties.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -second Year of the Republic of India as follows :— 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short t itle, extent and commenceme nt.—(1) This Act may be called the Protection of Plant 
Varieties and Farmers’  Rights Act, 2001.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official  Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 5]
al  Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and 
any reference in  any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to 
the coming into force  of that provision.  
2. Definitions .—In this  Act, unless  the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Authority ” means the Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’  Rights Authority 
established under sub-section  (1) of section 3;  
(b) “benefit sharing ”, in relation to a variety, means such proportion of the benefit accruing to a 
breeder of such  variety or  such proportion of the benefit accruing to the breeder from an agent or a 
licensee of such  variety, as  the case may be, for which a claimant shall be e ntitled as determined by 
the Authority under section 26 ; 
(c) “breeder ” means a person or group of persons or a farmer or group of farmers or any 
institution which has  bred, evolved or developed any variety;  
2*   *  *   *   * 
(e) “Chairperson ” means the Chairperson of the Authority appointed under clause ( a) of                     
sub-section ( 5) of section 3;  
(f) “convention country ” means a country which has acceded to an international convention for 
the protection  of plant varieties to which  India has also acceded, or a country which has a law on 
                                                           
1. 11th November, 2005, ss. 2 to 13 (both inclusive) and ss. 95, 96 and 97, vide notification No. S.O. 1588( E), dated 11th 
November, 2005, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
 19th October, 2006, s. 1 and ss. 14 to 94 (both inclusive)  vide notification No. S.O. 1797( E), dated 19th October, 2006, see 
Gazette of India Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
2. Clause ( d) omitted by Act 33 of 2021, s. 23 (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 6]
6 
 protection of plant varieties  on the basis of which India has entered into an agr eement for granting 
plant breeders' right to the citizens of  both the countries;  
(g) “denomination ”, in relation to a variety or its propagating material or essentially derived 
variety or its  propagating material, means the denomination of such variety or its propagating material 
or essentially derived  variety or its propagating material, as the case may be, expressed by means of 
letters or a combination of letters  and figures written in any language;  
(h) “essential characteristics ” means such heritable traits of a plant variety which are  determined 
by the expression of one or more genes of other heritable determinants that contribute to the  principle 
features, performance or value of the plant variety;  
(i) “essentially derived variety ”, in respect of a variety (the initial variety) , shall be said to be 
essentially derived  from such initial variety when it — 
(i) is predom inantly derived from such initial va riety, or from a variety that  itself is 
predominantly  derived from such initial variety, while retaining the expression of the essential 
characteristics that result from  the genotype or combination of genotype s of such i nitial variety;  
(ii) is clearly distinguishable from such initial variety; and  
(iii) conforms (except for the differences which result from the act of derivation) to such 
initial variety  in the expression of the essential characteristics that result from t he genotype or 
combination of genotype of  such initial variety;  
(j) “extant variety ” means a variety available in India which is — 
(i) notified under section 5 of the Seeds Act, 1966  (54 of 1966); or  
(ii) farmers’  variety; or  
(iii) a variety about which there is common knowledge; or  
(iv) any other va riety which is in public domain;  
(k) “farmer ” means any person who — 
(i) cultivates crops by cultivating the land himself; or  
(ii) cultivates crops by dir
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 6]
erson who — 
(i) cultivates crops by cultivating the land himself; or  
(ii) cultivates crops by directly supervising the cultivation of land through any ot her person; 
or 
(iii) conserves and preserves, severally or jointly, with any  other person any wild species or 
traditional  varieties or adds value to such wild species or traditional varieties through selection 
and identification of their  useful properties;  
(l) “farmers ’ variety ” means a variety which — 
(i) has been traditionally cultivated and evolved by the farmers in their fields; or  
(ii) is a wild relative or land race of a variety about which the farme rs possess the common 
knowledge;  
(m) “Gene Fund ” means the National Gene Fund constituted under sub-section  (1) of section 45;  
1*   *   *   *    * 
 (p) “member ” means a member of the Authority appointed under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 5) of 
section 3 and  includes the member -secretary;  
2[(q) “prescribed ” means ,— 
(i) in relati on to proceedings before a High Court, prescribed by rules made by the High 
Court; and  
                                                           
1. Clauses ( n) and ( o) omitted by Act 33 of 2021, s. 23 (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
2. Subs. by s. 23, ibid., for clause ( q) (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 7]
7 
 (ii) in other cases, prescribed by rules made under this Act; ] 
(r) “propagating material ” means any plant or its component or part thereof includi ng an intended 
seed or seed  which is capable of , or suitable for , regeneration into a plant;  
(s) “Register ” means a national Register  of Plant Varieties referred to in section 13;  
(t) “Registrar ” means a Registrar of Plant Varieties appointed under sub -section ( 4) of section 12 
and includes  the Registrar -General;  
(u) “Registrar -General ” means the Registrar -General of Plant Varieties appointed under                 
sub-section ( 3) of section12;  
(v) “Registry ” means the Plant Variety Registry referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 12;  
(w) “regulations ” means regulations made by the Authority under this Act;  
(x) “seed” means a type of living embryo or propagule capable of regeneration and giving rise to 
a plant which is  true to such type;  
1*   *   *   *  * 
(za) “variety ” means a plant grouping except micro -organism within a single botanical taxon of 
the lowest  known rank, which can be — 
(i) defined by the expression of the characteristics resulting from a given genotype of that 
plant  grouping;  
(ii) distinguished from any other plant grouping by expression of at least one of the said  
characteristics; and  
(iii) considere d as a unit with regard to its suitability for being propagated, which remains 
unchanged  after such propagation,  
and includes propagating material of such variety, extant variety, transgenic variety,  farmers’  variety and 
essentially derived variety.  
CHAPTE R II 
PROTECTION OF PLANT  VARIETIES  AND FARMERS ’ RIGHTS AUTHORITY  AND REGISTRY  
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’  Rights Authority  
3. Establishment of Authority .—(1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, establish an  authority to be  known as the Protection  of Plant Varieties and Farmers’  Rights 
Authority for the purposes of this Act.
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 7]
 as the Protection  of Plant Varieties and Farmers’  Rights 
Authority for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual  succession and a 
common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of properties, both movable and  immovable, and to 
contract, and shall by the said name sue and be sued.  
(3) The head office of the Authority shall be at such place as the Central Government may, by 
notification in  the Official Gazette, spe cify and the Authority may, with the previous approval of the 
Central Government,  establish branch offices at other places in India.  
(4) The Authority shall consist of a Chairperson and fifteen members.  
(5) (a) The Chairperson , to be appointed by the Central Government , shall be a person of outstanding 
caliber and eminence, with long practical experience to the satisfaction of that Government especially in 
the field of  plant varietal research or agricultural development.  
(b) The members of the Authority, to be appointed by the Central Government, shall be as  follows, 
namely :— 
(i) the Agriculture Commissioner, Government of India, Department of Agriculture and  
Cooperation, New Delhi, ex officio ; 
                                                           
1. Clauses ( y) and ( z) omitted by Act 33 of 2021, s. 23 (w.e.f. 4-4-2021).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 8]
8 
 (ii) the Deputy Director General in charge of Crop Sciences, Indian Council of Agricultural  
Research, New Delhi, ex officio ; 
(iii) the Joint Secretary in charge of Seeds, Government of I ndia, Department of Agriculture and  
Cooperation, New Delhi, ex officio ; 
(iv) the Horticulture Commissioner, Government of In dia, Department of Agriculture  and 
Cooperation, New Delhi, ex officio;  
(v) the Director, National Bureau of Plant Genetic Resources, New Delhi, ex officio ; 
(vi) one member not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India to  represent 
the Department of Bio -technology, Government of India, ex officio ; 
(vii) one member not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India to  represent 
the Ministry of Environment and Forests , Government of India, ex officio ; 
(viii) one  member not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India to  represent 
the Ministry of Law , Justice and Company Affairs, Government of India, ex officio ; 
(ix) one representative from a National or State level farmers’  organisation to be nomi nated  by 
the Central Government;  
(x) one representative from a tribal organisation to be nominated by the Central Government;  
(xi) one representative from the seed industry to be nominated by the Central Government;  
(xii) one repre sentative from an agricultural U niversity to be nominated by the Central  
Government;  
(xiii) one representative from a National or State level women’s organisation associated with  
agricultural activities to be nominated by the Central Government;  and 
(xiv) two representative s of State Governments on rotation basis to be nominated by the  Central 
Government.  
(c) The Registrar -General shall be the ex officio  member -secretary of the Authority.  
(6) The term of office of the Chairperson and the manner of filling the post shall be such as  may be 
prescribed.  
(7) The Chairperson shall appoint a Standing Committee consisting of five members
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 8]
 be 
prescribed.  
(7) The Chairperson shall appoint a Standing Committee consisting of five members, one of  whom  
shall be a member who is a representative from a farmers ’ organisation , to advise the  Authority on all 
issues including farmers’  right s. 
(8) The Chairperson shall be entitled to such salary and allowances and shall be subject to  such 
conditions of service in respect of leave, pension, provident fund and other matters as  may be prescribed. 
The allowances for non -official members for atten ding the meeting s of the  Authority shall  be such as may 
be prescribed.  
(9) The Chairperson may resign his office by giving notice thereof in writing to the Central  
Government and on such resignation being accepted, he shall be deemed to have vacated his  office.  
(10) On the resignation of the Chairperson or on the vacation of the office of the Chairperson for  any 
reason, the Central Government may appoint one of the members to officiate as  Chairperson till a regular 
Chairperson is appointed in accordance w ith clause ( a) of sub -section  (5). 
4. Meetings of Authority .—(1) The Authority shall meet at such time and place and shall observe 
such rules of  procedure in regard to the transacti on of business at its meetings [ including the quorum at its  
meetings and th e transaction o f business of its Standing Committee appointed under sub -section  (7) of 
section 3]  as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Chairperson of the Authority shall preside at the meetings of the Authority.  
(3) If, for any reason the Chairperson is unable  to attend any meeting of the Authority, any  member of 
the Authority chosen by the members present shall preside at the  meeting.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 9]
9 
 (4) All questions which come before any meeting of the Authority shall be decided by a  majority of 
the votes of the members of the Authority present and voting and in the event of  equality of votes, the 
Chairperson of the Authority or in his absence, the person presiding  shall have and exercise a second or 
casting vote.  
(5) Every member who is in any way, whether directly, indirec tly or personally, concerned or  
interested in a matter to be decided at the meeting shall disclose the nature of his concern o r interest and 
after such disclosure, the member , concerned or interested , shall not attend that  meeting.  
(6) No act or proceeding  of the Authority shall be invalid merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of , the Authority; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as the Chairperson or a member of the  
Authority; or  
(c) any irregularit y in the procedure of the Authority not affecting the merits of the case.  
5. Committees of Authority .—(1) The Authority may appoint such committees as may be necessary 
for the efficient  discharge of its duties and performance of its functions under this Act. 
(2) The persons appointed as members of the committee under sub -section ( 1) shall be  entitled to 
receive such allowances or fees for attending the meetings of the committee as may  be fixed by the 
Central Government.  
6. Officers and other employees of Authority .—Subject to such control and restriction as may be 
prescribed, the Authority may appoint  such officers and other employees as may be necessary for the 
efficient performance of its  functions and the method o f appointment, the salary  and allowances  and other  
conditions o f service of such other officers and employees of the Authority shall be such as  may be 
prescribed.  
7. Chairperson to be Chief Executive .—The Chairperson shall be the Chief Executive of the 
Authority and shall exercise such  powers and perform such dut
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 9]
 shall be the Chief Executive of the 
Authority and shall exercise such  powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed.  
8. General f unctions of Authority .—(1) It shall be the duty of the Authority to promote, by such 
measures as it thinks fit, the  encouragement for the development of new varieties of plants and to protect 
the ri ghts of the  farmers and breeders.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the  measures 
referred to in sub -section ( 1) may provide for — 
(a) the registration of extant varieties subject to such terms and condit ions and  in the manner as 
may be prescribed;  
(b) developing characterisation and documentation of varieties registered  under this Act;  
(c) documentation, indexing and cataloguing of farmers’  varieties;  
(d) compulsory cataloguing facilities for all varieties of plants;  
(e) ensuring that seeds of the varieties registered  under this Act are available to the farmers  and 
providing for compulsory licensing of such varieties if the breeder of such varieties or  any other 
person entitled to produce such vari ety under this Act does not arrange for  production and sale of the 
seed in the manner as may be prescribed;  
(f) collecting statistics with regard to plant varieties, including the contribution of any person  at 
any time in the evolution or development of an y plant variety, in India or in any other  country, for 
compilation and publication;  
(g) ensuring  the maintenance of the Register . 
9. Authentication of orders , etc.,  of Authority. —All orders and decisions of the Authority shall be 
authenticated by the signa ture of the  Chairperson or any other member authorised by the Authority in this 
behalf.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 10]
10 
 10. Delegation. —The Authority may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to the 
Chairperson,  any member or officer of the Authority subject to such conditions or limitations, if any, as  
may be specified in the order, such of its powers and functions (except the power to make  regulations 
under section 95 ) under this Act as it may deem necessary.  
 
11. Power of Authority. —In all proceedings under this Act before the Authority or the Registrar ,— 
(a) the Authority or the Registrar, as the case may be, shall have all the powers of a civil  court for 
the purposes of receiving evidence, administering oaths, enforcing the attendance of  witnesses, 
compelling th e discovery and production of documents and issuing commissions  for the examination 
of witnesses;  
(b) the Authority or the Registrar may, subject to any rule made in this behalf under this Act,  
make such orders as to cost as it considers reasonable and any  such order shall be executable  as a 
decree of a civil court.  
Registry  
12. Registry and offices thereof. —(1) The Central Government shall establish , for the purpose s of 
this Act, a Registry which  shall be known as the Plant Varieties Registry.  
(2) The head office of the Plant Varieties Registry shall be located in the head office of the  Authority, 
and for the purpose of f acilitating the registration of  varieties, there may be  established, at such places, as 
the Authority may think fit, branch office s of the Registry.  
(3) The Auth ority shall appoint a Registrar -General of Plant Varieties who shall be entitled to  such 
salary and allowances and shall be subject to such conditions of service in respect of  leave, pension, 
provident fund and such other mat ters as may be prescribed.  
(4) The Authority may appoint such number of Registrars as it thinks necessary for  registration of 
plant varieties under the superintendence and direction of the Registrar -General under this Act and may 
make regulations wi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 10]
 superintendence and direction of the Registrar -General under this Act and may 
make regulations with resp ect to their duties and jurisdiction.  
(5) The term of office and the conditions of service of the Registrars shall be such as may be  provided 
by regulations.  
(6) The Authority may, by notification in the Official Gazette, define the territorial limits  within 
which a branch office of the Registry may exercise its functions.  
(7) There shall be a seal of the Plant Varieties Registry.  
13. National Register  of Plant Varieties .—(1) For the purposes of this Act, a Register  called the 
National Register  of Plant Varieties  shall be kept at the head office of the Registry, wherein shall be 
entered the names of all the  registered  plant varieties with the names and addresses of their respective 
breeders, the right  of such breeders in respect of the registere d varieties , the particulars of the 
denomination of  each Registered  variety, its seed  or other propagating material along with specification 
of salient features thereof and such other  matters as may be prescribed.  
(2) Subject to the superintendence and dir ection of the Central Government, the Register  shall  be kept 
under the control and management of the Authority.  
(3) There shall be kept at each branch office of the Registry a copy of the Register  and such  other 
documents as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,  direct.  
CHAPTER III  
REGISTRATION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND ESSENTIALLY DERIVED  VARI ETY 
Application for registration  
14. Application for r egistration .—Any person specified in section 16 may make an application to 
the Registrar for  registration of any variety — 
(a) of such genera and species as specified under sub -section ( 2) of section 29; or  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 11]
11 
 (b) which is an extant variety; or  
(c) which is a farmers’  variety.  
15.  Registrable varieties. —(1) A new variety shall be registered  under this Act if it conforms to the 
criteria of  novelty, distinctiv eness, uniformity and stability.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section  (1), an extant variety shall be  registered  under 
this Act within a specified period if it conforms to such criteria of  distinctiveness, uniformity and stability 
as shall be specified under the regulations .  
(3) For the purposes of sub -section s (1) and ( 2), as the case may be , a new variety  shall b e deemed to 
be— 
(a) novel, if , at the date of filing of the application for registration for protection, the  propagating 
or harvested material of such variety has not been sold or otherwise disposed of  by or with the 
consent of its breeder or his successor  for the purposes of exploitation of such  variety — 
(i) in India, earlier than one year;  or 
(ii) outside India , in the case of trees or vines earlier than six years, or in any other case,  
earlier than four years,  
before the date of filing such application:  
Provided that a trial of a new variety which has not been sold or otherwise disposed of shall  not 
affect the right to protection:  
Provided further that the fact that on the date of filing the application for registration , the 
propagating or harvested mater ial of such variety has become a matter of common  knowledge  other 
than through the aforesaid manner shall not affect the criteria of novelty for such  variety;  
(b) distinct, if it is clearly distinguishable by at least one essential characteristic from any  another 
variety whose existence is a matter of common knowledge in any country at the time  of filing of the 
application.  
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the filing of an application  for 
the granting of a breeder’ s right t o a new variety or for entering such variety in the offic
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 11]
 for 
the granting of a breeder’ s right t o a new variety or for entering such variety in the official  register  of 
varieties in any convention country shall be deemed to render that variety a matter  of common 
knowledge from the date of the application in case the application leads to the  granting of the 
breeder's right or to the entry of such variety in such official register , as the  case may be;  
(c) uniform , if subject to the variation that may be expected from the particular features of its  
propagation it is sufficiently  uniform in its essential characteristics;  
(d) stable, if its essential characteristics remain unchanged after repeated propagation or, in  the 
case of a particular cycle of propagation, at the end of each such cycle.  
(4) A new variety shall not be register ed under this Act if the denomination given to such  variety — 
(i) is not capable of identifying such variety; or  
(ii) consists solely of figures; or  
(iii) is liable to mislead or to cause confusion concerning the characteristics, value identity of  
such vari ety or the identity of breeder of such variety; or  
(iv) is not different from every denomination which designates a variety of the same  botanical 
species or of a closely related species registered  under this Act; or  
(v) is likely to deceive the public or cause confusion in the public regarding the identity of  
such variety;  or 
(vi) is likely to hurt the religious sentiments respectively of any class or section of the  citizens 
of India; or  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 12]
12 
 (vii) is prohibited for use as a name or emblem for any of the purpose s mentioned in                 
section 3  of the Emblems and Names (Prevention  of Improper Use) Act, 1950  (12 o f 1950) ; or 
(viii) is comprised of solely or partly of geographical name:  
Provided that the r egistrar may register  a variety , the denominat ion of which comprises  solely or 
partly of a geographical  name, if he considers that the  use of such denomination in  respect of such variety 
is an honest use under the circumstances of the case.  
16. Persons who may make application. —(1) An application for registration under section 14 shall 
be made by — 
(a) any person claiming to be  the breeder of the variety; or  
(b) any successor of the breeder of the variety; or  
(c) any person being the assignee of the breeder of the variety in respect of the right to make  such 
application ; or 
(d) any farmer or group of farmers or community of farmers claiming to be the breeder of the  
variety;  or 
(e) any person authorised in the prescribed manner by a person specified under clause s (a) to (d) 
to make application on his beha lf; or  
(f) any university or publicly funded agricultural institution claiming to be the breeder of the  
variety.  
(2) An application under sub -section ( 1) may be made by any of the persons referred to  therein 
individually or jointly with any other person.  
17. Compulsory v ariety denomination. —(1) Every applican t shall assign a single and distinct 
denomination to a variety with  respect to which he is seeking registration under this Act in accordance 
with the regulations.  
(2) The Authority shall, having regard  to the provisions of any international convention or  treaty to 
which India has become a party, make regulation s governing the assignment of  denomination to a variety.  
(3) Where the denomin ation assigned to the variety does  not satisfy the requirements specified  in the 
regulations, the Registrar may require the applicant t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 12]
t satisfy the requirements specified  in the 
regulations, the Registrar may require the applicant to propose another denomination  within such time as 
may be specified  by such regulations.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Trade Mark s Act, 199 9 (47 of 1999) , a denomination  
assigned to a variety shall not be registered  as a trade mark under that Act.  
18. Form of application .—(1) Every application for registration under section 14 shall — 
(a) be with respect to a variety;  
(b) state the denomination assigned to such variety by the applicant;  
(c) be accompanied by an affidavit sworn by the applicant that such variety does not contain  any 
gene or gene sequence involving terminator technology;  
(d) be in such form a s may be specified by regul ations;  
(e) contain a complete passport data of the parental lines from which the variety has been  derived 
along with the geographical location in India from where the genetic material has  been taken and all 
such information relating to the contribution, i f any, of any farmer, village  community, institution or 
organisation in breeding, evol ving or developing the variety;  
(f) be accompanied by a statement containing a brief description of the variety bringing out  its 
characteristics of novelty, distinctivene ss, uniformity and stability as required for registration;  
(g) be accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed;  
(h) contain a declaration that the genetic material or parental material acquired for breeding, 
evolving or developing the variety has been law fully acquired; and  
(i) be accompanied by such other particulars as may be prescribed:  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 13]
13 
 Provided that in case where the application is for the registration of farmers’  variety, nothing  
contained in clause s (b) to ( i) shall apply in respect of the application and the application  shall be  in such 
form as may be prescribed.  
(2) Every application referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be filed in the office of the Registrar.  
(3) Where such application is made by virtue of a succession or an assignment of  the right to  apply 
for registration, there shall be furnished at the time of making the application, or within  such period after 
making the application as may be prescribed, a proof of the right to make  the application.  
19. Test to be  conducted. —(1) Every  applicant shall, along with the application for registration 
made under this Act,  make available to the Registrar such quantity  of seed  of a variety for registration of 
which  such application is made, for the purpose of conducting tests to evaluate whethe r seed of  such 
variety  along with parental material conform to the standards as may be specified by regulations:  
Provided that the Registrar or any person or test centre to whom such seed has been sent for  
conducting test shall keep such seed during his or  its possession in such manner and in such  condition that 
its viability and quality shall remain unaltered.  
(2) The applicant shall deposit such fees as may be prescribed for conducting tests referred to  in                
sub-section ( 1). 
(3) The tests  referred to in  sub-section ( 1) shall be conducted in such manner and by such method as  
may be prescribed.  
20. Acceptance of a pplication or amendment  thereof. —(1) On receipt of an application under 
section 14, the Registrar may, after making such  inquiry as he  thinks fit with respect to the particulars 
contained in such application, accept  the application absolutely or subject to such condition s or 
limitations as he deems fit.  
(2) Where the Registrar is satisfied that the application does
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 13]
 s or 
limitations as he deems fit.  
(2) Where the Registrar is satisfied that the application does not comply with the  requirements of this 
Act or any rules or regulations m ade thereunder, he may, either — 
(a) require the applicant to amend the application to his satisfaction;  or 
(b) reject the application:  
Provided that no application shall be rejected unless the applicant h as been given a  reasonable 
opportunity of presenting his case.  
21. Advertisement of application .—(1) Where an application for registration of a variety has been 
accepted absolutely or  subject  to conditions or limitations under sub -section ( 1) of section 20, the 
Registrar shall, as  soon as after its acceptance, cause such application together with the conditions or  
limitations, if any, subject to which it has been accepted and the specifications of the variety  for 
registration of which such ap plication is made includ ing its photographs or drawings,  to be advertised in 
the prescribed  manner calling objections from  the persons interested in the  matter.  
(2) Any person may, within three months from the date of the advertisement of an application  for 
registration on payment of the prescribed fees, give notice  in writing in the prescribed  manner, to the 
Registrar  of his opposition to the registration.  
(3) Opposition to the registration under sub -section ( 2) may be made on any of the following grounds, 
namely: — 
(a) that the person opposing the applica tion is entitled to the breeder’ s right as against the  
applicant; or  
(b) that the variety is not registrable under this Act;  or 
(c) that the grant of certificate of registration may not be in public  interest;  or 
(d) that the variety may have adverse effect on the environment.  
(4) The Registrar shall serve a copy of the notice of opposition on the applicant for  registration and, 
within two months from the receipt by the applicant of such copy of the  notice of opposition, the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 13]
from the receipt by the applicant of such copy of the  notice of opposition, the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 14]
14 
 applicant shall send to the Registrar in the prescribed manner a  counter -statement of the grounds on which 
he relies for his application, and if he does not do  so, he shall be deemed to have abandoned his 
application.  
(5) If the a pplicant sends such counter -statement, the Registrar shall serve a copy thereof on  the 
person giving notice of opposition.  
(6) Any evidence upon which the opponent and the applicant may rely shall be submitted, in  the 
manner prescribed and within the time prescribed, to the Registrar and the Registrar shall  give an 
opportunity to them to be heard, if so desired.  
(7) The Registrar shall, after hearing the parties, if so required, and considering the evidence,  decide 
whether and subject to what conditions or limitations, if any, the registration is to be  permitted and may 
take into account a ground of objection whether relied upon by the  opponent or not.  
(8) Where a person giving notice of opposition or  an applicant sending a counter -statement  after 
receipt of  a copy of such notice neither resides nor carries on business in India, the  Registrar may require 
him to give security for the cost of proceedings before him and in  default of such security being duly 
given may treat the opposition or application, as the case may be, as abandoned.  
(9) The Registrar may, on request, permit correction of any error in, or any amendment of, a  notice of 
opposition or a counter -statement on such terms as he may think fit.  
22. Registrar to consider grounds of opposition. —The Registrar shall consider all the grounds on 
which the application has been opposed  and after giving reasons for his decision, by order, uphold or 
reject the opposition.  
Registration of essentially derived variety  
23. Registration of essentially derived var iety.—(1) An application for the registration of an 
essentially derived variety of the genera or  species specified under sub -section ( 2) of section 29 by the 
Central Government 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 14]
f the genera or  species specified under sub -section ( 2) of section 29 by the 
Central Government shall be  made to the Registrar by or on behalf of any person referred to in sec tion 14 
and in the  manner specified in section 18 as if for the word “variety ”, the words “essentially derived  
variety ” have been substituted therein and shall be accompanied by such documents and fees as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) When the Registrar is satisfied that the requirements of sub -section ( 1) have been  complied with 
to his satisfaction, he shall forward the application with his report and all the  relevant document to the 
Authority.  
(3) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 2), the Aut hority shall get examined such  
essentially derived variety to determine as to whether the essentially derived variety is a  variety derived 
from the initial variety by conducting such tests and following such procedure  as may be prescribed.  
(4) When the Aut hority is satisfied on the report of the test referred to in sub -section ( 3) that  the 
essentially derived variety has been derived from the initial variety, it may direct the  Registrar to register  
such essentially derived variety and the Registrar shall co mply with the  direction of the Authority.  
(5) Where the Authority is not satisfied on the report of the test referred to in sub -section ( 3) that the 
essentially derived variety has been derived from the initial variety it shall refuse the  application.  
(6) The rights of the breeder of a variety contained in section 28 shall apply to the breeder of  
essentially derived variety:  
Provided that the authorisation by the breeder of  the initial variety to the breeder of essentially  
derived varie ty under  sub-section ( 2) of section 28 may be subject to such terms and  conditions as both 
the parties may mutually agree upon.  
(7) An essentially derived variety shall not be registered  under this section unless it satisfies  the 
requirements of se
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 14]
ved variety shall not be registered  under this section unless it satisfies  the 
requirements of section 15 as if for the word “variety ”, the words “essentially derived  variety ” have been 
substituted therein.  
(8) When an essentially derived variety has been registered  by the Registrar in compliance  with the 
direction of the Authori ty under sub -section ( 4), the Registrar shall issue to the  applicant a certificate of 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 15]
15 
 registration in the prescribed form and sealed with the seal of the  Registry and send a copy thereof to the 
Authority and to such other authority, as may be  prescribed, f or information.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
DURATION AND EFFECT OF REGISTRATION AND BENEFIT SHARING  
24. Issue of certificate of registration. —(1) When an application for registration of a variety (other 
than an essentially derived  variety)  has been accepted and either — 
(a) the application has not been opposed and the time of notice of opposition has expired; or  
(b) the application has been opposed and the opposition has been rejected,  
the Registrar shall  register  the variety.  
(2) On the registration of the variety (other than an  essentially derived variety), t he Registrar  shall 
issue to the applicant a certificate of registration in the prescribed form and sealed with  the seal of the 
Registry and send a copy thereof to the Authority for determination of benefit sharing  and to such other 
authority, as may be prescribed, for information. The maximum time  required by the Registrar for issuing 
the certificate of registration from the date of filing of  the application for registration of a variety shall be 
such as may be prescri bed. 
(3) Where registration of a variety (other than an essentially derived variety), is not completed  within 
twelve months from the date of the application by reason of default on the part of the  applicant, the 
Registrar may , after giving notice to the ap plicant in the prescribed manner , treat the application as 
abandoned unless it is completed within the time specified in that behalf in  the notice.  
(4) The Registrar may amend the register  or a certificate of registration for the purpose of  correcting a 
clerical error or an obvious mistake.  
(5) The Registrar shall have power to issue such directions to protect the interests of a  breeder against 
any abusive act committed by any third party during the period between filing  of applicati
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 15]
against 
any abusive act committed by any third party during the period between filing  of application for 
registration an d decision taken by the Authority on such application.  
(6) The certificate of registration issued under this section or sub -section ( 8) of section 23  shall be 
valid for nine years in the case of trees and vines and six years in the case of other  crops and may be 
reviewed and renewed for the remaining period on payment of such fees as may be fixed by the rules 
made in this behalf subject to the condition that the total period of validity shall not exceed ,— 
(i) in the case of trees and vines, eighteen years f rom the date of registration of the variety;  
(ii) in the case of extant variety, fifteen years from the date of the notification of that variety  by 
the Central Government under section 5 of the Seeds Act , 1966  (54 of 1966) ; and  
(iii) in other cases, fifteen years from the date of registration of the variety.  
25. Publication of list of varieties .—The Authority shall, within such intervals as it thinks 
appropriate, publish the list of  varieties which have been registered  during that interval . 
26. Determ ination of benefit sharing by Authority .—(1) On receipt of copy of the certificate of 
registration under sub -section ( 8) of section  23 or sub -section ( 2) of section 24, the Authority shall 
publish such contents of the certificate  and invite claims of benefit sharing to the variety registered  under 
such certificate in the  manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) On invitation of the claims under sub -section ( 1), any person or group of persons or firm or                   
governmental  or non -governmental  organisation shall submit its claim of benefit sharing to such variety 
in the  prescribed form within such period, and accompanied with  such fees, as may be prescribed:  
Provided that such cl aim shall only be submitted by a ny— 
(i) person or grou p of persons, if such person or every person constitutin
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 15]
y be submitted by a ny— 
(i) person or grou p of persons, if such person or every person constituting such group is a citizen 
of India; or  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 16]
16 
 (ii) firm or government al or non -government al organisation, if such firm or organisation is 
formed or established in India.  
(3) On receiving a claim under sub -section ( 2), the Authority shall send a copy of such claim  to the 
breeder of the variety registered  under such certificate and the breeder may, on receipt of  such copy, 
submit his opposition to such claim within such period and in such manner as may  be pre scribed.  
(4) The Authority shall, after giving an opportunity of being heard to the parties , dispose of the  claim 
received under sub -section ( 2). 
(5) While disposing of the claim under sub -section ( 4), the Authority shall explicitly indicate  in its 
order the amount of the benefit sharing, if any, for which the claimant shall be entitled  and shall take into 
consideration the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the extent and nature of the use of genetic material of the claimant in the development of  the 
variety  relating to which the b enefit sharing has been claimed;  
(b) the commercial utility and demand in the market of the variety relating to which the  benefit 
sharing has been claimed.  
(6) The amount of benefit sharing to a variety determined under this section  shall be  deposited by the 
breeder of such variety in the manner referred to in clause ( a) of sub -section  (1) of section 45 in the 
National Gene Fund.  
(7) The amount of benefit sharing determined under this section shall, on a reference made by  the 
Authori ty in the prescribed manner, be recoverable as an arrear of land revenue by the  District Magistrate 
within whose local limits of jurisdiction the breeder liable for such benefit  sharing resides.  
27. Breeder to deposit seeds or propagating material .—(1) The  breeder shall be required to deposit 
such quantity of seeds or propagating  material including parental line seeds of registered  variety in the 
National Gene Bank as may  be specified in the regulations for reproduction purpose at the br
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 16]
n the 
National Gene Bank as may  be specified in the regulations for reproduction purpose at the breeder's 
expense within such  time a s may be specified in that regulation . 
(2) The seeds or propagating material or parental line seeds to be deposited under sub -section  (1) 
shall be deposited to the National Gene Bank specified by the Authority.  
28. Registration to confer right. —(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a certificate of 
registration for a variety  issued  under this Act shall confer an exclusive right on the breeder or his 
successor, his agent  or licensee, to produce, sell, market, distribut e, import o r export the variety:  
Provided that in the case of an extant variety, unless a breeder or his successor establishes his  right, 
the Central Government, and in cases where such extant variety is notified for a State  or for any area 
thereof under section 5 of  the Seeds Act, 1966  (54 of 1966),  the State Government, shall be  deemed to be 
the owner of such right.  
(2) A breeder may authorise any person to produce, sell, market or otherwise deal with the variety  
registered  under this Act subject to such limitations and condi tions as may be specified by regulations.  
(3) Every authorisation under this section shall be in such form as may be specified by  regulations.  
(4) Where an agent or a licensee referred to in sub -section (1) becomes entitled to produce,  sell, 
market, distribute, import or export a variety, he shall apply in the prescribed manner  and with the 
prescribed fees to the Registrar to register  his title and the Registrar shall , on receipt of application and on 
proof of title to his satisfaction, register  him as an agent or a  licensee, as the case may be, in respect of the 
variety for which he is entitled for such right,  and shall cause particulars of such entitlement and 
conditions or restrictions, if any, subject to  which such entitlement is made, to be entered in the Register : 
Provided that
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 16]
, if any, subject to  which such entitlement is made, to be entered in the Register : 
Provided that when the validity of such entitlement is in dispute between the parties, the  Registrar 
may refuse to register  the entitlement and refer the mat ter in the prescribed manner  to the Authority and 
withhold the registration of such entitlement until the right of the parties  in dispute  so referred to has been 
determined by the Authority.  
(5) The Registrar shall issue a certificate of registration under  sub-section ( 4) to the  applican t after 
such registration and shall enter in the certificate the brief conditions of  entitlement, if any, in the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 17]
17 
 prescribed manner, and such certificate shall be the conclusive  proof of such entitlement and the 
conditions or  restriction s thereof, if any.  
(6) Subject to any agreement subsisting between the parties, an agent or licensee of a right to  a variety 
registered  under sub -section ( 4) shall be entitled to call upon the breeder or his  successor thereof to take 
proceedings to prevent infringement thereof, and if the breeder or  his successor refuses or neglects to do 
so within three months after being so called upon, such  registered  agent or licensee may institute 
proceedings for infringement in his own name as if  he were the breeder, making the breeder or his 
successor a defendant.  
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, a breeder or his successor so added  as 
defendant shall not be liable for any costs unless he enters an appearance and takes part  in the 
proceedings.  
(8) Nothing in this section shall confer on a registered  agent or registered  licensee of a variety  any 
right to transfer such  right further thereof.  
(9) Without prejudice to the registration under sub -section ( 4), the terms of registra tion— 
(a) may be varied by the Registrar as regards the variety in respect of which, or any condition  or 
restriction  subject to which, it has effect on receipt of an application in the prescribed  manner of the 
registered  breeder of such variety  or his succ essor ; 
(b) may be cancelled by the Registrar on the application in the prescribed manner of the  
registered  breeder of such variety or his successor or of the registered  agent or registered  licensee of 
such variety;  
(c) may be cancelled by the Registrar on the application in the prescribed manner of any  person 
other than the breeder, his successor, the registered  agent or the registered  licensee on  any of the 
following  grounds, namely: — 
(i) that the breeder of a variety or his successor or the registered  agent or registered  licensee  
of suc
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 17]
 the breeder of a variety or his successor or the registered  agent or registered  licensee  
of such variety, misrepresented, or failed to disclose, some fact material to the application for  
registration under sub -section ( 4) which if accurately represented or disclosed would have  
justified the refusal of the application for registration of the registered  agent or registered  
licensee;  
(ii) that the registration ought not to have  been effected having regard to the right vested in 
the applicant by virtue of a contract in the performance of which he is interested;  
(d) may be cancelled by the R egistrar on the application in the prescribed manner of the  breeder 
of a registered  variety or his successor on the ground that any stipulation in the  agreement between 
the registered  agent or the registered  licensee, as the case may be, and  such breeder or his successor 
regarding the variety for which such agent or licensee is  registered  is not being enforced or is not 
being complied with;  
(e) may be cancelled by the  registrar on the application of any perso n in the prescribed  manner on 
the ground that the variety relating to the registration is no longer existing.  
(10) The r egistrar shall issue notice in the prescribed manner of' every application under this  section 
to the registered  breeder of a variety or his successor and to each registered  agent or  registered  licensee 
(not being the applicant) of such variety.  
(11) The Registrar shall , before making any order under sub -section ( 9), forward the  application made 
in that behalf along with any objection recei ved by any party after notice  under sub-section  (10) for the 
consideration of the Authority, and the Authority may, after  making such i nquiry as it thinks fit, issue 
such directions to the Registrar as it thinks fit and  the Registrar shall dispose of the application in 
accordance with such directions.  
29. Exclusion of certain varieties .—(1) Notwithstanding anyth
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 17]
n 
accordance with such directions.  
29. Exclusion of certain varieties .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act , no 
registration of a variety shall be  made under this Act in cases where prevention of commercial 
exploitation of such v ariety is  necessary to protect public order or public morality or human, animal and 
plant life and  health or to avoid serious prejudice to the environment.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 18]
18 
 (2) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify the genera  or 
species for the purposes of registration of varieties other th an extant varieties and farmers’  varieties under 
this Act.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained under sub -section ( 2) and sub -sections ( 1) and  (2)                          
of section 15, no variety of any genera or species which involves any technology  which is injurious to the 
life or health of human beings, animals or plants shall be  registered  under this Act.  
Explanation .—For the purpose s of this sub -section,  the expression “any technology ” includes  genetic 
use restriction technology and terminator technology.  
(4) The Central Government shall not delete any genera or species from the list of genera or  species 
specified in a notification issued under sub -section ( 2) except  in the public interest.  
(5) Any variety belonging to the genera or species excluded under sub -section ( 4) shall not be  eligible 
for any protection under this Act.  
30. Researcher’s r ights .—Nothing contained  in this Act shall prevent — 
(a) the use of any variety registered  under this Act by any person using such variety for  
conduc ting experiment or research; or  
(b) the use of a variety by any person as an initial source of variety for the purpose of  creating 
other varieties:  
Provided that the authorisation  of the breeder of a registered  variety is required where the  repeated 
use of such variety as a parental line is necessary for commercial production of such  other newly 
developed variety.  
31. Special provisions relating to application  for registration from  citizens of convention  
countrie s.—(1) With a view to the fulfilment of a treaty, convention or arrangement with any country  
outside India which affords to citizens of India similar privileges as granted to its own  citizen s, the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare such  coun
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 18]
 citizen s, the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare such  country to be a convention 
country for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Where a person has made an application for the granting of a breeder's right to a variety  or for 
entering such variety in the official register  of varieties in a convention country and  that person , or any 
person entitled to make application on his behalf under section 14 or  section 23 , makes an application for 
the registration of such variety in India within twelve  months after the date on  which the application was 
made in the convention country, such  variety shall, if registered  under this Act, be registered  as of the 
date on which the application  was made in the convention country and that date shall be deemed for the 
purposes of this  Act to be the date of registration.  
(3) Where applications have been made for granting of a breeder's right to a variety , or for  entering 
such variety in the official register  of varieties in two or more convention countries,  the period of twelve 
months refer red to in sub-section  (2) shall be reckoned  from the date on which the earlier or earliest of 
those application s were made.  
(4) Nothing in this Act shall entitle the breeder of a registered  variety for infringement of  rights other 
than protected under this  Act which took place prior to the date of application of  registration under this 
Act. 
32. Provisions as to reciprocity .—Where any country declared by the Central Government in this 
behalf  by notification in  the Official Gazette under sub -section ( 1) of section 31 does not accord to 
citizens of India  the same rights in respect of the registration and protection of a variety, as it accords to 
its own nationals, no national of such country shall be entitled, either solely or jointly with any  other 
person, t o apply for the registration of a variety or be entitled to get a variety registered  under this Act . 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 18]
or the registration of a variety or be entitled to get a variety registered  under this Act . 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 19]
19 
 CHAPTER V  
SURRENDER AND REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE AND  RECTIFICATION AND CORRECTION OF REGISTER  
33. Surrender of certificate of r egistration. —(1) A breeder of a variety registered  under this Act 
may, at any time by giving notice in  the prescribed manner to the Registrar, offer to surrender his 
certificate of registration.  
(2) Where such an offer is made, the Registrar shall notify in the prescribed manner every  registered  
agent or registered  licensee relating to such certificate.  
(3) Any of such agent or licensee may , within the prescribed period after such notification , give 
notice to the Registrar of his opposition to the surrender and w here any such notice is  given, the Registrar 
shall intimate the contents of such notice to the breeder of such variety.  
(4) If the Registrar is satisfied after hearing the applicant and all the opponents, if desirous of  being 
heard , that the certificate of  registration may properly be surrendered, he may accept the  offer and by 
order revoke the certificate of registration.  
34. Revocation of protection on certain grounds .—Subject to the provisions contained in this Act, 
the protection granted to a breeder in  respect of a variety may, on the application in the prescribed manner 
of any person interested,  be revoked by the A uthority on any of the following grounds, namely: — 
(a) that the grant of the certificate of registration has been based on incorrect information  
furnished by the applicant;  
(b) that the certificate of registration has been granted to a person who is not eligible for  
protection under this Act;  
(c) that the breeder did not provide the Registrar wit h such information, documents or  material  as 
required for registration under this Act;  
(d) that the breeder has failed to provide an  alternative denomination of the variety which is  the 
subject matter of the registration to the Registrar in case where the earlier denomination  of such 
variety prov ided to the R
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 19]
tration to the Registrar in case where the earlier denomination  of such 
variety prov ided to the Registrar is not permissible for registration under this Act;  
(e) that the breeder did not provide the necessary seeds or propagating material to the person  to 
whom compulsory licence has been issued under section 47  regarding the variety in  respect of which 
registration certificate has been issued to such breeder;  
(f) that the breeder has not complied with the provisions of this Act or rules or  regulations made 
thereunder;  
(g) that the breeder has failed to comply with the directions of the Aut hority issued under this  
Act; 
(h) that the grant of the certificate of registration is not in the public intere st: 
Provided that no such protection shall be revoked unless the breeder is given a reasonable  opportunity 
to file objection and of being heard in the matter.  
35. Payment of annual fees and forfeiture of registration in default thereof .—(1) The Authority 
may, with the prior approval of the Central Government ,  by notification in the Official Gazette, impose a 
fee to be paid annually, by every bree der of a  variety, agent and licensee thereof registered  under this Act 
determined on the basis of  benefit or royalty gained by such breeder, agent or licensee, as the case may 
be, in respect of  the variety, for the retention of their registration under thi s Act.  
(2) If any breeder, agent or licensee fails to deposit the fees referred to in sub -section ( 1) imposed 
upon him under that sub -section in the prescribed manner up to two consecutive  years, the Authority shall 
issue notice to such breeder, agent or licensee and on service of  such notice if he fails to comply with the 
direction in the notice, the Authority shall declare  all the protection admissible under the registration 
certificate issued to such breeder or agent or  licensee forfeited.  
(3) The arrea rs of fee imposed under sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to be  the arr
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 19]
 forfeited.  
(3) The arrea rs of fee imposed under sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to be  the arrears of land  revenue 
and shall be recoverable accordingly.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 20]
20 
 36. Power to cancel or change registration and to rectify the Register .—(1) On an application 
made in the prescribed manner to the Registrar by any person  aggrieved, the Registrar may make such 
order as he may think fit for cancelling or changing  any certificate of registration issued under this Act on 
the ground of any contravention of the  provisions of this Act or failure to  observe a condition subject to 
which such registration  certificate is issued.  
(2) Any person aggrieved by the absence or omission from the Register  of any entry, or by  any entry 
made in the Register  without sufficient cause, or by any entry wrongly remaining on the  Register , may 
apply in the pr escribed manner to the Registrar and the Registrar may make such  order for making, 
expunging or varying the entry as he may think fit.  
(3) The Registrar may , in any proceeding  under this section , decide any question that  may be  
necessary or expedient to decide in connection  with the rectification of the Register . 
(4) The Registrar  on his own motion may, after giving notice in the prescribed manner to the  parties 
concerned and after giving them an opportunity of being heard , make any order  referred to in               
sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2). 
37. Correction of Register .—(1) The Registrar may, on an application in the prescribed manner by 
the breeder of a  variety registered  under this Act ,— 
(a) correct any error in the Register  in the name, address or description of such breeder or any  
other entry relating to such variety;  
(b) enter in the Register  any change in the name, address or description of such breeder;  
(c) cancel the entry in the Register  of the var iety in respect of which such application is made;  
and may make any consequential amendment or alteration in the certificate of registration and for  that 
purpose require the certificate of registration to be produced to him.  
(2) The Registrar may, on appli cation made in th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 20]
rtificate of registration to be produced to him.  
(2) The Registrar may, on appli cation made in the prescribed manner  by a registered  agent or  a 
registered  licensee of a variety and after notice to the registered  breeder of such variety,  correct any error, 
or enter any change, in the name, address or description of such registered  agent or registered  licensee, as 
the case may be, in the Register  or certificate of r egistration  issued under this Act.  
38. Alteration of denomination of a registered  variety .—(1) The breeder of a variety registered  
under this Act may apply in the prescribed manner  to the Registrar to delete any part or to add to or alter 
the denomination of such variety in any  manner not substantially affecting the identity thereof, and the 
Registrar may  refuse  leave or  may grant it  on such terms and subject to such limitations as he may think 
fit to avoid any  conflict with the rights of other breeders of the varieties registered  under this Act.  
(2) The Registrar may cause an application under this section to be advertised in the  prescribed 
manner in any case where it appears to him that it is expedient so to do, and where  he does so, if within 
the prescribed time from the date of the advertisement any person gives  notice to the Registrar in the 
prescribed manner of opposition to the application, the Registrar  shall, after hearing the parties if so 
required, decide the matter.  
(3) Where leave is granted under this section, the denomination of the variety as altered shall  be 
advertised in the prescribed manner, unless the application ha s already been advertised  under                 
sub-section ( 2). 
CHAPTER VI  
FARMERS’  RIGHTS  
39. Farmers’  rights .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, — 
(i) a farmer who has bred or developed a new variety shall be entitled for registration and other 
protection in like manner as a bree der of a variety under this Act;  
(ii) the farmers’  variety shal
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 20]
otection in like manner as a bree der of a variety under this Act;  
(ii) the farmers’  variety shall be entitled for registration if the application contains  declaration as 
specified in clause ( h) of sub -section ( 1) of section 18;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 21]
21 
 (iii) a farmer who is engaged in the conservation of genetic resources of land races and wild  
relatives of economic plants and their improvement through selection and preservation shall  be 
entitled in the prescribed manner for recognition and reward from the Gene  Fund:  
Provided that material so selected and preserved has been used as donors of genes in varieties  
registrable under this Act;  
(iv) a farmer  shall  be deemed t o be entitled to save, use, sow , resow, exchange, share or sell his 
farm  produce including seed of a va riety protected under this Act in the same manner as he was  
entitled before th e coming into force of this Act:  
Provided that the farmer shall not be entitled to sell branded seed of a variety protected under  this 
Act. 
Explanation .—For the purpose of clause  (iv), “branded seed ” means any seed put in a package or  any 
other container and labelled in a manner indicating that such seed is of a variety  protected under this Act.  
(2) Where any propagating material of a variety registered  under this Act has been sold to a  farmer or 
a group of farmers or any organisation of farmers, the breeder of such variety shall  disclose to the farmer 
or the group of farmers or the organisation of farmers, as the case may  be, the expected performance 
under given conditions, and if such propagating material fails  to provide such performance under such 
given conditions , the farmer or the group of  farmers or the organisation of farmers,  as the case may be, 
may claim compensation in the  prescribed manner bef ore the Authority and the Authority , after giving 
notice to the  breeder of the variety and after providing him an opportunity to file opposition in the  
prescribed manner and after hearing the parties, may direct the breeder of the variety to pay  such 
compensation as it deems fit, to the farmer or the group of  farmers or the organisation of  farmers, as the 
case may be.  
40. Certain information to be given in a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 21]
ers or the organisation of  farmers, as the 
case may be.  
40. Certain information to be given in application registration .—(1) A breeder or other person 
making application for registration of an y variety under  Chapter III shall disclose in the application the 
information regarding the use of genetic  material conserved by any tribal or rural families in the breeding 
or development of such  variety.  
(2) If the breeder or such other person fails to d isclose any information under sub -section ( 1), the 
Registrar may , after being satisfied that the breeder or such person has wilfully and  knowingly concealed 
such information , reject the application for registration.  
41. Rights of communities. —(1) Any per son or group of persons (whether actively engaged in 
farming or not) or any  governmental or non -governmental organisation may , on behalf of any village or 
local  community in India, file in any centre notified, with the previous approval of the Central  
Gove rnment , by the Authority , in the Official Gazette , any claim attributable to the  contribution of the 
people of that village or local community , as the case may be , in the  evolution of any variety for the 
purpose of staking a claim on behalf of such village  or local  community.  
(2) Where any claim is made under sub -section ( 1), the centre notified under that sub -section  may 
verify the claim made by such person or group of persons or such governmental or non -governmental  
organisation  in such manner as it deems fit , and if it is satisfied that such village  or local community has 
contributed significantly to the evolution of the variety which has  been registered  under this Act, it shall 
report its findings to the Authority.  
(3) When the  Authority, on a report under sub -section ( 2) is satisfied, after such i nquiry as it  may 
deem fit, that the variety with which the report is related has been registered  under the  provision s of this 
Act, it may issue notice in 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 21]
 report is related has been registered  under the  provision s of this 
Act, it may issue notice in the prescribed manner to the b reeder of that  variety and after providing 
opportunity to such breeder to file objection in the prescribed  manner and of being heard, it may subject 
to any limit notified by the Central Government,  by order, grant such sum of compensation to be paid to a 
person or group of persons or  governmental or non -governmental organisation which has made claim 
under sub -section ( 1), as it may deem fit.  
(4) Any compensation granted under sub -section ( 3) shall be deposited by the breeder of the  variety 
in the Gene Fund.  
(5) The compensation granted under sub -section ( 3) shall be deemed to be an arrear of land  revenue 
and shall be recoverable by the Authority accordingly.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 22]
22 
 42. Protection of innocent infringement .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act ,— 
(i) a right  established under this Act shall not be deemed to be infringed by a farmer who at  the 
time of such infringement was not aware of the existence of such right; and  
(ii) a relief which a court may grant in any suit for infringement referred to in section 65 shall  not 
be granted by such court , nor any cognizance of any offence under this Act shall be taken , for such 
infringement by any court against a farmer who proves, before such court, that at the  time of the 
infringement he was not aware of the existence o f the right so infringed.  
43. Authorisat ion of farmers’  variety .—Notwit hstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 6) of 
section 23  and section 28 , where an essentially derived variety is derived from a farmers’  variety, the 
authoris ation under sub-section ( 2) of section 28 shall not be given by the breeder of such farmers’  variety  
except with the consent of the farmers or group of farmers or community of farmers who  have made 
contribution in the preservation or development of such variety.  
44. Exemption from fees.—A farmer or group of farmers or village community shall not be liable to 
pay any fees in any proceeding before the Authority or Registrar 1*** or the High Court under this  Act or  
the rules made thereunder.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “fees in any proceeding ” includes any fees payable 
for inspection of any document or for obtaining a copy of any decision or order or  document under this 
Act or the rules made thereunder.  
45. Gene Fund .—(1) The Central Gov ernment shall constitute a Fund to be called the National Gene 
Fund  and there shall be credited thereto — 
(a) the benefit sharing received in the prescribed manner f rom the breeder of a variety or                      
an essentially derived variety registered  under this Act , or propagating material of such variety or  
essen
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 22]
ally derived variety registered  under this Act , or propagating material of such variety or  
essentially derived variety, as the case may be;  
(b) the annual fee payable to the A uthority by way of royalty under sub-section  (1) of section  35; 
(c) the compensation deposited in the G ene Fund under sub -section ( 4) of section 41;  
(d) the contribution from any national and international organisation and other sources.  
(2) The Gene Fund shall , in the prescribed manner , be applied for meeting — 
(a) any amount to be paid by way of benefit sh aring under sub -section ( 5) of section 26;  
(b) the compensation payable under sub -section ( 3) of section 41;  
(c) the expenditure for supporting the conservation and sustainable use of genetic resources  
including in-situ and ex-situ collections and for strengthening the capability of the Panchayat  in 
carrying out such conservation and sustainable use;  
(d) the expenditure of the sche mes relating to benefit sharing  framed under section 46.  
46. Framing of schemes , etc.—(1) The Central G overnment shall, for the purposes of section 41 and 
clause ( d) of sub -section  (2) of section 45 , frame , by notification in the Official Gazette, one or more 
schemes.  
(2) In particular , and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the 
scheme may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the registration of the claims for the purposes of section 41 under the scheme and all  matters 
conne cted with such registration;  
(b) the processing of such claims for securing their enforcement and matters connected  therewith;  
(c) the maintenance of records and Register s in respect of such claims;  
(d) the utilisation, by way of disbursal (including apportionment) or otherwise, of any  amounts 
received  in satisfaction of such claims;  
                                                           
1. The words “or the Tribunal” omitted by Act 33 of 2021, s. 23 (w.e.f
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 22]
                             
1. The words “or the Tribunal” omitted by Act 33 of 2021, s. 23 (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 23]
23 
 (e) the procedure for disbursal or apportionment by the Authority in the event of dispute  
regarding such claims;  
(f) the utilisation  of benefit sharing for the purposes relating to breeding,  discovery or  
development of varieties;  
(g) the maintenance and audit of accounts with respect to the amounts referred to in clause  (d). 
CHAPTER VII  
COMPULSORY LICENCE  
47. Power of Authority to make  order for compulsory licenc e in certain circumstances .—(1) At 
any time, after the expiry of three years from the date of issue of a certificate of  registration of a variety, 
any person interested may make an application to the Authority  alleging that the reasonable requ irements 
of the public for seed  or other propagating material  of the variety have not been satisfied or that the seed 
or other propagating material of the  variety is not available to the public at a reasonable price and pray for 
the grant of  a compulsory licence to undertake production, distribution and sale of the seed or other  
propagating material of that variety.  
(2) Every application under sub -section ( 1) shall contain a statement of the nature of the  applicant’ s 
interest together with su ch particulars as may be prescribed and the facts upon  which the application is 
based.  
(3) The Authority, after consultation with  the Central Government, and if satisfied after giving an  
opportunity to the breeder of such variety to file opposition and aft er hearing the parties, on  the issue that 
the reasonable requirements of the public with respect to the variety have not  been satisfied or that the  
seed or other propagating material of the variety is not available to the public at a reasonable price, may 
order  such breeder to grant a licence to the applicant upon such terms and conditions as it may  deem fit 
and send a copy of such order to the Registrar to register  the title of such applicant as licensee  under               
sub-section  (4) of section 28  on payment
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 23]
title of such applicant as licensee  under               
sub-section  (4) of section 28  on payment of such fees by the applicant as is referred to in that sub -section.  
48. When requirement of public deemed to have not been satisfied. —In determining the question 
as to whether the reasonable requirements of the public for  seeds of a variety or  its propagating material 
as referred to in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section  (3) of section 47, the Authority shall take into account — 
(i) the nature of the variety, the time which has elapsed since the grant of the certificate of  
registration of the variety, price of the seed of the variety and the measures taken by the  breeder or 
any registered  licensee of the variety to meet the requirement of the public; and  
(ii) the capacity, ability and technical competence of the applicant to produce and market the 
variety to meet the requirement of the public.  
49. Adjournment of applicatio n for grant of compulsory licenc e.—(1) If the breeder of a variety 
registered  under this Act in respect of which any  application has been pending before the Authority under 
section 47 makes a written request  to the Authority on the ground that due to any reasonable factor, such 
breeder has been  unable to produce seed or other propagating material of the variety on a commercial 
scale to  an adequate extent till the date of making such request, the Authority may , on being satisfied  that 
the said ground is reasonable, adjourn the hearing of such application for such period not  exceeding 
twelve months in aggregate as it may consider s ufficient for optimum production  of the seed or 
propagating material of such variety , as the case  may be, by such breeder.  
(2) No adjournment of the application under sub -section ( 1) shall be granted unless the  Authority is 
satisfied that the breeder of the variety registered  under this Act in respect of  which such application is 
made , has taken immediate measures to meet the
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 23]
r this Act in respect of  which such application is 
made , has taken immediate measures to meet the reasonable  requirem ents of the public for the seed  or 
other propagating material of such variety.  
50. Duration of compulsory licence .—The Authority shall  determine the duration of the compulsory 
licences granted under this  Chapter and such duration may vary from case to case keeping in view the   
gestation periods  and other relevant factors but in any  case  it shall  not exceed the total remaining period        
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 24]
24 
 of the  protection of that variety and when a compulsory licence is granted the prescribed authority  shall , 
in the prescribed manner make available to the licensee of such compulsory licence, the  reproductive 
material of the variety relating to such compulsory licence stored in the National  Gene Bank or any other 
centre.  
51. Authority to settle terms and conditions of licence .—(1) The Authority shall,  while 
determining the terms and conditions of a compulsory  licence  under the provisions of this Chapter, 
endeavour to secure — 
(i) reasonable compensation to the breeder of the variety relating to the compulsory licence  
having regard to the nature of the variety, the expenditure incurred by such breeder in  breeding the 
variety or for developing it , and other relevant factors;  
(ii) that the compulsory licensee of such variety possesses the adequate means to provide to  the 
farmers, the seeds or other propagating material of such variety , timely and at  reasonable market 
price . 
(2) No compulsory licence granted by the Authority shall authorise the licensee to import the  variety 
relating to such licence or any seed or other propagating material of such variety from  abroad where such 
import would constitute an infringement of the  rights of the breeder of  such variety.  
52. Revocation of compulsory licence .—(1) The Authority, on its own motion or on application 
from an aggrieved person  made to it in the prescribed form, if it is satisfied that a compulsory licensee 
registered  under  this Chapter has violated any terms or conditions of his licence or it is not appropriate to  
continue further such licence in public interest, may , after giving such licensee an  opportunity to file 
opposition and of being heard , make order to revoke such l icence.  
(2) When a licence is revoked under sub -section  (1) by an order of the Authority, the  Authority shall 
send a copy of such order to the Registrar to rectify the entry or correct t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 24]
, the  Authority shall 
send a copy of such order to the Registrar to rectify the entry or correct the  Register  relating to such 
revocation and the Registrar shall rectif y the entry or correct the  Register  accordingly.  
53. Modification of compulsory licence .—The Authority may , on its own motion or on application 
from licensee of a compulsory  licence , after providing the opportunity of being heard to the breeder of the 
variety registered  under this Act relating to such compulsory licence, if it considers, in public interest, so 
to do,  modify, by order, such terms and conditions as it thinks fit and se nd a copy of such order to  the 
Registrar to correct the entries and Register  according to such modification and the  Registrar shall ensure 
such corrections to be made accordingly.  
CHAPTER VIII  
1[APPEALS ] 
54. [Tribunal .]—Omitted by the Tribunal s Reforms  Act, 2021  (33 of 2021), s. 23 (w.e.f . 4-4-2021) . 
55. [Composition of Tribunal .]—Omitted by s . 23, ibid. (w.e.f . 4-4-2021).  
56. Appeals to 2[High Court] .—(1) An appeal shall be preferred to the 2[High Court ] within the 
prescribed period from any — 
(a) order or decision of the Authority or Registrar, relating to registration of a variety; or  
(b) order or decision of the Registrar relating to regist ration as an agent or a licens ee of a variety; 
or 
(c) order or decision of the Authority relating to claim for benefi t sharing; or  
(d) order or decision of the Authority regarding revocation of compulsory licence or  modification 
of compulsory licence; or  
(e) order or decision of  the Authority regarding payment of compensation, made under this Act  or 
the rules made thereunder.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 33 of 2021, s. 23, for “ PLANT VARIETIES PROTECTION APPELLATE TRIBUNAL” (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
2. Subs. by s. 23, ibid., for “Tribunal” (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 24]
 “Tribunal” (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 25]
25 
 (2) Every such appeal shall be preferred by a petition in writing and shall be in such form and  shall 
contain such particulars as may be prescribed.  
1*    *  *   *   * 
57. Orders of 2[High Court ].—(1) The 2[High Court ] may, after giving both the parties to the appeal 
an opportunity of being  heard, pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit.  
(2) The 2[High Court ] may, at any time within thirty days from the date of the order, with a view to  
rectifying the mistake apparent  from the record, amend any order passed by it under sub -section  (1), and 
make such amendment if the mistake is brought to its notice by the  appellant or the opposite party.  
(3) In every appeal, the 2[High Court ] may,  where it is possible, hear and decide such appeal within a  
period of one year from the date of filing of the appeal.  
(4) The 2[High Court ] shall send a copy of any order  passed under this section to the Registrar.  
3*   *   *   *   * 
58. [Procedure of Tribunal ].—Omitted by the Tribunal s Reforms Act , 2021  (33 of 2021), s. 23 ( w.e.f . 
4-4-2021).  
59. [Transitional provision ].—Omitted by s . 23, ibid. (w.e.f . 4-4-2021).  
CHAPTER IX  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
60. Grants by Central Government .—The Central government may, after due appropriation made 
by Parliament by law in this  behalf, make to the Authority grants and loans of such sums of money as the 
Central  Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.  
61. Authority Fund .—(1) There shall be constituted a fund to be called the Protection of Plant 
Varieties  Authority Account and there shall be credited thereto — 
(a) all grants and loans made to the Authority by the Central Government under section 60;  
(b) all fees received by the Authority and the Registrars except the annual fee determined on  the 
basis of benefit or royalty under sub -section ( 1) of section 35;  
(c) all sums received by the Authority from such other sources as may be decided upon
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 25]
 section 35;  
(c) all sums received by the Authority from such other sources as may be decided upon by the  
Central Gove rnment.  
(2) The Protection of Plant Varieties Authority Account shall be applied for meeting — 
(a) the salaries, allowances and other remuneration of the Chairperson, officers and other  
employees of the Authority and allowances, if any, payable to the membe rs; 
(b) the other expenses of the Authority in connection with the discharge of its functions and  for 
purposes of this Act.  
62. Budget, accounts and audit. —(1) The Authority shall prepare a budget, maintain proper 
accounts and other relevant  records (including the accounts and other relevant records of the Gene Fund) 
and prepare an  annual statement of account s in such form as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government in  consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts  of the Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of  India at 
such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in  connection with such audit 
shall be payable by the Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor -Gene ral of India.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any other person appointed by him in  
connection with the audit of the accounts of the Authority shall have the same right s and privileges and 
authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India generally has in 
                                                           
1. Sub -section ( 3) omitted by Act 33 of 2021, s. 23 (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
2. Subs. by s. 23, ibid., for “ Tribunal” (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
3. Sub -section ( 5) omitted by s. 23, ibid. (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 26]
26 
 connection with the audit of the G overnment accounts and, in  particular, shall have the right to demand 
the production of books, accounts, connected  vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect 
any of the offices of the Authority.  
(4) The accounts of the Authority as certified  by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of  India or any 
other person appointed by him in his behalf together with the audit report  thereon shall be forwarded 
annuall y to the Central Government and that Government shall  cause the same to be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
63. Financial and administrative powers of the Chairperson .—The Chairperson shall exercise 
such financial and administrative powers over the  functions of the Authority as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the Chairperson shall have the authority to delegate such of his financial and  
administrative powers as he may think fit to a member or any other officer of the Authority  subject to the 
condition  that the member or such other officer shall, while exercising such  delegated powers, continue to 
be under the direction, control and supervision of the  Chairperson.  
CHAPTER X  
INFRINGEMENT , OFFENCES, PENALATIES AND PROCEDURE  
Infringement  
64. Infringement .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, a right established under this Act is 
infringed by a  person — 
(a) who, not being the breeder of a variety registered  under this Act or a registered  agent or  a 
registered  licensee of that variety, sells, exports, imports or produces such variety without the  
permission of its bree der or within the  scope of a registered  licence or registered  agency  without 
permission of the registered  licensee or registered  agent, as the cas e may be;  
(b) who uses, sells, exports, imports or produces any other variety giving such variety, the  
denomination identical with or deceptively similar to the denomination of a variety registered  under 
this Act in such manner as to cause confu
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 26]
imilar to the denomination of a variety registered  under 
this Act in such manner as to cause confusion in the  mind or general people in  identifying such 
variety so registered . 
65. Suit for infringement , etc.—(1) No suit — 
(a) for the infringement of a variety registered  under this A ct; or  
(b) relating to any right in a variety registered  under this Act,  
shall be instituted in any court inferior to a District Court having jurisdiction to try the suit.  
(2) For the purpose s of clauses ( a) and ( b) of sub -section ( 1), “District Court having  jurisdiction ” 
shall mean the District Court within the local limit of whose jur isdiction the  cause of action arises.  
66. Relief in suits for infringement. —(1) The relief which a court may grant in any suit for 
infringement referred to in section  65 includes an injunction and at the option of the plaintiff, either 
damages or a share of the  profits.  
(2) The order of injunction under sub -section ( 1) may include an ex parte  injunction or any  
interlocutory order for any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) discovery of documents;  
(b) preserving of infringing variety or documents or other evidence which are related to the  
subject -matter of the suit;  
(c) attachment of such property of the defendant which the court deems necessary to recover  
damages, costs or other pecuniary remedies which may be finally awarded to the plaintiff.  
67. Opinion of scientific adviser .—(1) When the court has to form an opinion upon any question of 
fact or a scientific issue,  such court may appoint an independent scientif ic adviser to suggest it or to 
inquire  into and report  upon the matter to enable it to from the desired opinion.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 27]
27 
 (2) The scientific adviser may be paid such remuneration or  expenses as the court may fix.  
Offences, penalties and procedure  
68. Prohibition to apply the denomination of a registered  variety .—(1) No person other than the 
breeder of a variety registered  under this Act or a registered  licensee or  a registered  agent thereof shall use 
the denomination of that variety in the manner  as may be prescribed.  
(2) A person shall be deemed to apply the denomi nation of a variety registered  under this Act  who— 
(a) applies it to the variety itself; or  
(b) applies it to any package in or with which the variety is sold, or exposed for sale, or had in  
possession such package for sale or for any purpose of trade or p roduction; or  
(c) places, encloses or annexes the variety which is  sold, or exposed for sale, or had in  possession 
for sale or for any purpose of trade or production, in or with any package or other  thing to which the 
denomination of such variety registered  under this Act has been applied;  or 
(d) uses the denomination of such variety registered  under this Act in any manner reasonably  
likely to lead to the belief that the variety or its propagating material in connection with  which it is 
used is desi gnated or described by that denomination; or  
(e) in relation to the variety uses such denomination in any advertisement, invoice, catalogue,  
business letter, business paper, price list or other commercial document and such variety is  delivered 
to a person in pursuance of a request or order made by reference to the  denomination as so used.  
(3) A denomination shall be deemed to be applied to a variety whether it is woven in,  impressed on, 
or otherwise worked into, or annexed or affixed to, such variety or to any package or other thing.  
69. Meaning of falsely applying denomination of a registered  variety. —(1) A person shall be 
deemed to falsely apply the denomination of a variety registered  under this Act who, without th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 27]
be 
deemed to falsely apply the denomination of a variety registered  under this Act who, without the assent of 
the breeder of such variety ,— 
(a) applies such denomination or a deceptively similar denomination to any variety or any  
package containing such variety;  
(b) uses any package bearing a denomination which is identical with or deceptively similar to  the 
denomination of such variety registered  under this Act, for the purpose of packing, filling  or wrapping 
therein any variety other than such variety registered  under this Act.  
(2) Any denomination of a variety registered  under this Act falsely applied as mentioned in                   
sub-section ( 1), is in this Act referred to as false denomination.  
(3) In any prosecution for falsely applying a denomination of a variety registered  under this  Act the 
burden of proving the assent of the breeder of such variety shall lie on the accused.  
70. Penalty for applying false denomination , etc.—(1) Any person who — 
(a) applies any false denomination to a variety; or  
(b) indicates the false name of a country or place or  false name and address of the breeder of a 
variety  registered  under this Act in the course of trading such  variety,  
shall, unless he proves that he acted, without intend to defraud, be  punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which shall not be less  than three months but which may extend to two years, or with fine  which 
shall not be less t han fifty thousand rupees but which may  extend to five lakh rupees, or with both.  
71. Penalty for selling varieties to which false denomination is applied, etc .—Any person who 
sells, or exposes for sale, or has in his  possession for sale or for any purpose  of trade or production o f any 
variety to which any false denomination is applied or to which an  indication of the country or place in 
which such variety was made or  produced or the name and address of the breeder of such variety  
registered  under this Act has been fa
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 27]
uced or the name and address of the breeder of such variety  
registered  under this Act has been falsely made, shall, unless he  proves — 
(a) that having taken all reasonable precautions  against committing an offence against this 
section, he had  at the time of commission of the alleged offence no reason  to suspect the genuineness 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 28]
28 
 of the denomin ation of such  variety or that any offence had been committed in respect  of indication of 
the country or place in which such variety  registered  under this Act, was made or produced or the  
name and address of the breeder of such variety;  
(b) tha t, on demand by or on behalf of the  prosecutor, he gave all the information in his 
possession  with respect to the person from whom he obtained such  variety; or  
(c) that otherwise he had acted innocently,  
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but which may 
extend to two years, or with fine  which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may  extend 
to five lakh rupees, or with both.  
72. Penalty for falsely representing a variety as registered .—Whoever makes any representation 
with respect to the  denomination of a variety or its propagating material or essentially  derived variety or 
its propagating material not being variety or its  propagating material or essentially derived variety or its 
propagating  material registered  under this Act, to the effect that it is a variety or  its propagating material 
or essentially derived variety or its  propagating material registered  under this Act or otherwise  represents 
any variety, or its propagating material, or essentially  derived variety or its propagating material not 
registered  under this  Act to the effect that it is registered  under this Act shall be  punishable with 
imprisonment for a term, which shall not be less  than six months but which may ex tend to three years, or 
with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may  extend to five lakh rupees, or with 
both.  
73. Penalty for subsequent offence. —Whoever , having already been convicted of an offence  under 
this Act is again convicted of such offence shall be  punishable for the second and for every subsequent 
offence with  imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but  w
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 28]
every subsequent 
offence with  imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but  which may extend to three 
years, or with fine which shall not be  less than two lakh rupees but which may extend to twenty lakh  
rupees, or with both.  
74. No offence in certain cases. —The provisions of this Act relating to offences shall be  subject to 
the right created as recognis ed by this Act and no act or  omission shall be deemed to be an of fence under 
the provisions of this Act  if such act or omission is permissible under this Act.  
75. Exemption  of certain persons employed in ordinary course of business .—Where a person 
accused of an offence under this Act  proves that in the ordinary course of his employment, he has acted  
without any intention to commit the offence and having taken all  reasonable precautions against 
committing the offence charged, he  had, at the time of the commission of the alleged offence, no reason  
to suspect the genuineness of the act so charged as an o ffence and  on demand made by or on behalf of the 
prosecutor, he gave all the  information in his possession with respect to the persons on whose  behalf the 
offence was committed, he shall be acquitted.  
76. Procedure where invalidity of registration is plead ed by the accused .—(1) Where the offence 
charged under this Act is in  relation to a variety or its propagating material or essentially derived  variety 
or its propagating material registered  under this Act and the  accused pleads that the registration of such 
variety or its propagating material or  essentially derived variety or its propagating material, as the case 
may be, is invalid and the  court is satisfied that such offence is prima facie not tenable, it shall not 
proceed with the  charge but shall adjo urn the proceedings for three months from the date on which the 
plea of  the accused is recorded to enable the accused to file an application before the Registrar under  this 
Act for the rectificat
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 28]
o enable the accused to file an application before the Registrar under  this 
Act for the rectification of the Register  on the ground that the registration is in valid.  
(2) If the accused  proves to the court that he has  made  such application within the time so limited or 
within such further  time as the court for sufficient cause allow, the further proceedings  in the prosecution 
shall stand stayed till the disposal of such  application for rectification.  
(3) If within a period of three months or within such  extended time as may be allowed by the court, 
the accused fails to  apply to the Registrar for rectification of the Register , the court shall  proceed with the 
case as if the registration were valid.  
(4) Where before institution of a complaint of an offence  referred to in sub -section ( 1), any 
application for the rectification of  the Register  concerning the registration of the variety or its  propagating 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 29]
29 
 material or essentially derived variety or its propagating  material, as the case may be, in question on the 
ground of invalidity  of such registration has already been properly made to and is  pending before the 
Registrar, the court shall stay the further  proceedings in  the prosecution pending the disposal of the  
application aforesaid and shall determine the charge against the  accused in conformity with the result of 
the application for  rectification.  
77. Offences by companies .—(1) If the person committing an offence und er this Act is  a company, 
the company as well as every person in charge of, and  responsible to, the company for the conduct of its 
business at the  time of the commission of the offence shall be deemed to be guilty of  the offence and shall 
be liable to be proceeded against and punished  accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall  render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that  the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had  exercised 
all due dilige nce to prevent the commission of such  offence . 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act  has been 
committed by a  company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance o f, or that the commission of the offence is  attributable to any neglect on the part of any 
director, manager,  secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager,  secretary or other 
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that  offence an d shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished  accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section ,— 
(a) “company ” means any  body corporate and  includes a firm or ot her association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner  in the firm.  
CHAPTER XI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
78. Protection of security of India. —Notwithstanding anything contai
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 29]
 
CHAPTER XI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
78. Protection of security of India. —Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the  Authority 
or the Registrar shall — 
(a) not disclose any information relating to the  registration of a variety or any application relating 
to the  registration of a variety under this Act, which it considers  prejudicial to the interest of the 
security of India; and  
(b) take any action regarding the cancellation of  registration of such varieties registered  under this 
Act which the Central Government may by notification in the  Official Gazette specify in the interest 
of the security of  India.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, the  expression “security of India ” means any action 
necessary for the  security of India which relates to the use of any produce of any  variety registered  under 
this Act directly or indirectly for the  purposes of war or military establishment or for the purposes of war  
or other emergency in international relations.  
79. Implied warranty o n sale of registered  variety, etc .—Where a denomination of a variety or its 
propagating  material or essentially derived variety or its propagating material  registered  under this Act 
has been applied to the variety or its  propagating material or essentially  derived variety or its propagating  
material, as the case may be, on sale or in the contract for sale of  such variety or its propagating material 
or essentially derived variety  or its propagating material, as the case may be, the seller shall be  deemed to 
warrant that the denomination is a genuine  denomination and not falsely applied, unless the contrary is  
expressed in writing signed by or on behalf of the seller and  delivered at the time of the sale of the variety 
or its propagating  material or essentiall y derived variety or its propagating material, as  the case may be, or 
contract to and accepted by the buyer.  
80. Death of p arty to  a proceeding. —If a person who is a part
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 29]
act to and accepted by the buyer.  
80. Death of p arty to  a proceeding. —If a person who is a party to a proceeding under this  Act (not 
being a proceeding in a court) dies pending the proceeding,  the Authority or the Registrar, as the case may 
be, may, on request,  and on proof to the satisfaction of such Authority or Registrar, of  the transmission of 
the interest of the deceased person, sub stitute in the proceedings his successor in int erest in his place, or, 
if the  Authority or the Registrar is of opinion that the interest of the  deceased person is sufficiently 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 30]
30 
 represented by the surviving party,  permit the proceedings to continue without the substitution of his  
successor in interest.  
81. Right of registered  agent and the registered  licensee to institute suit .—The registered  agent or 
the registered  licensee of a  variety or its propagating material or essentially derived variety or  its 
propagating material registered  under this Act may institute  appropriate proceedings in the court under 
this Act on behalf of the  breeder of such variety or its propagating material or essentially  derived variety 
or its propagating material, as the case may be, if  such age nt or licensee  has been authoris ed in the 
prescribed  manner by such breeder for doing so.  
82. Evidence of entry in Register , etc., and things done by the Authority and the Registrar .—(1) 
A copy of any entry in the Register , or of any  document issued under this Act purporting to be certified 
by the  Authority or the Registrar and sealed with the seal of such Authority  or Registrar, as the case may 
be, shall be admitted in evidence in all  courts and in all proceedings without further proof or production 
of the original . 
(2) A certificate purporting to be under the hand of the  Authority or the Registrar, as the case may be, 
as to any entry,  matter or things that such Au thority or Registrar is authoris ed by  this Act or the rules to 
make or do shall be prima facie evidence  of the entry having been made, and of the content thereof, or of 
the matter or things having been done or not done.  
83. Authority, Registrar and other officers not compellable to production of Register , etc.—The 
Authority or the Registrar or any officer working  under the Authority or the Registrar, as the case may be, 
shall not,  in any legal proceedings, be compelled to produce the Register  or any other document in its or 
his custody, the content of which can  be proved by the production of a certified cop y issued under this 
Act in the prescribed 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 30]
hich can  be proved by the production of a certified cop y issued under this 
Act in the prescribed manner or to appear as a witness to prove the  matter therein recorded unless by 
order of the court made for  special cause.  
84. Document open to public inspection .—Any person may, on an application to the Authority or 
the Registrar, as the case may be, and on payment of such fees as may be prescribed, obtain a certified 
copy of any entry in the  Register  or any other document in any proceedings under this Act  pending before 
such Authority or Registrar or may inspect such entry or document.  
85. Report of Authority to be placed before Parliament. —The Central Government shall cause to 
be placed  before both Houses  of Parliament once a year a report regarding the  performance of the 
Authority under this Act.  
86. Government to be bound .—The provisions of this Act shall be binding on the  Government.  
87. Proceedings before Authority or Registrar .—All proceedings before the Authority or the 
Registrar,  as the case may be, relating to registration of variety or essentially  derived variety, registration 
of agent, registration of licence or  registration of compulsory licensing under this Act shall be deemed  to 
be judicial proceedings within the meaning of sections 193 and  228, and for the purpose of section 196 of 
the Indian P enal Code  (45 of 1860) and the Authority or the Registrar, as the case may be, shall be  
deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and  Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) . 
88. Protection of action taken in good faith. —No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central Government, or against the Chairperson, or  members, or the Registrar or any 
person acting under such  Government, Authority or Registrar under the provisions of this Act,  for 
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in  pursuance of this Act or any rule, 
regu
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 30]
hing which is in good faith done or intended to be done in  pursuance of this Act or any rule, 
regulation, scheme or order made  thereunder.  
89. Bar of jurisdiction .—No civil court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any  matter which the 
Authority or the Registrar 1*** is empowered by or under this Act to determine.  
90. Members and staff of Authority, etc.,  to be public  servants .—The Chairperson, members, 
officers and other  employees of the Authority and the Registrar -Gene ral and the  officers and other 
                                                           
1. The words “or the Tribunal” omitted by Act 33 of 2021, s. 23 (w.e.f. 4 -4-2021).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 31]
31 
 employees working under him shall be deemed to  be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of 
the Indian  Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
91. Exemption from tax on wealth and income .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Wealth -tax Act, 1957  (27 of 1957) , the Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961) , or any other enactment for the  
time being in force relating to tax on wealth, income, profits or  gains, the Authority shall not be liable to 
pay wealth -tax, income -tax or any other t ax in respect of its wealth, income, profits or gains  derived.  
92. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect  notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any  other  law for the time being in force or in any instrument 
having  effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.  
93. Power of Centra l Government to give directions .—The Central Government may give 
direction s to the  Authority as it may think necessary in the p ublic interest for the  execution of all or any of 
the functions of the Authority under any  provision of this Act or rules and regulations made thereunder.  
94. Power to remove difficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the  provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order,  published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be  necess ary for removing the difficulty : 
Provided that no order shall be made under t his section  after the expiry of two years from the date of 
commencement of this  Act. 
(2) Every order made under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid  before each House of Parliament.  
95. Power to make regulations. —(1) The Authority may, with the previous approval of the Central 
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette,  make regulations consistent with this Act and the 
rules made  thereunder to carry  out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and wi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 31]
nd the 
rules made  thereunder to carry  out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of  the foregoing  power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely :— 
(a) duties and jurisdiction of the Registrars under  sub-section ( 4) of section 12;  
(b) the term of office and the conditions of service of  the Registrars under sub-section ( 5) of 
section 12;  
(c) the criteria of distinctiveness, uniformity and  stability for registration of extant variety under 
sub-section  (2) of section 15;  
(d) the manner in which a single and distinct  denomination to a variety shall be assigned by the  
applicant under sub -section ( 1) of section 17;  
(e) the  matter s governing the assignment of  denomination to a variety under sub -section ( 2) of 
section  17; 
(f) the time within which the Registrar may require  the applicant to propose another denominati on 
under  sub-section ( 3) of section 17;  
(g) the form of application under clause ( d) of sub-section  (1) of section 18;  
(h) the standards for evaluating seed during tests  under sub -section ( 1) of section 19;  
(i) the quantity of seeds or propagating material  including parental line seeds to be deposited by a 
breeder  and the time to be specified under sub -section ( 1) of section 27;  
(j) the limitations and conditions subject to which a  breeder may authoris e a person to produce, 
sell, market  or otherwise deal wi th variety under sub -section ( 2) of section 28;  
(k) the form for authoris ation under sub -section ( 3) of section 28.  
96. Power of  Central Government to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in  the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this  Act. 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 32]
32 
 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality  of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the  following matters, namely :— 
(i) the term of office of the Chairperson and the  manner of filling  the post under sub -section ( 6) of 
section 3;  
(ii) the salary and allowances of the Chairperson and  his conditions of service in respect of leave, 
pension,  provident fund and other matters and the allowances for  non-official members for attending 
the meeting under sub-section  (8) of section 3;  
(iii) the time and place of meetings of the Authority  and the rules of procedure in regard to the 
transaction of  business at its meetings [including the quorum at its  meetin gs and the transaction of 
business of its Standing  Committee appointed under sub -section ( 7) of section  3] under                   
sub-section ( 1) of section 4;  
(iv) the control and restriction regarding appointment  of the officers and other employees of t he 
Authority and the  method of such appointment, salary and allowances and  other conditions of service 
under section 6;  
(v) the powers and duties of the Chairperson under  section 7;  
(vi) the terms and conditions subject to which and the  manner in which  the measures referred to 
in sub -section ( 1) of section 8 may provide for the registration of new extant  varieties under clause ( a) 
of sub -section ( 2) of that section;  
(vii) the manner for arranging production and sale of  the seed under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 2) 
of section 8;  
(viii) the order s by the Authority or the Registrar as to  costs under clause ( b) of section 11;  
(ix) the salary and allowances of Registrar -General of  Plant Varieties and the conditions of 
service in respect of his  leave, pension, provident fund and other matters under  sub-section ( 3) of 
section 12;  
(x) the matter s to be included in the National Register  of Plant Varieties under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 13;  
(xi) the manner o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 32]
he National Register  of Plant Varieties under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 13;  
(xi) the manner of authoris ing a person under clause  (e) of sub -section ( 1) of section 16 ; 
(xii) the fees under clause ( g) and the other particulars  under clause ( i) which shall accompany the 
application  under sub -section ( 1) of section 18;  
(xiii) the form of application under the proviso to sub -section  (1) of section 18;  
(xiv) the period within which after making application a  proof of the right to make the application 
is to be furnished  under sub -section ( 3) of section 18;  
(xv) the fees to be deposited by the applicant under  sub-section ( 2) of section 19;  
(xvi) the manner and m ethod of conducting the tests  under sub -section ( 3) of section 19;  
(xvii) the manner of advertising application, conditions  or limitations and specifications of variety 
for registration  including its photographs or drawings under sub -section ( 1) of section  21; 
(xviii) the manner of giving notice and the fees payable  therefor under sub -section ( 2) of                
section 21;  
(xix) the manner of sending counter -statement under  sub-section ( 4) of section 21;  
(xx) the manner of submitting evidence and the time within which such evidence may be 
submitted under sub -section  (6) of section 21;  
(xxi) the documents and fees under sub -section ( 1) and  the tests to be conducted and the 
procedure to be followed  under sub -section ( 3) of section 23; 
(xxii) the form of a certificate of registration and the  other authority to which a copy thereof shall 
be sent under  sub-section ( 8) of section 23;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 33]
33 
 (xxiii) the form of a certificate of registration and the  other authority to which a copy thereof and 
the maximum  time for issu ing the certificate of registration under sub-section  (2) of section 24;  
(xxiv) the manner of giving notice to the applicant  under sub -section ( 3) of section 24;  
(xxv) the fees for review and renewal under sub -section  (6) of section 24;  
(xxvi) the contents  of the certificate and the manner of  publishing such contents and inviting 
claim of benefits  sharing under sub -section ( 1) of section 26;  
(xxvii) the form for submitting claims of benefit  sharing and the fees to be accompanied therewith 
under  sub-section (2) of section 26;  
(xxviii ) the ma nner in which and the time within which  opposition to claims shall be submitted 
under sub -section  (3) of section 26;  
(xxix) the manner of making reference under sub-section  (7) of section 26;  
(xxx) the manner of making an application for  registration for title and the fees to be accompanied  
therewith under sub -section ( 4) of section 28;  
(xxxi) the manner of referring the disputes regarding  registration of entitlement under the proviso 
to sub -section  (4) of section 28;  
(xxxii) the manner to enter into a certificate the brief  conditions of entitlement under                
sub-section ( 5) of section  28; 
(xxxii i) the manner of making an application for  varying the terms of registration under clause ( a) 
of sub-section  (9) of section 28;  
(xxxiv) the manner of making an application by the  registered  breeder and certain other for 
cancellation of  terms of registration under clause ( b) of sub -section (9) of section 28;  
(xxxv) the manner of application by any person other  than the breeder, his successor, the 
registered  agent or the  registered  licensee for cancellation of terms of registration  under clause ( c) of 
sub-section ( 9) of section 28;  
(xxxvi) the manner of application for cancellation of  the terms of registration under c
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 33]
ction 28;  
(xxxvi) the manner of application for cancellation of  the terms of registration under clause ( d) of 
sub-section ( 9) of section 28;  
(xxxvii ) the manner of application for cancellation of  the terms of registration under clause ( e) of 
sub-section ( 9) of section 28;  
(xxxviii ) the manner of issuing notice to the registered  breeder of a var iety or his successor or to 
each registered  agent  or registered  licensee (not being the applicant) under  sub-section ( 10) of           
section 28;  
(xxxix) the manner of giving notice to the r egistrar  under s ub-section ( 1) of section 33;  
(xl) the manner of notifying to the registered  agent or  registered  licensee  under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 33;  
(xli) the period within which the notice of opposition  under sub -section ( 3) of section 33 may be 
given;  
(xlii) the manner of making application u nder section  34; 
(xliii) the manner of depositing fees under sub -section  (2) of section 35;  
(xliv) the manner of making application under sub-section  (1) of section 36;  
(xlv) the manner of applying to the Registrar under  sub-section ( 2) of section 36;  
(xlvi) the manner of giving notice under sub -section  (4) of section 36;  
(xlvii)  the manner of application under sub -section ( 1) of section 37;  
(xlviii) the manner of making application under sub-section  (2) of section 37;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 34]
34 
 (xlix) the manner to apply to the Registrar under sub-section  (1) of section 38;  
(l) the manner of advertising application and to give  notice to the Registrar, and the time from the 
date of the  advertisement within which a person may give such notice  under sub -section ( 2) of      
section 38;  
(li) the manner of advertising the denomination of the  variety under sub -section ( 3) of section 38;  
(lii) the manner of recognition and reward from Gene  Fund under clause ( iii) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 39;  
(liii) the manner of claiming compensation and filing  of opposition under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 39;  
(liv) the manner of issuing notice and filing objection  under sub -section ( 3) of section 41;  
(lv) the manner of receiving benefit sharing under  clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1) of section 45;  
(lvi) the manner of applying Gene Fund under sub-section  (2) of section 45;  
(lvii) the particulars to be contained in the  application under sub -section ( 2) of section 47;  
(lviii) the authority and the manner in which such  authority shall make available to the 
compulsory licensee  the reproduction material of the variety under section 50;  
(lix) the form for making application under sub-section  (1) of section 52;  
(lx) the period within which an appeal shall be  preferred under sub-section ( 1) of section 56;  
(lxi) the form of petition and the particulars which  such petition shall contain under                             
sub-section ( 2) of section  56; 
(lxii ) the form for preparing annual statement of  accounts under sub -section ( 1) of section 62;  
(lxiii) the financial and administrative powers which  the Chairperson shall exercise under              
section 63;  
(lxiv) the manner of using the denomination of a  variety under sub -section ( 1) of section 68;  
(lxv) the manner of authoris ing registered  agent or  registered  licensee under section 81;  
(lxvi) the manner of issuing certified copy of content  of R
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’ RIGHTS ACT, 2001.pdf - page 34]
egistered  licensee under section 81;  
(lxvi) the manner of issuing certified copy of content  of Register  or any other document under 
section 83;  
(lxvii) the fees payable for obtaining a certified copy of,  or to inspect, any entry in the Register  or 
any other  document under section 84;  
(lxviii ) any other matter which is to be, or may be,  prescribed or in respect of which this Act 
makes no  provision or makes insufficient provision and provision is,  in the opi nion of the Central 
Government, necessary for the  proper implementation of this Act.  
97. Rules, regulations and schemes  to be laid before Parliament .—Every rule and every regulation 
and every scheme  made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be afte r it is  made, before each House 
of Parliament, while it is in session, for a  total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or  in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the  session immediately 
following the session  or the successive sessions  aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule  or regulation or scheme or both House s agree that the rule or  regulation or scheme should not 
be made, the rule or regulation or  scheme shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be  of 
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such  modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity  of anything previously done under that rule or regulation or  scheme.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVIDENT FUNDS ACT, 1925.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE PROVIDENT FUNDS ACT, 1925  
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
3. Protection of compulsory deposits.  
4. Provisions regarding re -payments.  
5. Rights of nominees.  
6. Power to make deductions.  
6A. Withholding or recovery of Government contributions in case of Central Government 
officers taking up, without prior permission, commercial employment within two years of 
their retirement.  
7. Protection for acts done in good faith . 
8. Power to apply the Act to ot her Provident Funds.  
9. Savings as to estates of soldiers.  
10. [Repealed .]. 
THE SCHEDULE.   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVIDENT FUNDS ACT, 1925.pdf - page 2]
2 
 THE PROVIDENT FUNDS A CT, 1925  
ACTNO. 19 OF 19251 
[27th August, 1925.]  
An Act to amend and consolidate the law relating to Government and other Provident Funds.  
WHEARES  it is expedient to amend and consolidate the law relating to Government and other 
Provident Funds;  
It is hereby enacted as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Provident Funds 
Act, 1925.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India 2[except the State of Jammu and Kashmir *] 3***. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date4 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or 
context, — 
(a) “compulsory deposit ” means a subscription to, or deposit in, a Provident Fund which, 
under the rules of the Fund, is not, until the happening of some specified contingency, 
repay able on demand otherwise than for the purpose of the payment of, premia in respect of a 
policy of life insurance, 5[or the payment of subscriptions or premia in respect of a family 
pension fund],  and includes any contribution 6***  and any interest or incr ement which has 
accrued under the rules of the fund on any such subscription, deposit or contribution, and 
also any such subscription, deposit, contribution, interest or increment remaining to the credit 
of the subscriber or depositor after the happening o f any such contingency;  
(b) “contribution ” means any amount credited in a Provident Fund, by 7[any authority 
administering the Fund], by way of addition to, 8[a subscription to, or deposit or balance 
at the credit of an individual account in,] the Fund; an d “contributory Provident Fund ” 
means a Provident Fund the rules of which provide for the crediting of contributions;  
(c) “dependant ” means any of the following relatives of -a deceased subscriber to, or a 
depositor in, a Provident Fund, namely, a wife, husband, parent, child, minor brother, 

<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVIDENT FUNDS ACT, 1925.pdf - page 2]
r to, or a 
depositor in, a Provident Fund, namely, a wife, husband, parent, child, minor brother, 
unmarried sister and a deceased son's widow and child, and, where no parent of the 
subscriber or depositor is alive, a paternal grand -parent;  
(d) “Government Provident Fund ” means a Provident Fund, other than a 
Railwa y Provident Fund, constituted by the authority of 9[the Secretary of State, the 
Central Government, the Crown Representative or any State Government] for any class or  
  
                                                      
1. This Act has been declared to be in force in —the district of Khondmals by Regulation 4 of 1936, s. 3 and Sch.; and the 
district of Angul  by Regulation 5 of 1936, s. 3 and Sch., also partially extended to Berar by C.P. and Berar Act 4 of 1941; 
amended partially in U.P. by U.P. Act 19 of 19 53. 
The Act has been extended to Goa, Daman and Diu by Regulation 12 of 1962, s. 3 and Sch.; to Pondicherry (w.e.f. 1 -10-
1963) by Regulation 7 of 1963, s. 3 and Sch. I, to Dadra and Nagar Haveli (w.e.f. 1 -7-1965) by Regulation 6 of 1963, s. 2 
and Sch.I and to Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands (w.e.f. 1 -10-1967) by Regulation 8 of 1965, s. 3 and  Sch. 
2. Subs. by Act  3 of 1851, s. 3 and  Schedule, for “except Part B States ”.  
3. The words “including British Baluchistan” omitted by the A.O. 1948.  
4. 1st April, 1926, Gazette of India, 1925, Pt. I, p. 1182.  
5. Ins. by Act 1 of 1930, s. 2.  
6. The words  “credited in respect of any such subscription or deposit” omitted by s. 2, ibid. 
7. Subs. by Act 28 of 1925, s. 2, for “the authority by which the Fund has been constituted”.  
8. Subs. by Act 1 of 1930, s. 2, for “or otherwise in respect of, a subscription  to, or deposit in,”.  
9. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “the Government”.  
*. Vide Notification No. S.O. 3912 (E), dated 30th October, 2019, this Act is made applicable to the Union territory of Jammu 
and Kashmir and the Union territory of Ladakh . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVIDENT FUNDS ACT, 1925.pdf - page 2]
able to the Union territory of Jammu 
and Kashmir and the Union territory of Ladakh . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVIDENT FUNDS ACT, 1925.pdf - page 3]
3 
 classes of 1[persons in the service of the Government] or 2[of persons employed in 
educ ational institutions or employed by bodies existing solely for educational purposes], 
3[and references in this Act to the Government shall be construed accordingly];  
(e)“Provident Fund ” means a fund in which subscriptions or deposits of any class or 
classes of employees are received and held on their individual accounts, and includes any 
contributions 4*** and any interest or increment accruing on such subscriptions, deposits or 
contribu tions under the rules of the Fund ; 
5[(f) “Railway administration ” means — 
(i) any company administering a railway or tramway in 6[any part of India] either 
under a special Act of Parliament7[of the United Kingdom] or an Indian law, or under 
under contract with th e Government, or  
(ii)the manager of any railway or tramway administered by the Central Government] or by a 
State Government,  
and includes, in any case referred to in sub -clause  (ii) the 8[Central Government] or the. State 
Government, as the case may be;]  
(g) “Railway Provident Fund ” means a Provident Fund constituted by the authority of a rail  
Way administration for any class or classes of its employees.  
3. Protection of compulsory deposits .—(1) A compulsory deposit in any Government or 
Railway Provident Fun d shall not in any way be capable of being assigned or charged and shall 
not be liable to attachment under any decree or order of any Civil, Revenue or Criminal Court in 
respect of any debt or liability incurred by the subscriber or depositor, and neither the Official 
Assignee nor any receiver appointed under the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920 (5 of 1920), 
shall be entitled to, or have any claim on, any such compulsory deposit.  
(2)Any sum standing to the credit of any subscriber to, or depositor in, any su ch Fund at 
the time of his decease and payable under the rules of the Fund to any dependant of the 
subscriber or depositor, or to such p
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVIDENT FUNDS ACT, 1925.pdf - page 3]
d payable under the rules of the Fund to any dependant of the 
subscriber or depositor, or to such person as may be authorised by law to receive payment on 
his behalf, shall, subject to any deduction authorised by this A ct and, save where the 
dependant is the widow or child of the subscriber or depositor, subject also to the rights of an 
assignee under an assignment made before the commencement of this Act, vest in the 
dependant, and shall, subject as aforesaid, be free f rom any debt or other liability incurred by 
the deceased or incurred by the dependant before the death of the subscriber or depositor . 
4. Provisions regarding re -payments. —(1)When under the rules of any Government or 
Railway Prov ident Fund the sum standing to the credit of any subscriber or depositor, or the 
balance thereof after the making of any deduction authorised by this Act, has become payable, 
the officer whose duty is to make the payment shall pay the sum or balance, as th e case may 
be, to the subscriber or depo sitor, or, if he is dead, shall — 
(a)if the sum or balance, or, any part thereof, vests in a dependant under the 
provisions of section 3, pay the same to the dependant or to such person as may be 
authorised by law to receive payment on his behalf; or  
 
                                                      
1. Subs. b y Act 25 of 1942, s. 3 and the Second Schedule , for “its employees”.  
2. Subs. by Act 7 of 1927, s. 2, for “for teachers in educational institutions”.  
3. Ins. by the A.O. 1937.  
4. The words “credited in respect of such subscriptions or deposits” omitted by Act 1 of 1930, s. 2. 
5. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for clause ( f). 
6. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for “a part A State or a part C State”.  
7. Ins. by the A.O. 1950.  
8. Subs. by the A.O. 1948, for “Federal Railway Authority”.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVIDENT FUNDS ACT, 1925.pdf - page 4]
4 
 (b) if the whole sum or balance, as the case may be, does not exceed five thousand 
rupees, pay the same, or any part thereof, which is not payable under clause ( a),to any person 
nominated to receive it under the rules of the Fund, or, if no person is so nominated, to any 
person appearing to him to be otherwise entitled to receive it; or  
(c) in the case of any sum or balance, or any part thereof, which is not payable to any person 
under clause ( a)or clause ( b) pay the same, —  
(i)to any person nominated to receive it under the rules of the Fund, on production 
by such person of probate or letters of adminis tration evidencing the grant to him of 
administration to the estate of the deceased or a certificate granted under the Succession 
Certificate Act, 18891 (7 of 1889), or under the Bombay Regulation VIII of 1827, 
entitling the holder thereof to receive payme nt of such sum, balance or part, or  
(ii)where no person is so nominated, to any person who produces such probate, letters or 
certificate:  
Provided that, where the whole or any part of any sum standing to the credit of the 
subscriber or depositor has been a ssigned to any other person before the commencement of this 
Act, and notice in writing of the assignment has been received by the officer from the assignee, 
the officer shall, after making any deduction authorised by this Act and any payment due under 
clause ( a)to or on behalf of the widow or children of the subscriber or depositor — 
(i) if the subscriber or depositor or, if he is dead, the person to whom in the absence 
of any valid assignment the sum or balance would be payable under this sub -section 
gives his consent in writing, pay the sum or part or the balance thereof, as the case may 
be, to the assignee, or  
(ii) if such consent is not forthcoming, withhold payment of the sum, part or balance, as the 
case may be, pending a decision of a competent C ivil Court as to the person entitled to receive it.  
(2) The making of a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVIDENT FUNDS ACT, 1925.pdf - page 4]
 decision of a competent C ivil Court as to the person entitled to receive it.  
(2) The making of any payment authorised by sub -section ( 1) shall be a full discharge to the 
Government or the railway administration, as the case may be, from all liability in respect of so 
much of the su m standing to the credit of the subscriber or depositor as is equivalent to the 
amount so paid.  
5. Rights of nominees .—2[(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time 
being in force or in any disposition, whether testamentary or otherwise,  by a subscriber to, or 
depositor in, a Government or Railway Provident Fund of the sum standing to his credit in the 
Fund, or of any part thereof, where any nomination, duly made in accordance with the rules of 
the Fund, purports to confer upon any person  the right to receive the whole or any part of such 
sum on the death of the subscriber or depositor occurring before the sum has become payable or 
before the sum, having become payable, has been paid, the said person shall, on the death as 
aforesaid of the  subscriber or depositor, become entitled, to the exclusion of all other persons, to 
receive such sum or part thereof, as the case may be, unless — 
(a) such nomination is at any time varied by another nomination made in like manner or 
expressly cancelled by  notice given in the manner and to the authority prescribed by those 
rules, or  
(b) such nomination at any time becomes invalid by reason of the happening of some 
contingency specified therein, —  
and if the said person predeceases the subscriber or deposito r, the nomination shall, so far as it 
relates to the right conferred upon the said person, become void and of no effect:  
Provided that where provision has been duly made in the nomination in accordance with 
the rules of the Fund, conferring upon some other  person such right in the stead of the person 
                                                      
1. See now the Indian Succession Act, 19
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVIDENT FUNDS ACT, 1925.pdf - page 4]
son 
                                                      
1. See now the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925).  
2. Subs. by Act 11 of 1946, s. 2, for sub -section ( 1). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVIDENT FUNDS ACT, 1925.pdf - page 5]
5 
 deceased, such right shall, upon the decease as aforesaid of the said person, pass to such other 
person.]  
(2)Notwithstanding anything contained in 1[the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925)] 
or the Bombay R egulation VIII of 1827, any 2[person, who becomes entitled as aforesaid, may  
be granted] a certificate -under that Act, or that Regulation, as the case may be, entitling him to 
receive payment of such sum or part, and such certificate shall not be deemed to  be invalidated 
or superseded by  any grant to any other person of probate or letters of administration to the 
estate of the deceased.  
3[(3) The provisions of this section as amended by sub -section ( 1)of section 2 of the Provident Funds 
(Amendment) Act, 1946 (11 of 1946), shall apply also to all such nominations made before the date of 
the commencement of that Act: 
Provided that the provisions of this section as so amended shall not operate to affect any 
case, in which before the said date any sum has been paid, or has under the rules of the Fu nd 
become payable in pursuance of any nomination duly made in accordance with those rules.]  
6. Power to make deductions .—When the sum standing to the credit of any subscriber or 
depositor in any Government or Railway Provident Fund which is a contributory Provident 
Fund becomes payable, there may, if the authority 4[specified in this behalf in. the rules of the 
fund] so di rects, be deducted therefrom and paid to 5[Government or the Railway admini -
station , as the case may bed ],— 
(a) any amount due under a liability incurred by the subscriber or depositor to 
5[Government or the Railway administration], but not exceeding in an y case the total 
amount of any contributions credited to the account of the subscriber or depositor and of 
any interest or increment which has accrued on such contributions; or  
(b) where the subscriber or depositor has been dismissed from 6[his employment]  
for any reasons specified in this behalf in the ru
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVIDENT FUNDS ACT, 1925.pdf - page 5]
sitor has been dismissed from 6[his employment]  
for any reasons specified in this behalf in the rules of the Fund, or where he has 
resigned such employment within five years of the commencement thereof, the whole 
or any part of the amount of any such contributions, interest and increment.  
7[6A. Withhol ding or recovery of Government contributions in case of Central 
Government officers taking up, without prior permission, commercial employment within 
two years of their retirement. —(1) In this section, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Central G overnment officer ” means a subscriber to, or depositor in, a contributory 
provident fund constituted by the Central Government, who, immediately before his 
retirement, is a member of a Central Service Class I, but does not include an officer 
appointed under a contract of se rvice for a specified term;  
(b) “commercial employment ” means employment in any capacity (including that of 
an agent) under any company, co -operative society, firm or individual engaged in 
trading, commercial, industrial, financial or professional business  and includes also — 
(i) a directorship of a company;  
(ii) the holding of any office, whether elective or otherwise, such as that of 
president, chairman, manager, secretary, treasurer, by whatever name called in a co -
operative society; and  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 35 of 1950, s. 3 and the Second Schedule, for “the Succession Certificate Act, 1889”.  
2. Subs. by Act 11 of 1946, s. 2, for certain words.  
3. Added by s. 2, ibid.  
4. Subs. by Act 28 of 1925, s. 3, for “by which the Fund has been constituted”.  
5. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for “that authority”.  
6. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for “the employment of that authority”.  
7. Ins. by Act 46 of 1975, s. 2 (w.e.f. 7 -2-1977).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVIDENT FUNDS ACT, 1925.pdf - page 6]
6 
 (iii) the setting  up of practice, either independently or as partner of a firm, as 
adviser or consultant in matters in respect of which the Central Government officer, — 
(A)has no professional  qualifications and the matters in respect of which 
the practice is to be set up or is carried on are relatable to his official knowledge or 
experience, or  
(B) has professional qualification, but the matters in respect of which such practice is to 
be set up are such as are likely to give his clients an unfair advantage by reason of the  posts 
held by him under the Central Government, or  
(C) has to undertake work involving liaison or contact with the offices or officers of 
Central Government,  
but does not include employment in or under a corporation or company wholly or substantially 
owne d or controlled by Government or employmen t in or under a body controlled  or financed 
wholly or substantially by Government;  
(c) “Government contributions ” means contributions made after the commencement of the 
Provident Funds (Amendment) Act, 1975 (46 of  1975), in respect of any period after such 
commencement, by the Central Government or by a State Government or by a local authority within 
the meaning of the Local Authorities Loans Act, 1914 (9 of 1914);  
(d) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made by  the Central Government by notification in 
the Official Gazette.  
(2)No Central Government officer shall have any right to the Government contributions made to his 
credit in a contributory provident fund in any case where he takes up commercial employment a t any 
time before the expiry of two years from the date of his retirement without the prior permission of the 
Central Government.  
Explanation 1.—For the purposes of this sub -section and sub -section ( 7), “date of retirement ” in 
relation to a Central Government officer re -employed after retirement without any break either in the 
same or any other Class I post under the Central Government or any 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVIDENT FUNDS ACT, 1925.pdf - page 6]
without any break either in the 
same or any other Class I post under the Central Government or any other equivalent post under a State 
Government, shall mean the date on which such C entral Government officer finally ceases to be re -
employed in Government service.  
Explanation 2.—A Central Government officer permitted by the Central Government to take up a 
particular commercial employment during his leave preparatory to retirement shall  be deemed, for the 
purposes of this sub -section, to have obtained prior permission of the Central Government for his 
continuance in such employment after retirement.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub -section (4), the Central Government may, by order in  
writing, on an application made in the prescribed form by a Central Government officer, grant, 
subject to such conditions, if any, as it may deem necessary, permission, or refuse, for reasons to 
be recorded in the order, permission, to such officer to tak e up the commercial employment 
specified in the application.  
(4)In granting or refusing permission under this section to a Central Government officer for 
taking up any commercial employment, the Central Government shall have regard to the following 
factors , namely: — 
(a) the nature of the employment proposed to be taken up and the antecedents of the 
employer;  
(b) whether his duties in the employment which he proposes to take up might be such as to bring 
him into conflict with Government;  
(c) whether the officer while in service had any such dealing with the employer under whom lie 
proposes to seek employment as might afford a reasonable basis for the suspicion that such officer 
had shown favours to such employer;  
(d) any other relevant factors which may be prescribed.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVIDENT FUNDS ACT, 1925.pdf - page 7]
7 
 (5) Where within a period of sixty days of the date of receipt of an application under 
sub-section ( 3), the Central Government does not refuse to grant the permission applied for 
or does not communicate the refusal to the applicant, the Central Government shall be deemed to have 
granted the permission applied for.  
(6) Where the Central Government grants the permission applied for subject to any 
conditions or refuses such permission, the applicant may, within thirty days of the receipt of 
the order of the Cent ral Government to that effect, make a representation against any such 
condition or refusal and the Central Government may make such orders thereon as it deems 
fit: 
Provided that no order other than an orde r cancelling such condition or granting such 
permission without any conditions shall be made under this sub -section without giving the 
person making the representation an opportunity to show cause against the order proposed to 
be made.  
(7) if any Central G overnment officer takes up any commercial employment at any time 
before the expiry of two years from the date of his retirement without the prior permission of 
the Central Government or commits a breach of any condition Subject to which permission to 
take up any commercial employment has been granted to him under this section, it shall be 
competent for the Central Government to declare by order in writing and for reasons to be 
recorded therein that he shall not be entitled to such part of the Government con tributions made 
in relation to such officer as may be specified in the order and if he has received payment 
thereof, to direct that he shall refund to the Central Government an amount equivalent to such 
part of the Government contributions:  
Provided that n o such order shall be made without giving the officer concerned an opportunity of 
showing cause against such declarati on or direction:  
Provided further that in making any order under this sub -section, the Central Gov
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVIDENT FUNDS ACT, 1925.pdf - page 7]
n or direction:  
Provided further that in making any order under this sub -section, the Central Government shall have 
regard to the following factors, namely: —  
(i) the financial circumstances of the officer concerned;  
(ii) the nature of, and the emoluments from, the commer cial employment taken up by the 
officer concerned;  
(iii) such other relevant factors as may be prescribed.  
(8) Any amount required to be refunded by an order under sub -section ( 7) may, if it is 
not refunded within the prescribed period, be recovered as arrears of land revenue.  
(9) Every order passed by the Central Government under this section shall be communicated to the 
officer concerned.  
(10) The provisions of this section shall have effect notwithstanding anything to the 
contrary contained in any other provision of this Act or the rules applicable to any contributory 
provident fund.  
(11)Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in sess ion, for a total period 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and 
if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making  any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that 
the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall 
be with out prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.]  
7. Protection for acts done in good faith. —No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie 
against any person in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done 
under this Act.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVIDENT FUNDS ACT, 1925.pdf - page 8]
8 
 8. Power to apply the Act to other Provident Funds .—1[(1)] The 2[appropriate Government] may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that the provisions of this Act 3[(except section 6A)] shall 
apply to any Provident Fund established for the benefit of its employees by any local authority 
within the meaning of the Local Authorities Loans Act, 1914 (9 of 1914), and, on the making of 
such declaration, this Act shall apply accordingly, as if such Provident Fund were a Governme nt 
Provident Fund and such local authority were the Government.  
4[(2) The 5[appropriate Government] may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that 
the provisions of this Act 6[(except section 6A)] shall apply to any Provident Fund established fo r 
the benefit of the employees of any of the institutions specified in the Schedule, or of any group of 
such institutions, and, on the making of such declaration, this Act shall apply accordingly, as if 
such Provident Fund were a Government Provident Fund and the authority having custody of the 
Fund were the Government: 
Provided that section 6 shall apply as if the authority making the contributions referred to in that 
section were the Government.  
(3)The 5[appropriate Government] may, by notification in the  Official Gazette, add to the Schedule 
the name of any public institution it may deem fit, and any such addition shall take effect as if it had 
been made by this Act.]  
7[(4) In this section “the appropriate Government ” means — 
(a) in relation to a cantonment authority, a port authority for a major port, and any 
institution which, or the objects of which, appear to the Central Government to fall within 
List I in the Seventh Schedule to 8[the Constitution], the Central Government; and  
(b) in other cases, the State Government.  
Explanation .—“The State Government ” in relation to an institution registered under the 
Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) means the State Government of the State in 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVIDENT FUNDS ACT, 1925.pdf - page 8]
under the 
Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) means the State Government of the State in which the 
society is registered.]  
9. Savings as to estates of soldiers .—Nothing in section 4 or section 5 shall apply to money 
belonging to any estate for the purpose of the administration of which the Regimental Debts Act, 1893 
(56 & 57 Viet., c.5), applies.  
10. [Repeals. ] Rep. by the Repealing Act, 1927 (12 of 1927), s. 2 and Sch.  
 
 
_______
                                                      
1. Section 8 re-numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof  by Act 1 of 1930, s. 3.  
2. Subs. by the A.O . 1937, for “L. G.”.  
3. Ins. by Act 46 of 1975, s. 3 (w.e.f. 7 -2-1977).  
4. Added by Act 1 of 1930, s. 3.  
5. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “G.G. in C.”.  
6. Ins. by Act 46 of 1975, s. 3 (w.e.f. 7 -2-1977).  
7. Ins. by the A. O. 1937.  
8. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “the Government of India Act, 1935”.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVIDENT FUNDS ACT, 1925.pdf - page 9]
9 
 1[THE SCHEDULE  
LIST OF INSTITUTIONS  
[See sub-section (2) of section 8]  
1. The Pasteur Institute of India, Kasauli.  
2. The Calcutta Improvement Tribunal.  
3. A Court of Wards.  
4. The Indian Central Cotton Committee.  
5. The Trustees for the European Hospital for mental diseases at Ranchi.  
6. The National Association for supplying female medical aid to the women of India.  
7. A College affiliated to a University established by Statute.]  
28. The Indian Coal Grading Board.  
9. The Lady Minto ’s Indian Nursing Association.  
10. The Indian Red Cross Society.  
11. The Indian Lac Cess Committee.  
12. The Madras State Branch of the Indian Red Cross Society.  
13. The Imperial Bank of India.  
14. The Bihar and Orissa Medical Examination Board.  
3*   *    *    * 
16. The Institution created for the control of emigrant Labour under the Tea Districts Emigrant  
Labour Act, 1932.  
17. The Bombay Board of Film Censors.  
18. The Calcutta University.  
19. The Central Board of Irrigation.  
20. The Reserve Bank of India.  
4*   *    *    * 
22. The Banaras Hindu University.  
23. The Medical Council of India.  
24. The Indian Coffee Cess Committee.  
25. The Inter -State Board for Anglo -Indian and European Education.  
26. The Indian Research Fund Association.  
27. The Delhi Joint Water and Sewage Board.  
28. The Tuberculosis Association of India.  
29. The Coal Mines Stowing Board.  
                                                      
1. The Schedule containing items 1 to 7 was added by Act 1 of 1930, s. 4. The original Schedule was omitted by Act 
12 of 1927, s. 2 and Sch.  
2. Items after 7 were added from time to time by notifications under s. 8(3) of the Act.  
3. Entry “15. The Punjab  University.” omitted by the A. O. 1948.  
4. Entry “21. The Trustees of the Victoria Memorial Park, Rangoon.” omitted, ibid.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVIDENT FUNDS ACT, 1925.pdf - page 10]
10 
 30. A Group Committee of the Sleeper Pool of Indian Railways.  
31. The Indian Coffee Market Expansion Board.  
32. The Coal Mines Rescue Stations Committee.  
33. The Indian Coffee Board.  
1*    *    *   * 
35. The Indian Rubber Board.  
36. The Indian Central Sugarcane Committee.  
37. All-India Cattle Show Committee.  
38. The Coal Mines Labour Welfare Fund.  
39. The Indian Coconut Committee.  
40. The Indian Central Tobacco Committee.  
41. The Employees' State Insurance Corporation.  
42. The Indian Tea Licensing Committee.  
43. The Coal Board established under the Coal Mines (Conservation and Safety) Act, 1952.  
44. The Delhi Road Transport Authority, New Delhi.  
45. The Central Tea Board.  
46. The Indian Central Oilsee ds Committee.  
47. The Central Institute of Research in Indigenous Systems of Medicine, Jamnagar.  
48. The Indian Standards Institution, Delhi.  
49. The Textiles Committee.  
50. The Deshbandhu College, Kalkaji.  
51. The Damodar Valley Corporation.  
52. The Central Silk Board.  
53. The Unive rsity Grants Commission, New Delhi.  
54. The Khadi and Village Industries Commission.  
55. The Lawrence School (Sanawar) Society.  
56. The Kalavati Saran Children ’s Hospital, New Delhi.  
57. The Sri Guru TegBahadurKhalsa College, Delhi.  
58. The Tea Board.  
59. Lady Shri  Ram College for Women, New Delhi.  
60. Indian Institute of Public Administration, New Delhi.  
61. The Central Board for Worker ’s Education.  
62. The Oil and Natural Gas Commission.  
63. The School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi.  
64. The Central Board of Trustees for the  administration of the Provident Fund established under the 
Employees ’ Provident Funds Scheme, 1952.  
                                                      
1. Entry “34. The N.W.F. Provincial Branch of the Indian Red Cross Society.” Omitted  by the A. 0. 1948.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVIDENT FUNDS ACT, 1925.pdf - page 11]
11 
 65. The Gujarat State Road Transport Corporation.  
66. Uttar Pradesh Financial Corporation established (incorporated) under the State Financial 
Corporations Act, 19 51 (63 of 1951).  
67. Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay.  
68. The Indian Nursing Council.  
69. Gujarat State Financial Corporation established (incorporated) under the State Financial 
Corporations Act, 1951 (63 of 1951).  
70. Indian Institute of Technology, Madras.  
71. Rajasthan Financial Corporation incorporated under the State Financial Corporations Act, 1951 
(63 of 1951).  
72. Air India International Corporation.  
73. The Sahitya  Akademi, New Delhi.  
74. The Pannalal  Girdharlal D.A.V. College, New Delhi.  
75. Delhi School of Social Work, D elhi. 
76. The All -India Institute of Medical Sciences.  
77. The Board of Trustees for the administration of the Provident Fund established under the Coal 
Mines Provident Fund Scheme, 1948.  
78. Janki Devi Mahavidyalaya, New Delhi.  
79. The Indian Council for Cultural Relations, New Delhi.  
80. National Productivity Council.  
81. The National Industrial Development Corporation Limited.  
82. The Post -Graduate Training Centre in Ayurveda, Jamnagar.  
83. The Indian Investment Centre, New Delhi.  
84. The Indian Airlines Corporation.  
85. The Indian Inst itute of Technology, Kanpur.  
86. The Vizagapatam Dock Labour Board established under the Dock Workers (Regulation of 
Employment) Act, 1948 (9 of 1948).  
87. The Central Social Welfare Board.  
88. Orissa State Financial Corporation incorporated under the State Financial Corporations Act, 1951 
(63 of 1951).  
89. The Sangeet  Natak  Akademi, New Delhi.  
90. Institute of Economic Growth, Delhi.  
91. The Delhi Wakf Board.  
92. Institute of Applied Manpower Research, New Delhi.  
93. The Indian Law Institute.  
94. The Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi.  
95. Dyal  Singh College, New Delhi.  
96. Pramila College, Delhi.  
97. Sanatan Dharma College, New Delhi.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVIDENT FUNDS ACT, 1925.pdf - page 11]
e, New Delhi.  
96. Pramila College, Delhi.  
97. Sanatan Dharma College, New Delhi.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVIDENT FUNDS ACT, 1925.pdf - page 12]
12 
 98. Pharmacy Council of India.  
99. The Indian Institute of Management, Calcutta.  
100. The Sainik Schools Society.  
101. The Salar Jung Museum Board, Hyderabad.  
102. The Lalit Kala Akademi, New Delhi.  
103. Madhya Pradesh Financial Corporation incorporated under the State Financial 
Corporations Act, 1951 (63 of 1951).  
104. The Central Council of Gosam vardhana.  
105. The State Bank of India constituted by the State Bank of India Act, 1955 (23 of 1955).  
106. All-India Institute  of Mental Health, Bangalore.  
107. The Indian Institute of Foreign Trade, New Delhi.  
108. Delhi Library Board, Delhi.  
109. The National Institute of Health Administration and Education, New Delhi.  
110. The All -India Institute of Speech and Hearing, Mysore.  
111. The Indian Museum, Calcutta.  
112. Press Council of India.  
113. National Council of Education, Research and Training.  
114. Indian Institute of Mass Communication Society.  
115. The National Institute for Training in Industrial Engineering, Bombay.  
116. Cochin Port Trust.  
117. Visakhapatnam Port Tru st. 
118. Kandla Port Trust.  
119. Mormugao Port Trust.  
120. Paradip Port Trust.  
121. Nehru Memorial Museum and Library, New Delhi.  
122. National Book Trust, India, New Delhi.  
123. Export Inspection Council.  
124. Export Inspection Agency, Bombay.  
125. Export Inspection Agency, Delhi.  
126. Export Inspection Agency, Calcutta.  
127. Export Inspection Agency, Madras.  
128. Export Inspection Agency, Cochin.  
129. The National Institute of Foundry and Forge Technology, Ranchi.  
130. The Unit Trust of India established under the Unit Trust of India Act, 1963 (52 of 1963).  
131. The I ndian Council of Social Science Research, New Delhi.  
132. The National Institute of Bank Management, Bombay.  
133. The Post -Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh.  
134. The Cardamom Board established under the Cardamom Act, 1965 (42 of 1965).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVIDENT FUNDS ACT, 1925.pdf - page 12]
 Board established under the Cardamom Act, 1965 (42 of 1965).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVIDENT FUNDS ACT, 1925.pdf - page 13]
13 
 135. Victoria Memorial Hall, Calcutta.  
136. Central Institute of Research and Training in Public Co -operation, New Delhi.  
137. The Mormugao Dock Labour Board established under the Dock Workers (Regulation of 
Employment) Act, 1948 (9 of 1948).  
138. The Cochin Dock Labour  Board established under the Dock Workers (Regulation of 
Employment) Act, 1948 (9 of 1948).  
139. The Institute of Constitutional and Parliamentary Studies, New Delhi.  
140. The Institute for Defence Studies and Analysis, New Delhi.  
141. Centre for Policy Research, New Del hi. 
142. Iron Ore Board.  
143. Council of Historical Research, New Delhi.  
144. Indian School of Mines, Dhanbad.  
145. Seamen's Provident Fund Organisation.  
146. Rural Electrification Corporation Limited.  
147. Indian Institute of Geomagnetism, Bombay.  
148. Kendriya  Vidyalaya  Sangthan.  
149. Bal Bhawan  Society (India).  
150. Power Engineers Training Society.  
151. National Institute of Hydrology.  
152. Raman Research Institute, Bangalore.  
153. Rashtriya Sanskrit Sansthan, New Delhi.  
154. National Labour Institute.  
155. National Co -operative Development Corporation, New Delhi.  
156. The Nati onal Water Development Agency, New Delhi.  
157. 1[The Delhi Development Authority. ] 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Notification No. S.O. 01(E) , dated 31st December, 2019.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVINCIAL SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 1]
1 
  
THE PROVINCIAL SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1887  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Title, extent and commencement.  
2. [Repealed. ]. 
3. Savings.  
4. Definition.  
CHAPTER II  
CONSTITUTION  OF COURTS  OF SMALL  CAUSES  
5. Establishment of Courts of Small  Causes.  
6. Judge.  
7. Appointment of times of sitting in certain circumstances.  
8. Additional Judges.  
9. [Repealed. ]. 
10. Power to require two Judges to sit as a bench.  
11. Decision in case heard by a bench.  
12. Registrar.  
13. [Repealed. ]. 
14. Duties of ministerial officers.  
CHAPTER III  
JURISDICTION  OF COURTS  OF SMALL  CAUSES  
15. Cognizance of suits by Courts of Small Causes.  
16. Exclusive jurisdiction of Courts of Small Causes.  
CHAPTER IV  
PRACTICE  AND PROCEDURE  
17. Application of the Code of Civil Procedure.  
18. Trial of suits by Registrar.  
19. Admission, return and rejection of plaints by Registrar.  
20. Passing of decrees by Registrar on confession.  
21. Execution of decrees by Registrar.  
22. Adjournment of cases by chief ministerial officer.  
23. Return of plaints in suits involving questions of title . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVINCIAL SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 2]
2 
 SECTIONS  
24. Appea l from certain orders of Courts of Small Causes.  
25. Revision of decr ees and orders of Courts of Small  Causes.  
26. [Repealed .]. 
27. Finality of decrees and orders.  
CHAPT ER V  
SUPPLEMENTAL  PROVISIONS  
28. Subordination of Courts of Small Causes.  
29. Seal.  
30. Abolition of Courts of Small Causes.  
31. Saving of power to appoint Judge of Court of Small Causes to other office.  
32. Application of Act to Courts invested with jurisdiction of Court of Small 
Causes.  
33. Application of Act and Code to Court so invested as to two Courts.  
34. Mod ification of Code as so applied.  
35. Continuance of proceedings of abolished Courts.  
36. [Repealed. ] 
37. Publication of certain orders.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. —[Repealed. ] 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE. —SUITS  EXCEPTED  FROM  THE COGNIZANCE  OF A COURT  OF 
SMALL  CAUSES . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVINCIAL SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 3]
3 
 THE PROVINCIAL SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1887  
ACT NO. 9 OF 18871 
[24th February , 1887 .] 
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to Courts o f Small Causes established beyon d 
the Presidency -towns.  
WHEREAS it is expedient to consolidate and amend the law relating to Courts of Small Causes 
established beyond the local limits for the time being of the ordinary original civi l jurisdiction of 
the High Courts of Judicature at Fort William in Bengal and at Madras and Bombay;  
It is hereby enacted as follows: —  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Title, extent and commen cement.—(1) This Act may be called the Provincial Small Cause Courts 
Act, 1887.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except 2[the territories which, immediately before the 1st 
November, 1956, were comprised in Part B States]; and  
(3) It shall come into force on the first day of July, 1887.  
2. [Repeal. ] Rep. partly by the Amending Act, 1891  (12 of 1891), s. 2 and the First  
Schedule and partly by the Repealing Act, 1938 (1 of 1938), s. 2 and the Schedule . 
3. Savings. —Nothing in this Act shall be construed to affect —  
(a) any proceedings before or after decree in any suit instituted before the commence ment of this 
Act; or  
(b) The jurisdiction of a Magistrate under any law for the time being in force with respect 
to debts or other claims of a civil nature, or of village -munsifs or village -panchayats, under the 
provisio ns of the Madras Code, or of village -munsifs under the Dekkhan Agriculturists ’ Relief 
Act, 1879 (17 of 1879); or  
(c) any local law or any special law other than the Code of Civil Procedure3                      
(14 of 1882).  
                                                      
1. For power to confer up on a Subordinate Judge or Munsif  in Bengal, the Province of Agra and Assam, the 
jurisdiction of a Court of Small Causes under this Act, see the Bengal, Agra and Assam Civil Courts Act, 1887 
(12 of 1887), s. 25.  
Ss. 15, 32, 37, 38, 39 and 4
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVINCIAL SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 3]
e Bengal, Agra and Assam Civil Courts Act, 1887 
(12 of 1887), s. 25.  
Ss. 15, 32, 37, 38, 39 and 40 of the Bengal , Agra and Assam Civil Courts Act,  1887 (12 of 1887),  apply to 
Courts of Small Causes  constituted under this Act, see Act 12 of 1887, s. 40.  
The powers of a Court of Small Causes under this Act have been conferred upon the Courts of                                
Sub-divisional Officers of  the Khondmals and Angul Districts by section 13 of Regulations 4 and 5 of 1936, 
respectively.  
The Act has been repealed in its application to Bellary District by Mysore Act 14 of 1955 and to the city of Ahmedabad 
by Gujarat Act 19 of 1961.  
The Act has bee n extended to and brought into force in Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and 
First Schedule  (w.e.f. 1 -7-1965), to the Union territory of Lakshadweep by Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 and the 
Schedule  (w.e.f. 1 -10-1967) and to the Union territory of Pondicherry by Act 26 of 1968, s. 3 and Sch edule . 
The Act has been amended in its application to —  
Uttar Pradesh by U.P. Acts 17 of 1957 and 14 of 1970, Madhya Pradesh by Madhya Pradesh Act 19 of 
1958, Bombay by Bombay Act 87 of 1958, West Bengal by West Bengal Act 30 of 1972, Punjab by Punjab 
Act 20 of 1975, Haryana by Haryana Act 27 of 1977 and Himachal Pradesh by Himachal Pradesh Act 4 of 
1970.  
2.  Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956, for “Part B States ”. 
3.  See now the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVINCIAL SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 4]
4 
 4. Definition. —In this Act, unless there is something repugnant in the subject or context, 
“Court of Small Causes ” means a Court of Small Causes constituted under this Act, and includes 
any person exercising jurisdiction under this Act in any such Court.  
CHAPTER II  
CONSTITU TION OF COURTS OF SMALL  CAUSES  
5. Establishment of Courts of Small Causes. —(1) The State Government 1*** may, by order 
in writing, establish a Court of Small Causes at any place within the territories under its 
administration beyond the local limits for the time being of the ordinary original civil jurisdiction 
of a High Court of Judicature established in a Presidency -town.  
(2) The local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court of Small Causes shall be such as the State 
Government may define, and the Court  may be held at such place or places within those limits as the 
State Government may appoint.2 
3[6. Judge. —When a Court of Small Causes has been established there shall be appointed, by order in 
writing, a Judge of the Court: 
Provided that if the State Gov ernment so direct, the same person shall be the Judge of more than one 
such Court.]  
7. Appointment of times of sitting in certain circumstances. —(1) A Judge who is the 
Judge of two or more such Courts may, with the sanction of the District Court, fix the times at 
which he will sit in each of the Courts of which he is Judge.  
(2) Notice of the times shall be published in such manner as the High Court from time to time directs.  
8. Additional Judges. —4[(1) If the State Government so direct, there may be appoin ted, by 
order in writing, Additional Judges of a Court of Small Causes or of two or more such Courts.]  
(2) 5[An Additional] Judge shall discharge such of the functions of the Judge of the Court or 
Courts as the Judge may assign to him, and in the discharge  of those functions shall exercise the 
same powers as the Judge. 
(3) The Judge may withdraw from 5[an Additional] Judge any business pending be
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVINCIAL SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 4]
powers as the Judge. 
(3) The Judge may withdraw from 5[an Additional] Judge any business pending before 
him. 
(4) When the Judge is absent, the 6[senior] Additional Judge may discharge all or any of the functions 
of the Judge.  
9. [Suspension and removal of Judges. ] Rep. by the A.O. 1937.  
10. Power to require two Judges to sit as a bench. —The State Government, after 
consultation with the High Court, may, by order in writing, direct that two Judges of Courts of 
Small  Causes or a Judge and an Additional Judge of a Court of Small Causes shall sit together 
for the trial of such class or classes of suits or applications cognizable by a Court of Small 
Causes as may be described in the order.  
11. Decision in case heard by a  bench.—(1) If two Judges, or a Judge and an Additional Judge, 
sitting together under the last foregoing section, differ as to a question of law or usage having the force of 
law, or in construing a document the construction of which may affect the  merits, they shall draw up 
and refer, for the decisio n of the High Court, a statement of the facts of the case and of the point 
                                                      
1. The words “with the previous sanction of the G. G. in C.” rep. by Act 4 of 1914. s. 2 and the Schedule.  
2. For notifications issued under cl. (2) of s. 5, see different local R. and O. 
3. Subs. by the A. O. 1937, for section  6. 
4. Subs., ibid.,  for the sub-section  (1). 
5. Subs. by A ct 11 of 1915, s. 2 and the First Schedule , for “the Additional” . 
6. Ins. by s. 2 and the First Schedule , ibid. 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVINCIAL SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 5]
5 
 on which they differ in opinion, and the provisions of 1Chapter XLVI of the Code of Civil 
Procedure (14 of 1882) shall apply to the reference.  
(2) If they differ on any matter other than a matter specified in sub -section ( 1), the opinion 
of the Judge who is senior in respect of date of appointment as Judge of a Court of Small 
Causes, or, if one of them is an Additional Judge, then the opinion of the Judge sitting with him, 
shall prevail.  
(3) For the purposes of sub -section ( 2), a Judge permanently appointed shall be deemed to be senior 
to an officiating Judge.  
212. Registrar .—3[(1) There may be appointed to a Court of Small Causes an officer to be called the 
Registrar of the Court.] 
(2) Where a Registrar is appointed, he shall be the chief ministerial officer of the Court.  
(3) The State Government may, by order in writing, confer upon a Registrar, within the 
local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court, the jurisdiction of a Judge of a Court of Small 
Causes for the trial of suits of which the value does not exceed twenty rupees.  
(4) The Registrar shall try such suits cognizable by him as the Judge may, by general or special orde r, 
direct.  
4*              *              *              *              * 
13. [Other ministerial officers. ] Rep. by the A.O. 1937.  
14. Duties of ministerial officers. —(1) The ministerial officers of a Court of Small Causes 
shall, in addition to any duties mentioned in this Act, or in any  other enactment for the time 
being in force, as duties which ar e or may be imposed on any of them, discharge such duties of  
a ministerial nature as the Judge directs.  
(2) The High Court may make rules consistent with this Act, and with any other enactment 
for the time being in force, conferring and imposing on the ministerial officers of a Court of 
Small Causes such powers and duties as it thinks fit, and regulating the mode in which powers 
and dut ies so conferred and impos ed are  to be exercised and performe
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVINCIAL SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 5]
ng the mode in which powers 
and dut ies so conferred and impos ed are  to be exercised and performed.  
CHAPTER III  
JURISDICTION  OF COURTS  OF SMALL  CAUSES  
15. Cognizance of suits by Courts of Small Causes. —(1) A Court of Small Causes shall not take 
cognizance of the suits specified in the second schedule  as suits excepted from the cognizance of a Court 
of Small Causes.  
(2) Subject to the exceptions specified in that schedule and to the provisions of any 
enactment for the time being in force, all suits of a civil nature of whi ch the value does not 
exceed five hundred rupees shall be cognizable by a Court of Small Causes.  
(3) Subject as aforesaid, the State Government may, by order in writing, direct that all suits of a civil 
nature of which the value does not exceed one thousand rupees shall be cognizable b y a Court of Small  
Causes mentioned in the order.5 
 
                                                      
1. See now ss. 113 and 115 and the First Schedule, Order XLVI, of the Code of Civil Procedure,  1908 (Act 5 of 1908).  
2. This section has been amended in its application to the Bombay Presidency by the Provincial Small Cause Courts (Bombay 
Amendment) Act, 1930 (Bom. 6 of 1930 ), s. 2.  
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for the original sub -section which read: “( 1) The L. G. may appoint to a Court of Small Causes an 
officer to be called the Registrar of the Court.”  
4. Sub-section ( 5), which read: “A Registrar may be suspended or removed  from office by the L.G.” was rep. by the 
A. O.  1937.  
5. For notifications issued under this section, see different local R. and O. 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVINCIAL SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 6]
6 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 15 of Act No. IX of 1887. —In section 15 of the Provincial S mall Cause Courts 
Act, 1887. — 
(a) In sub -section (2) for the words “ five thousand rupees” the words “twenty five thousand rupees” 
shall be substituted . 
(b) in the proviso to sub -section (2) for the words “twenty five thousand rupees” the words “one lakh 
rupees” shall be substitute d. 
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 14 of 2015 , s. 4]  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 15 of Act No. 9 of 1887. —In section 15 of the Provincial Small Cause Courts 
Act, 1887, — 
(a) in sub -section (2), for the words “one thousand rupees”, the words “two thousand rupees” shall be 
substituted  ; 
(b) in sub -section (3) and in the proviso thereto for the words, “two thousand rupees” wherever they 
occur, the words “three thousand rupees” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 57 of 1976, s 29.]  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 15 of Act IX of  1887.— In section 15 of the Provincial Small Cause Courts Act, 
1887 for sub -section (2) and (3), the following sub -sections shall be substituted namely : - 
“(2) Subject to the exceptions specified in that schedule and to the provisions of any enactment for  
the time being in force, all suits of a Civil  nature of which the value does not exceed one thousand rupees 
shall be cognizable by a court of Small Causes.  
(3) Subject as aforesaid, the State Government may, by order in writing direct that all suits of a civil 
nature of which the value does not exceed two thousand rupees shall be cognizable by a court of Small 
Causes mentione d in the order.  ” 
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 14 of 1970, s. 5.]  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of section 15 of Act IX of 1887. —In section 15 of the Provincial Small Cause Courts Act, 
1887, as amended in its application to Uttar Pradesh, hereinafter referred to as the principal Act, in sub -
section (3), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely : — 
“Provided that in 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVINCIAL SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 6]
l Act, in sub -
section (3), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely : — 
“Provided that in relation to suits by the lessor for the eviction of a less ee from a building after the 
determination of his lease, or for recovery from him of rent in respect of the period of occupation thereof 
during the continuance of the lease, or of compensation for the use and occupation thereof after such 
determination of lease, t he reference in this sub -section to two thousand rupees shall be constructed as as 
a reference to five thousand rupees.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, the expression “building has the same meaning as 
in Article (4) in the Second Schedu le.” 
[vide Uttar Pradesh Act 37 of 1972, s. 2]  
16. Exclusive jurisdiction of Court s of Small Causes. —Save as expressly provided by this 
Act or by any other enactment for the time being in force, a suit cognizable by a Court of Small 
Causes shall not be tri ed by any other Court having jurisdiction within the local limits of the 
jurisdiction of the Court of Small Causes by which the suit is triable.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVINCIAL SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 7]
7 
 CHAPTER IV  
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE  
17. Application of the Code of Civil Procedure. —(1) 1[The procedure prescribed in the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), shall, save in so far as is otherwise provided by that Code or by this 
Act,] be the procedure followed in a Court of Small Causes in all suits cognizable by it and in all 
proceedings arising out of such suits:  
Provided that an applicant for an order to set aside a decree passed ex parte or for a review of 
judgment shall, at the time of presenting his application, either deposit in the court the amount due 
from him under the decree or in pursuance of the judgment, or give 2[such security for the 
performance of the decree or compliance with the judgment as the Court may, on a previous 
application made by him in this behalf, have directed] . 
(2) Where a person has become liable as surety under the prov iso to sub -section ( 1), the security may 
be reali zed in manner provided by section 3[145] of the Code of Civil Procedure, 4[1908 (5 of 1908)].  
18. Trial of suits by Registrar. —(1) Suits cognizable by the Registrar under section 12,    
sub-sections ( 3) and (4), shall be tried by him and decrees passed therein shall be executed by 
him, in like manner in all respects as the Judge might try the suits, and execute the decrees, 
respectively.  
(2) The Judge may transfer to his own file, or to that of the Additiona l Judge if an Additional  
Judge has been appointed, any suit or other proceeding pending on the file of the Registrar.  
19. Admission, return and rejection of plaints by Registrar. —(1) When the Judge of a 
Court of Small Causes is absent, and an Additional Ju dge has not been appointed or, having been 
appointed, is also absent, the Registrar may admit a plaint, or return or reject a plaint for any 
reason for which the Judge might return or reject it.  
(2) The Judge may, of his own motion or on the application of  a party, return or reject a 
plaint which has been admitted
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVINCIAL SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 7]
his own motion or on the application of  a party, return or reject a 
plaint which has been admitted by the Registrar, or admit a plaint which has been returned or 
rejected by him:  
Provided that where a party applies for the return or rejection or the admission of a plaint 
under this sub -section,  and his application is not made at the first sitting of the Judge after the 
day on which the Registrar admitted, or returned or rejected, the plaint, the Judge shall dismiss 
the application unless the applicant satisfies him that there was sufficient caus e for not making 
the application at that sitting.  
20. Passing of decrees by Registrar o n confession. —(1) If, before the date appointed for 
the hearing of a suit, the defendant or his agent duly authori sed in that behalf appears before 
the Registrar and adm its the plaintiff's claim, the Registrar may, if the Judge is absent, and an 
Additional Judge has not been appointed or, having been appointed, is also absent, pass 
against the defendant, upon the admission, a decree which shall have the same effect as a 
decree passed by the Judge.  
(2) Where a decree has been passed by the Registrar under sub -section ( 1), the Judge may  
grant an application for review of judgment, and re -hear the suit, on the same conditions, 
on the same grounds and in the same manner as if the decree had been passed by himself.  
21. Execution of decrees by Registrar. —(1) If the Judge is absent, and an Additional 
Judge has not been appointed or, having been appointed, is also absent, the Registrar may, 
subject to any instructions which he may have received from the Judge or, with respect to 
                                                      
1 Subs. by Act 1 of 1926, s. 2, for certain  words.  
2. Subs. by Act 9 of 1935, s. 2, for “security to the satisfaction of the Court for the performance of the decree or compliance with 
the judgment, as the Court may direct”.  
3. Subs. by Act 1 of 1926, s. 2, for “253”.  
4. Ins. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVINCIAL SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 7]
th 
the judgment, as the Court may direct”.  
3. Subs. by Act 1 of 1926, s. 2, for “253”.  
4. Ins. by s. 2, ibid.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVINCIAL SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 8]
8 
 decrees or orders made by an Additional Judge, from the Additional Judge, make any orders 
in respect of applications for the execution of decrees and orders made by the Court of 
which he is Registrar, or sen t- to that Court for execution, which the Judge might make 
under this Act.  
(2) The Judge, in the case of any decree or order with respect to the execution of which the Registrar 
has made an order under sub -section (1), or the Additional Judge, in the case of any such decree or order 
which has been made by himself and with respect to which proceedings have not been taken by the Judge 
under this sub -section, may, of his own motion, or on application made by a party within fifteen days 
from the date of the ord er of the Registrar or of the execution of any process issued in pursuance of that 
order, reverse or modify the order.  
(3) The period of fifteen days mentioned in sub -section (2) shall be computed in accorda nce with the 
provisions of the 1Indian Limitation  Act, 1877 ( 15 of 1877), as though the application of the party were an 
application for review of judgment.  
22. Adjournment of cases by chief ministerial officer. —When the Judge of a Court  of 
Small Causes is absent and an Additional Judge has not been appo inted or, having been 
appointed, is also absent, the Registrar or other chief ministerial officer of the Court may 
exercise from time to time the power which the Court possesses of adjourning the hearing of 
any suit or other proceeding, and fix a day for t he further hearing thereof.  
23. Return of plaints in suits involving questions of title. —(1) Notwithstanding anything 
in the foregoing portion of this Act, when the right of a plaintiff and the relief claimed by him 
in a Court of Small Causes depend upon t he proof or disproof of a title to immovable property 
or other title which such a Court cannot finally determine, the Court may at any stage of the 
proceedings return the plaint to be presented to a Court having j
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVINCIAL SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 8]
the Court may at any stage of the 
proceedings return the plaint to be presented to a Court having jurisdiction to determine the 
title.  
(2) When a Court returns a plaint under sub -section ( 1), it shall comply with the 
provisions of the second paragraph of 2section 57 of the Code of Civil Procedure                 
(14 of 1882) and make such order with respect to costs as it deems just, and the Court 
shall , for the purposes  of the 1Indian Limitation Act, 1877 (15 of 1877), be deemed to have 
been unable to entertain the suit by reason of a cause of a nature like to that of defect of 
jurisdiction.  
24. Appeal from certain orders of Courts of Small Causes.—Where an order specified 
in 3[clause (ff) or clause (h) of sub -section ( 1) of section 104 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908  (5 of 1908),] is made by a Court of Small Causes, an appeal therefrom shall lie to the 
District Court 4[on any ground on which an appeal from such order would lie under that 
section].  
25. Revision of decrees and orders of Courts of Small Causes. —The High Court, for  the 
purpose of satisfying itself that a  decree or order made in any case  decided by a Court of 
Small Causes was according to law, may call for the case and pass such order with respect 
thereto as it thinks fit.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of Section 25 of Act IX of 1887. —In section 25 of principal Act, the 
followin g proviso thereto shall be inserted, namely : — 
 
                                                      
1. See now the Indian Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963).  
2. Sec now the Code of Civil  Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908), Sch. I, Order VII, rule 10  
3. Subs. by Act 9 of 1922, s. 5, for “section 588, clause ( 29), of the Code of Civil Procedure”.  
4. Ins . by s. 5, ibid.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVINCIAL SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 9]
9 
  
“Provided that in re lation to any case decided by a District Judge or Additional District 
Judge exercising the jurisdiction of Judge  of Small Causes, the power of revision under this 
section shall vest in the High Court. ” 
[Vide  Uttar Pradesh Act 37 of 1972, s. 3]  
26. [Amendment of the Second Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure. ] Rep. by the 
Presidency Small Cause Courts Law Amendment Act, 1888 (10 of 1888), s. 4. 
27. Finality of decrees and orders. —Save as provided by this Act, a decree or order 
made under the foregoing provisions of this Act by a Court of Small Causes shall be 
final.  
CHAPTER V  
SUPPLEMENTAL  PROVISIONS  
28. Subordination of Courts of Small Causes. —(1) A Court of Small Causes shall be 
subject to the administrative control of the District Court and to the superintendence of 
the High Court, and shall —  
(a) keep such registers, books and accounts as the High Court from time to time 
prescribes, and  
(b) comply with such requisitions as may be made by the District Court, the High 
Court or the State Government for records, returns and statements in such form and 
manner as the authority making the requisition directs.  
(2) The relation of the District Court to a Court of Small Causes, with respect to 
administrative control, shall be the same as that of the District Court to a Civil Court of the 
lowest grade competent to try an original suit of the value of five thousand rupees in that 
portion of the territories administered by the State Gove rnment in which the Court of Small 
Causes is established.   
29. Seal. —A Court of Small Causes shall use a seal of such form and dimensions  as ar e 
prescribed by the State Government.  
30. Abolition of Courts of Small Causes. —The State Govern ment may, by order in 
writing, 1abolish a Court of Small Causes.  
31. Saving of power to appoint Judge of Court of Small Causes to other              
office.—(1) Nothing in this Act shall be construed to prevent 2[the appointment 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVINCIAL SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 9]
other              
office.—(1) Nothing in this Act shall be construed to prevent 2[the appointment of] a 
person who is a Judge or Additional Judge of a Court of Small Causes t o be also a Judge 
of any other 3Civil Court or to be a Magistrate of any class or to hold any other public 
office.  
(2) When a Judge or Additional Judge is so appointed, the ministerial officers of his 
Court shall, subject to any rules which the State Government may make in this behalf, be 
deemed to be ministerial officers appointed to aid him in the disc harge of the duties of 
the other office.  
32. Application of Act to Co urts invested with jurisdiction  of Court of Small 
Causes.—(1) So much of Chapters III and IV as relates to —  
(a) the nature of the suits cognizable by Courts of Small Causes,  
(b) the exclusion of the jurisdiction of other Courts in those suits,  
                                                      
1.  For instan ce of a notification abolishing a Court of Small Causes (Broach) , see Bombay Govt. Gazette, 1907, Pt. 1. p. 339.  
2. Subs. by the A. O. 1937, for “the L. G. from appointing”.  
3. For instances of notifications issued under this power, see U. P. R. & 0.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVINCIAL SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 10]
10 
 (c) the practice and procedure of Courts of Small Causes,  
(d) appeal from certain orders of those Courts and revision of cases decided by 
them, and  
(e) the finality of their decrees and orders subject to such appeal and revision as are provided by 
this Act,  
applies to Courts invested by or under any enactment for .the time being in force with the jurisdiction 
of a Court of Small Causes so far as regards the exercise of that jurisdiction by those  Courts.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) with respect to Courts invested with the jurisdiction of a Court of Small 
Causes applies to suits instituted or proceedings commenced in those Courts before the date on which 
they were invested with that jurisdiction . 
33. Application of Act and Code to Court  so invested as to two Courts. —A Court invested  
with the jurisdiction of a Court of Small Causes with respect to the exercise of that jurisdiction, and 
the same Court with respect to the exercise  of its jurisdictio n in suits of a civil nature which are not 
cognizable by a Court of Small Causes, shall, for the purposes of this Act and the 1Code of Civil 
Procedure (14 of 1882), be deemed to be different Courts.  
34. Modif ication of Code as so applied. —Notwithstanding anything in the last two foregoing 
sections, —  
(a) when, in exercise of the jurisdiction of a Court of Small Causes, a Court invested with 
that jurisdiction sends a decree  for execution to itself as a Court having jurisdiction in suits 
of a civil nature which are not cognizable by a Court of Small Causes, or  
(b) when a Court, in the exercise of its jurisdiction in suits of a civil nature which ar e not 
cognizable by a Court of Small Causes, sends a decree for execution to itself as a Court in vested with 
the jurisdiction of a Court of Small Causes,  
the documents mentioned in 2section 224 of the Code of Civil Procedure (14 of 1882) shall not 
be sent with the decree unless in any case the Court, by order in writing, requires th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVINCIAL SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 10]
2) shall not 
be sent with the decree unless in any case the Court, by order in writing, requires them to be 
sent.  
35. Continuance of proceedings of abolished Courts. —(1) Where a Court of Small Causes, or 
a Court invested with the Jurisdiction of a Court of Small Causes, has from any cause ceased to 
have jurisdiction with respect to any case, any proceeding in relation to the case, whether before or 
after decree, which, if the Court had not ceased to have jurisdiction, might have been had therein, 
may be had in the Court which, if the suit out of which the proceeding has arisen were about to be 
instituted, would have jurisd iction to try the suit.  
(2) Nothing in this section applies to cases for which special provision is made in the 1Code of Civil 
Procedure (14 of 1882) as extended to Courts of Small Causes or in any other enactment for the time 
being in force.  
36. [Amendmen t of Indian Limitation Act .] Rep. by the Indian Limitation Act, 1908           
(9 of 1908) , s. 32 and the Third Schedule . 
37. Publication of certain orders. —All orders required by this Act to be made in writing by the 
State Government shall be published in the Official Gazette.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. —[Enactments repealed. ] Rep. by the Amending Act, 1891 (12 of 1891), s. 2 
and the First Schedule . 
    
                                                      
1. See now the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908).  
2. See now Order XXI, rule 6, ibid. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVINCIAL SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 11]
11 
 1THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
SUITS EXCEPTED  FROM THE COGNIZANCE  OF A COURT  OF SMALL  CAUSES  
(See section 15) 
2[(1) A suit concerning  any act done or purporting to be done by or by order of the 
Central Government, the Crown Representative or the State Government;] 
(2) a suit concerning an act purporting to be done by any person in pursuance of a 
judgment or order of a Court or of a judicial officer acting in the execution of his 
office;  
(3) a suit concerning an act or order purporting to be done or made by any other officer of the 
Government in his official capacity, or by a Court of Wards, or by an officer o f a Court of Wards in the 
execution of his office;  
(4) a suit for the possession of immovable property or for the recovery of an interest in 
such property;  
(5) a suit for the partition of immovable property;  
(6) a suit by a mortgagee of immovable property for the foreclosure of the mortgage or 
for the sale of the property, or by a mortgagor of immovable property for the redemption of 
the mortgage;  
(7) a suit for the assessment, enhancement, abatement or apportionment of the rent of 
immovable property;  
(8) a suit for the recovery of rent, other than house -rent, unless the Judge of the Court 
of Small Causes has been expressly invested by the State Government with authority to 
exercise  jurisdiction with respect thereto;  
(9) a suit concerning the liability of la nd to be assessed to land -revenue;  
(10) a suit to restrain waste;  
(11) a suit for the determination or enforcement of any other right to or interest in 
immovable property;  
(12) a suit for the possession of an  hereditary office or of an interest in such an office, 
including a suit to establish an exclusive or periodically recurring right to discharge the 
functions  
of an office;  
(13) a suit to enforce payment of the  allowance or fees respectively called malikana  
and hakk, or of cesses  or other dues when the cesses or dues are payable to a person by 
reason o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVINCIAL SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 11]
 
and hakk, or of cesses  or other dues when the cesses or dues are payable to a person by 
reason of his interest in immovable property or in an hereditary office or in a shrine or 
other religious  institut ion; 
(14) a suit to recover from a person to whom com pensation has been paid under the 
3Land Acquisition Act, 1870  (1 of 1870), the whole or any part of the compensation;  
(15) a suit for the specific performance or rescission of a contract;  
(16) a suit for the rectification o r cancellation of an instrument;  
                                                      
1. This Schedule has been amended in its application to the Bombay Presidency by s. 2 of the Provincial Small Cause 
Courts (Bombay Amendment) Act, 1930 (Bom. 6 of 1 930): and by s. 2 of the Provincial Small Cause Courts  
(Bombay Amendment) Act, 1932 (Bom. 9 of 1932).  
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for the original paragraph.  
3. See now the Land Acquisition  Act, 1894 (1 of 189 4). 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVINCIAL SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 12]
12 
 (17) a suit to obtain an injunction;  
(18) a suit  relating to a trust, including  a suit to  make good out of the general estate of 
a deceased trustee the loss occasioned by a breach of trust, and a suit by a co -trustee to 
enforce against the estate of a deceased trustee a claim for contribution;  
(19) a suit for a declaratory decree, not being a suit instituted under 1section 283 or section 332 of 
the 1Code of Civil Procedure (14 of 1 882);   
 (20) a suit instituted under sec tion 283 or section 332 of the 1Code of Civil Procedure 
(14 of 1882);  
(21) a suit to set aside an attachment by a Court or a revenue -authority, or a sale, 
mortgage, lease or other transfer by a Court or a revenue -authority or by a guardian;  
(22) a suit for property which the plaintiff ha s conveyed while insane;  
(23) a suit to alter or set aside a decision, decree or order of a Court or of a person acting in a 
judicial capacity;  
(24) a suit to contest an award;  
(25) a suit upon a foreign judgment as defined in the 1Codc of Civil Procedure (14 of 1882) or upon 
a judgment obtained in 2[India];  
(26) a suit to compel a refund of assets improperly distributed under section 3295 of 
the Code of Civil Procedure (14 of 1882);  
(27) a suit under the 4Indian Succession Act, 1865 (10 of 1865), section 320 or section 321, or under 
the 4Probate and Administration Act, 1881 (5 of 1881), section 139 or section 140, to compel a refund by 
a person to whom an executor or administrator has paid a legacy or distr ibuted assets;  
(28) a suit for a legacy or for the whole or a share of a residue bequeathed by a 
testator, or for the whole or a share of the property of an intestate;  
(29) a suit —  
(a) for a dissolution of partnership or for the winding up of the business  of a 
partnership after its dissolution;  
(b) for an account of partnership -transactions; or  
(c) for a balance of partnership -account, unless the balance has been struck by the parties or their 
agents;  

<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVINCIAL SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 12]
ance of partnership -account, unless the balance has been struck by the parties or their 
agents;  
(30) a suit for an account of property and for its due administration under decree;  
(31) any other suit for an account, including a suit by a mortgagor, after the mortgage has 
been satisfied, to recover surplus collections received by the mortgagee, and a suit for the 
profits on immovable property belonging to  the plaintiff which have been wrongfully received 
by the defendant;  
(32) a suit for a general average loss or for salvage;  
(33) a suit for compensation in respect of collision between ships;  
(34) a suit on a policy of insurance or for the recovery of any premium paid under any such 
policy;  
(35) a suit for compensation —  
(a) for loss occasioned by the death of a person caused by actionable wrong;  
                                                      
1. See now the Code of  Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908) Sch. 1, Order XXI, rules 63 and 100, respectively.  
2. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No.  2) Order, 1956, for “a Part A State or a Part C State”.  
3. See now the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908), s. 73.  
4. See now the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925), ss. 360 and 361.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVINCIAL SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 13]
13 
 (b) for wrongful arrest, restraint or confinement;  
(c) for malicious prosecution;  
(d) for libel;  
(e) for slander;  
(f) for adultery or seduction;  
(g) for breach of contract of betrothal or promise of marriage;  
(h) for inducing a person to break a contract made with the plaintiff;  
(i) for obstruction of an easement or diversion of a water -course;  
1[(ii)for an act which is, or, save for the provisions of Chapter I V of the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860), would be, an offence punishable under Chapter XVII of the 
said Code;]  
2[(j) for illegal, improper or excessive distress, attachment or search, or for trespass 
committed in, or damage caused by, the illegal or improper execution of any distress, search or 
legal process;] 
(k) for improper arrest under Chapter XXXIV of the 3Code  of Civil Procedure (14 of 1882) 
or in respect of the issue of an injunction wrongfully ob tained under Chapter XXXV of that 
3Code; or  
(l) for injury to the person in any case not specified in the foregoing sub -clauses of this 
clause;  
(36) a suit by a Muhammadan for exigible (mu’ ajjal) or deferred (mu’ waijal) dower;  
(37) a suit for the restitution of conjugal rights, 4*** for the custody of a minor, or for a 
divorce;.  
(38) a suit relating to maintenance;  
(39) a suit for arrears of land -revenue, village -expenses or other sums payable to the 
representative of a village -comm unity or to his heir or other successor in title;  
(40) a suit for profits payable by the representative of a village -community or by his heir or other 
successor in title after payment of land -revenue, village -expenses and other sums;  
(41) a suit for contribution by a sharer in joint property in respect of a payment made by 
him of money due from a co -sharer, or by a manager of joint property, or a member of an 
undivided family in respect of a payment made by him on account of the property or family;  
(42) a suit by one of several joint mortgagors of immovable property f
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVINCIAL SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 13]
 of the property or family;  
(42) a suit by one of several joint mortgagors of immovable property for contribution in 
respect of money paid by him for the redemption of the mortgaged property;  
(43) a suit against the Government to recover money paid under protest in satisfaction of 
a claim made by a revenue -authority on account of an arrear of land -revenue or of a demand 
recoverable as an arrear of land -revenue;  
5[(43A) a suit to recover property obtained by an act which is, or, save for the provisions of Chapter 
IV of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), would be, an offence punishable under Chapter XVII of the 
said Code;)  
(44) a suit, the cognizance whereof by a Court of Small Causes is barred by any enactment for the 
time being in force.  
 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 6 of 1914, s. 2 (1). 
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for item ( j). 
3. See now th e Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 19 08), Sch. I. Orders XXXVIII  and XXXIX respectively  and 
s. 95.  
4. The words “for the recovery of a wife” were rep. by Act 10 of 1914, s. 3 and the Second Schedule . 
5. Ins. by Act 6 of 1914 , s. 3. 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PROVINCIAL SMALL CAUSE COURTS ACT, 1887.pdf - page 14]
14 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttar Pradesh  
Amendment of the Second Schedule to Act IX of 1887 .—In the Second Schedule to the principal 
Act, for Article (4), the following article shall be substituted, namely : — 
“(4) a suit for the possession of immovable property or for the recovery of an interest in such 
property,  but not include a suit by a lessor for the eviction of a lessee from a building after the 
determination of his lease, and for the recovery from him of compensation for the use and occupation of 
that building after such determination of lease.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this Article, the expression ‘building’ means a residential or non -
residential roofed structure, and includes any land (including any garden), garages and out -houses, 
appurtenant to such building and also includes any fittings and fixt ures affixed to the building for the 
more beneficial enjoyment thereof”.  
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 37 of 1972, s. 4]  
 
 
__________  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUBLIC GAMBLING ACT, 1867.pdf - page 1]
 
1 
 THE PUBLIC GAMBLING ACT, 1867  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
PREAMBLE  
SECTIONS  
1. Interpretation -clause.  
“Common gaming -house ”. 
2. Power to extend Act.  
3. Penalty for owning or keeping, or having charge of, a gaming -house.  
4. Penalty for being found in gaming -house.  
5. Power to enter and authorise police to enter and search.  
6. Finding cards, etc., in suspected houses, to be evidence that such houses  are common gaming -
houses.   
7. Penalty on persons arrested fo r giving false names and addresses.   
8. On conviction for keeping a gaming -house, instruments of gaming to  be destroyed.  
9. Proof of playing for stakes unnecessary.   
10. Magistrate may require any person apprehended to be sworn and give  evidence.   
11. Witn esses indemnified.  
12. Act not to apply to certain games.  
13. Gaming and setting birds and animals to fight in public streets.  
Destruction of instruments of gaming found in public streets.   
14. Offences, by whom triable.  
15. Penalty for subsequent offence.  
16. Portion of fine may be paid to informer.  
17. Recovery and application of fines.  
18. [Repealed. ].  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUBLIC GAMBLING ACT, 1867.pdf - page 2]
 
2 
 1THE PUBLIC GAMBLING ACT, 1867 
ACT NO. 3 O F 18672 
[25th January , 1867.]  
An Act to provide for the punishment of public  gambling and the keeping of comm on gaming -
houses in the 3[United Provinces, East Punjab, Delhi] 4[and the Central Provinces].  
Preamble. —WHEREAS it is expedient to make provision for the punishment of public gambling and 
the keeping of common gaining -houses 5[in the United Provinces, East Punjab, Delhi and the Central 
Provinces];  
It is hereby enacted as follows:  — 
1. Interpretation -clause.—In this Act — 
6*                *                *                *                * 
“Common gaming -house”.—“Common gaming -house ” means any house, walled enclosure, 
room or place in which cards, dice, tables or other instruments of gaming are kept or used for the 
profit or gain of the person owning, occupying, using or keeping such house, enclosure, room or 
place, whether by way of charge for the use of the instruments of gaming, or of the house, 
enclosure, roo m or place, or otherwise howsoe ver. 
7*        *        *        *        * 
2. Power to extend Act .—8[Sections 13 and 17] of this Act shall extend to the whole of the 
9[said Sta tes] and it shal l be competent to the State Government whenever it may think fit, to 
extend, by a notification to be published in three successive numbers of the Official Gazette, all 
or any of the remaining sections of this Act to any city, town, s uburb, railway -station, house a nd 
place being not more than three miles distant from any part of such station -house within the 
10[States], and in such notification to define, for the purposes of this Act, the limits of such city, 
town, suburb or station -house , and  from time to time to alte r the limits so defined.  
From the date of any such extension, so much of any rule having the force of law which shall 
be in operation in the territories to which such extension shall have been made, as shall be 
                                     
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUBLIC GAMBLING ACT, 1867.pdf - page 2]
ies to which such extension shall have been made, as shall be 
                                                      
1.  Short title given by the Amending Act, 1897 (5 of 1897) , Sch. III . 
2. The Act was declar ed to be in force in the tract o f land lying between the railway station at Satna and the eastern 
boundary of the Jabbulpore District in the Central Provinces (now Madhya Pradesh) by the Scheduled Districts Act , 
1874  (14 of 1874), s. 10 and in Panth Piploda, by the Panth Piploda Laws Reg ulation, 1929 (1 of 1929), s. 2.  
It has been declared by notification under the Scheduled Districts Act, 1874 (14 of 1874), to be in force in — 
Coorg ................................................................................................... .............. See Gazette of India, 1878, Pt. 1, p. 373.  
The Tarai Parganas .................................................................................................. .................. Ditto  1876, Pt. I, p. 505.  
The Act has been amended in Madhya Pra desh by C. P. Acts 3 of 1927, 25 of 1950, by Madhy a Prad esh Act 23 of 1958 
(when notified) and  47 of 1976, in Himachal Pradesh by Himachal Pradesh Act 30 of 1976. in the Punjab by Punjab 
Acts 1 of 1929 and 9 of 1960 and in U.P. by U. P. Acts 1 of 1917, 5 o f 1919, 1 of 1925, 10 of 1938 and 34 of 1952.  
The Act as extended to Ajmer -Merwara was rep. by Ajmer Act 6 of 1953.  
The Act has been extended to the whole of Madhya Pradesh by Madhya Pradesh Act 23 of 1958 (when not and to Goa, 
Daman and Diu by Reg. 11 of 1963, s. 3 and the Schedule  (w.e.f. 1 -2-1965).  
3.  Subs. by the A.O. 1948, for “North -Western Provinces of the Presidency of Fort William, and in the Punjab, Oudh ”. 
4.  Subs. by Act I of 1903, for “the C. P. and British Burma ”. 
5. Subs. by the A.O. 1948, for “in the territories, respectively, subject to the Govts. of the Lieutenant -Governor of the North -
Western Provinces of the Presidency of Fort William and of the Lieutenant -Govern
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUBLIC GAMBLING ACT, 1867.pdf - page 2]
nor of the North -
Western Provinces of the Presidency of Fort William and of the Lieutenant -Governor of the Punjab, and to the 
administrations of the  Chief Commissioner of Oudh, and of the Chief Commissioner of the Central Provinces ”. The last nine 
words had been subs.  by Act 1 of 1993, for “of the Chief Commissioner of the C. P. and of the Chief Commissioner of British 
Burma ”. 
6.  Definitions of “Lieu tenant -Governor ” and “Chief Commissioner ” rep. by the A. O. 1937.  
7.  The clauses relating to “Number ” and “Gender ” were rep, by  Act 17 of 1914, s. 3 and the Second Schedule .  
8.  Subs. by Act 12 of 18 91, s. 2 and the Second Schedule , for “sections 13, 17 and 18 ”, 
9.  Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “said Provinces ”.  
10. Subs.,  ibid., for “Provinces”  which had been subs. by the A. O. 1948, for “territories subject to its Govt. or  administration”.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUBLIC GAMBLING ACT, 1867.pdf - page 3]
 
3 
 inconsistent with o r repugnant to any section so extended, shall cease  to have effect in such 
territories.  
3. Penalty for owning or keeping, or having charge of a gaming -house.—Whoever,  being the 
owner or occupier, or having the use, of any house, walled enclosure, room or p lace situated within the 
limits to which this Act applies, opens, keeps or uses the same as  a common gaming -house; and  
whoever, being the owner or occupier of any such house, walled enclosure, room or place 
as aforesaid, knowingly or wilfully permits the s ame to be  opened, occupied, used or kept by 
any other person as a common gaming -house; and  
whoever has the care or management of, or in any manner assists in conducting, the business of any 
house, walled enclosure, room or place as aforesaid, opened, occup ied, used or kept for the purpose 
aforesaid; and  
whoever advances or furnishes money for the purpose of gaining with persons frequenting such 
house, walled enclosure, room or place;  
shall be liable to a fine not exceeding two -hundred rupees, or to imprison ment of ei ther 
description,1 as defined in the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), for any term not exceeding three 
months.2  
4. Penalty for being found in gaming -house.—Whoever  is found in any such house, walled 
enclosure, room  or place, playing or gaming w ith cards, dice, counters, money or other 
instruments of gaming, or is found there present for the purpose of gaming, whether playing for 
any money, wager, stake or otherwise, shall be liable to a fine not exceeding one hundred rupees, 
or to imprisonment o f either description,1 as defined in the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), for 
any term not exceeding one month,2 
and any person found in any common gaming -house during any gaming or playing therein shall be 
presumed, until the contrary be proved, to have be en there for the purpose of gaming.  
5. Powers to enter and authorise police to enter and search. —If the Magistrate of a 
district or 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUBLIC GAMBLING ACT, 1867.pdf - page 3]
 
5. Powers to enter and authorise police to enter and search. —If the Magistrate of a 
district or other officer invested with the full powers of a Magistrate, or the District 
Superintendent of Police, upon credible information, and after such enquiry as he may think 
necessary, has reason to believe that any house, walled enclosure, room or place, is used as a 
common gaming -house,  
he may either himself enter, or by his warrant authorise any officer of police, not belo w such 
rank as the State Government shall appoint in this behalf to enter with such assistance as may be 
found necessary, by night or by day, and by force if necessary, any such house, walled enclosure, 
room or place;  
and may either himself take into custo dy, or authorise such officer to take into custody, all persons 
whom he or such officer finds therein, whether or not then actually gaming;  
and may seize or authorise such officer to seize all instruments of gaming, and all moneys and 
securities for money,  and articles of value, reasonably suspected to have been used or intended to be used 
for the purpose of gaming which are found therein;  
and may search or authorise such officer to search all parts of the house, walled enclosure, 
room or place which lie  or such officer shall have so entered when he or such officer has reason 
to believe that any instruments of gaming are concealed therein, and also the persons of those 
whom he or such officer so takes into custody;  
and may seize or authorise  such officer to seize and take possession of all instruments of gaming 
found upon such search.  
                                                      
1. See s. 53 of the Code.  
2. As to enhanced punishment for a second conviction of an offence under s. 3 or s. 4, see s. 15 of this Act. 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUBLIC GAMBLING ACT, 1867.pdf - page 4]
 
4 
 6. Finding cards, etc., in suspected houses, to be evidence that such houses are common gaming -
houses.—When any cards, dice, gaming -tables, cloths, boards or ot her instruments of gaming are found 
in any house, walled enclosure, room or place entered or searched under the provi sions of the last 
preceding section, or about the person of any of those who are found therein, it shall be evidence, until the 
contrary i s made to appear, that such house, walled enclosure, room or place, is used as a common 
gaming -house, and that the persons found therein were there present for the purpose of gaming, although 
no play was actually seen by the Magistrate or police -officer, o r any of his assistants.  
7. Penalty on persons arrested for giving false names and addresses. —If any person found in any 
common gaming -house entered by any Magistrate or officer of police under the provisions of this Act, 
upon being arrested, by any such o fficer or upon being brought before any Magistrate, on being required 
by such officer or Magistrate to give his name and address, shall refuse or neglect to give the same, or 
shall give any false name or address, he may upon conviction before the same or a ny other Magistrate be 
adjudged to pay any penalty not exceeding five hundred rupees, together with such costs as to such 
Magistrate shall appear reasonable, and on the non -payment of such penalty and costs, or in the first 
instance, if to such Magistrate it shall seem fit, may be imprisoned for any period not exceeding one 
month.  
8. On conviction for keeping a gaming -house, instruments of gaming to be destroyed. —On 
conviction of any person for keeping or using any such common gaming -house, or being present  therein 
for the purpose of gaming, the convicting Magistrate may order all the instruments of gaming found 
therein to be destroyed, and may also order all or any of the securities for money and other articles seized, 
not being instruments of gaming, to be  so
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUBLIC GAMBLING ACT, 1867.pdf - page 4]
y of the securities for money and other articles seized, 
not being instruments of gaming, to be  sold and converted into money, and the proceeds thereof with all 
moneys seized therein to be forfeited or, in his discretion, may order any part thereof to be returned to the 
persons appearing to have been severally thereunto entitled.  
9. Proof of playing  for stakes unnecessary. —It shall not be necessary, in order to convict any person 
of keeping a common gaming -house, or of being concerned in the management of any common gaming -
house, to prove that any person found playing at any game was playing for any money, wager or stake.  
10. Magistrate may require any person, apprehended to be sworn and give evidence. —It shall be 
lawful for the Magistrate before whom any persons shall be brought, who have been found in any house, 
walled enclosure, room or place enter ed under the provisions of this Act, to require any such persons to 
be examined on oath or solemn affirmation, and give evidence touching any unlawful gaming in such 
house, walled enclosure, room or place, or  touching any act done for the purpose of preven ting, 
obstructing or delaying the entry into such house, walled enclosure, room or place or any part thereof, of 
any Magistrate or officer authorised as aforesaid.  
No person so required to be examined as a witness shall be excused from being so examined wh en 
brought before such Magistrate as aforesaid, or from being so examined at any subsequent time by or 
before the same or any other Magistrate, or by or before any Court on any proceeding or trial in any ways 
relating to such unlawful gaming or any such ac ts as aforesaid, or from answering any question put to him 
touching the matters aforesaid, on the ground that his evidence will tend to criminate himself.  
Any such person so required to be examined as a witness, who refuses to make oath or take 
affirmation  accordingly or to answer any such question as aforesaid, shall be subject to
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUBLIC GAMBLING ACT, 1867.pdf - page 4]
h or take 
affirmation  accordingly or to answer any such question as aforesaid, shall be subject to be dealt with in all 
respects as any person committing the offence described in section 178 or section 179 (as the case may 
be) of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
11. Witness es indemnified. —Any person who shall have been concerned in  gaming contrary to this 
Act, and who shall be examined as a witness before a Magistrate on the trial of any person for a breach of 
any of the provisions of this Act relating to gaming, and who, up on such examination, shall in the opinion 
of the Magistrate make true and faithful discovery, to the best of his know ledge, of all things as to which 
he shall be so examined, shall thereupon receive from the said Magistrate a certificate in writing to tha t 
effect, and shall be freed from all prosecutions under this Act for anything done before that time in 
respect of such gaming.  
12. Act not to apply to certain games. —Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this Act contained 
shall be held to apply to any g ame of mere skill wherever played.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUBLIC GAMBLING ACT, 1867.pdf - page 5]
 
5 
 13. Gaming and setting birds and animals to fight in public streets. —A police -officer may 
apprehend without warrant —any person found playing for money or other valuable thing with cards, dice, 
counters or other instrument s of gaming, used in playing any game not being a game of mere skill in any 
public street, place or thoroughfare situated within the limits aforesaid, or  
any person setting any birds or animals to fight in any public street, place or thoroughfare situated 
within the limits aforesaid, or  
any person there present aiding and abetting such public fighting of birds and animals.  
Such person when  apprehended sha ll be brought without delay before a Magistrate, and  
shall be liable to a fine not exceeding fifty rupe es, or to imprisonment, either simple or rigorous,  
for any term not exceeding one calendar month;  
Destruction of instruments of gaming found in public street. —And such police -officer may seize 
all inst ruments of gaming found in such public place or on the  person of those whom he shall so arrest, 
and the Magistrate may on conviction of the offender order such instruments to be forthwith destroyed.  
14. Offences by whom triable. —Offences punishable under this Act shall be triable by any 
Magistrate having juri sdiction in the place where the offence is committed.  
But such Magistrate shall be restrained within the limits  of his jurisdiction under the 1Code of 
Criminal Procedure, as to the amount of fine or imprisonment he may inflict.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Utta r Pradesh  
Insertion of new section 14 -A in Act No. 3 of 1867 .— After section 14 of the Public Gambling Act, 
1867, the following section shall be inserted, namely: — 
“14-A. Compounding of offences. —An officer specially empowered in this behalf by the State 
Government by notification may, subject to any general or special order of the State Government in this 
behalf, compound any offence punishable under this Act, either before or after the institut
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUBLIC GAMBLING ACT, 1867.pdf - page 5]
in this 
behalf, compound any offence punishable under this Act, either before or after the institution  of the 
prosecution, on realization of such amount of composi tion fee as he thinks fit, not exceeding the 
maximum amount of fine fixed for the offence; and where the offence is so compounded — 
(i) before the institution of the prosecution, the offender shall not be liable to prosecution for such 
offence and shall, if  in custody, be set at liberty ;  
(ii) before the institution of the prosecution, the composition shall amount to acquittal of the offender.”  
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall authorize the composition of any subsequent 
offence committed  by an offender who has once been convicted for any offence punishable under this 
Act. 
[Vide Uttar Pradesh Act 35 of 1979, s. 6]  
Abatement of certain trials. —Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in force, — 
(1) the trial of an accused for — 
 (a) an offence punishable under — 
“(i) the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988; or”  
(ii) the Public Gambling Act, 1867, not being an offence punishable under section 3 of that Act 
or an offence in respect of wagering punishable under section 13 of that Act; or  
(iii) section 34 of the Police Act, 1861; or  
(iv) section 160 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860; or  
  (b) any other offence punishable with fine only, or  
(2) a procedure, under section 107 or section 109 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, pending 
before a Magistrate on the date of commencement of this Act from before “December 31, 2015” shall 
abate.  
[Vide the Utt ar Pradesh Act 35 of 1979, s. 9, and amended by Utt ar Pradesh Act 29 of 2016 and 9 of 
2018] . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUBLIC GAMBLING ACT, 1867.pdf - page 6]
 
6 
 15. Penalty for subsequent offe nce.— Whoever, having been convicted of an offence punishable 
under section 3 or section 4 of this Act, shall again be guilty of any offence punishable under either of 
such sections, shall be subject for every such subsequent offence to double the amount o f punish ment to 
which he would have been liable for the first commission of an offence of the same description:  
Provided that he shall not be liable in any case to a fine exceeding six hundred rupees, or to 
imprisonment for a term exceeding one year.  
16. Portion of fine may be paid to informer. —The Magistrate trying the case may direct any 
portion of any fine which shall be levied under sections 3 and 4 of this Act, or any part of the moneys or 
proceeds of articles seized and ordered to be forfeited under this Act, to be paid to an informer.  
17. Recovery and application of fines. —All fines imposed under this Act may be recovered in the 
manner p rescribed by section 61 of the 1Code of Criminal Procedure 2***. 
18. [Offences under this Act to be “offences” within the meaning of Penal Code .] Rep. by the  
Repealing Act , 1874 (16 of 1874), s. 1 and the Schedule , Pt. I. 
_______  
                                                      
1. See now the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
2. The words  and brackets  “and such fines shall (subject to the provisions contained in the last preceding section) be applied as 
the Lieutenant -Governor or Chief Commissioner, as the case may be, shall from time to time direct” rep. by the A. O. 1937 . 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE P UNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831 
__________  
C O N T E N T S  
_________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
Extent.  
Commencement.  
2. Repeal of Act V of 1878.  
3. Definitions.  
4. Powers exercisable from time to  time.  
CHAPTER II.  
OF THE  LOCAL  RATE ON  LAND. 
5. The local rate.  
6. Road, school and post cesses to merge in the rate.  
7. Liability for local rate.  
8. Power to recover a share of the rate from occupancy -tenant.  
9. Appropriation of proceeds of loca l rate. 
CHAPTER III.  
OF DISTRICT AND LOCAL BOARDS.  
A.—Constitution of District and Local Boards.  
10. Establishment of district and local boards.  
11. Number and appoint ment or election of members.  
12. Term of office of members.  
13. Resignation of members.  
14. Powers of the Local Government as to removal of mot hers.  
15. Filling of casual vacancies.  
16. Incorporation of district boards.  
17. Time for district and local boards coming into existence.  
18. Chairman.  
19. Vice -chairman.  
B.—Duties of District and Local Boards.  
20. Duties of district board.  
                                                      
1. Subject to verification by Administration Ministry . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 2]
2 
 SECTIONS  
21. Duties of local board.  
22. Limits on expenditure of local board.  
23. Power for district board to provide for performance of duty in default of local board.  
C.—Joint Committees.  
24. Joint committees.  
D.—Conduct of Business.  
25. Record and publication of proceedings.  
26. Power to make rules as to business and affairs.  
E.—Officers and Servants.  
27. Employment of officers and servants.  
28. Pensions of Govern ment officials serving boards.  
29. Pensions of servants of boards.  
F.—Taxation and Finance.  
30. Powers of taxation conferred on district boards.  
31. Procedure in imposing taxes.  
32. Reduction and abolition of tax.  
33. Levy of fees.  
34. Additional funds to be provided by the Government.  
35. District fund.  
36. Vesting, custody and investment of district fund.  
37. Application of district fund.  
38. Works or undertakings benefiting several districts.  
39. Annual estimates of income and expen diture of district boards.  
40. Accounts of district boards.  
41. Estimates and accounts of local boards.  
42. Inspection of estimates and accounts.  
43. Publication of abstract of accounts.  
G.—Control.  
44. Control of Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner over boards and joint committees.  
45. Power to suspend action.  
46. Extraordinar y powers of Deputy Commissioner  in ease of emergency.  
47. Power to provid e for performance of duties in case of  default of board.  
48. Power to invest other officers with power of control.  
49. Report of action under prec eding sections.  
50. Powers of Local Government and its officers over boards.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 3]
3 
 SECTIONS  
51. Power of Local  Government to  supersede in case of in competency, persistent default  abuse of 
powers.  
52. Consequences of supersession.  
53. Constitution of new board, and transfer of functions of superseded local boards.  
54. Disputes.  
55. Power of the Governor General in Council and the Local Government to make rules.  
H.—Regulations . 
56. Power to make regulations.  
57. Penalty for infringement of regulations.  
58. Prosecutions.  
I.—Supple ment and Exceptio nal Provisions . 
59. Liability of members of boards.  
60. Procedure for making rules and regulations.  
61. Acquisition of land.  
62. Penalty on member, officer or servant being interested in contracts made with a board or joint 
committee.  
63. Saving for Act XI of 1879.  
64. General powers of Local Government and Commissioners.  
65. Contracts of local Committees.  
66. Government officers serving under committees to continue under board.  
67. Power of Local Government to except local area from operation of Act.  
68. Committee to be constituted for distric t wholly excepted from Act.  
69. Power to direct that Act XX of 1856 shall cease to be in force.  
_______  
CHAPTER IV  
SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS AS TO TAXATION  
70. Recovery of rates.  
71. Local rate or tax how to be assessed and collected.  
72. Appeals.  
73. Instalments of rates and t axes.  
74. Power of Local Government to exempt from taxation.  
75. Power to direct measurements.  
76. Suits relating to rates and taxes under this Act cogni zable by Courts having cognizance of suits 
for rent.  
77. Confirmation and recovery of existing rates.  
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 4]
4 
 SECTIONS  
[CHAPTER V ].—[AMENTDMENT OF THE NORTHEN  INDIA  FERRIES  ACT, 1878 ]  [REPEALED .]. 
78. [Repealed .]. 
79. [Repealed .]. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 5]
5 
 THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 1883  
ACT NO. 20 OF 1883  
[12th October , 1883.]  
An Act to make better provision for local self-government  in the Districts of the Panjab.  
WHEREAS  it is expedient to amend the law in force in the territories administered by the Lieutenant -
Governor of the Panjab for the levy a nd expenditure of rates on land ; and  
Whereas it is also expedient to provide for the constitution of district boards and local  boards in those 
territories, and to define and regulate the powers to be exercised by those boards ; 
It is hereby enacted as follows :—  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title .—(1) This Act may be called the Panjab District Boards Act, 1883.  
Extent. —(2) It shall extend only to the territories for the time being administered by 
the Li eutenant -Governor of the Panjab ; and  
Commencement .—(3) It shall come into force in each district on such date as the Local 
Government, by notification, directs.  
2. Repeal of Act V of 1878 .—From the date on which this Act comes into  force in any district, the 
Panjab Local Rates Act, 1878  (V of 1878) , shall be repealed throughout that d istrict. But all rates 
imposed, sums credited to the Local Govern ment, and notifications publ ished under that Act, shall, so far 
as ma y be, be deemed to have been re spectively  spectively imposed, credited and published under this Act.  
3. Definitions .—In this Act, unless there is something repugnant in the subject or 
context, — 
(1) “Land ” means land  assessed to the land -revenue, and includes land whereof the land -revenue has 
been wholly, or in part, released, compounded for, re deemed or assigned.  
(2) “Land -revenue ” includes trini  or grazing -dues levied for grazing on Government lands under 
section 48 of the Panjab Laws Act, 1872  (IV of 1872) . 
(3) “Landholder ” means any person responsible for the payment of the land -revenue, if any, 
assessed on land. It also includes the proprietor  of land the land -revenue o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 5]
nd -revenue, if any, 
assessed on land. It also includes the proprietor  of land the land -revenue of which has been wholly, or in 
part, released, compounded for, redeemed or assigned.  
(4) “Annual value ” means —  
(a) double the land -revenue for the time being assessed on any land, whether the assessment is 
leviable or not ; or  
(b) where the land -revenue has been permanently assessed, or has been wholly or in part com -
pounded for or redeemed, double the amount which, but for such permanent assessment, 
compositi on or redemption, would have been leviable; or  
(c) where no land -revenu e has been assessed, dou ble the amount which would have been 
assessed if the average village -rate had been applied:  
Provided that, in any tract in which, under the settlement for the time being in force, the 
improve ment of the land due to canal irrigati on has been ex cluded from account in assessing the 
land-revenue, and a rate has been imposed in respect of such im provement, that rate shall be 
added to the land -revenue for the purpose of computing the annual value.  
(5) “Financial  year” means the year commencing on the first day of April.  
(6) “Prescribed day “means such day as the Local Government may, from time to time, prescribe.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 6]
6 
 1[(6A) “Punjab” means the territories which, immediately before the Ist November, 1956, were 
comprised in the State with th e same name];  
(7) “Notification “means a notification published in the official Gazette.  
(8) “Notified ” means notified in the official Gaz ette. 
(9) “Deputy Commissioner ” means the Deputy Commissioner of a district, and includes any 
officer specially appoi nted by the Local Government to per form the functions of a Deputy 
Commissioner under this Act.  
4. Power exercisable from time to time. —All powers conferred by this Act may be ex ercised from 
time to time as occasion requires.  
CHAPTER IL  
OF THE LOCAL  RATE ON LAND  
5. The local rate. —(1) All land shall be subject to the payment The local of a rate, to be called the 
local rate, not exceeding one rate annual for every rupee of its annual value.  
(2) The proportion which the local rate shall bear to the annual v alue of land shall, except as provided 
in sub -section ( 3), be fixed for each district by the Local Government by notification.  
(3) The Local Government may, by notification, delegate to the district board, subject to such 
restric tions or conditions as it thinks fit, its powers under sub -section ( 2), and may, by 
notification, cancel or vary any such notification.  
6. Road, school and post cesses to merge in the rate. —From such date as may be notified in 
respect of each district by the Local Government, all author ized rates and cesses for the 
maintenance of roads, schools and the district -post shall merge in and be come part of the local rate, 
and no rate or cess other than the local rate shall be thereafter leviable for those purposes.  
7. Liability for loca l rate.—The landholder shall be liable for the local rate subject to the following 
provisos , namely :—  
(1) where the landholder pays the land -revenue in kind to any assignee of revenue or any village -
headman, the assignee of revenue or village -headman shall be liable for the payment 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 6]
 any village -
headman, the assignee of revenue or village -headman shall be liable for the payment of the local rate in -
stead of the landholder, and no demand shall be made by any such assignee or village -headman on the 
landholder in respect of the payment of the rate; and  
(2) where the Government has, under any lease cu rrent at the time when this Act comes into force, 
paid the Focal rate  on trini, it shall continue to  pay the rate during the currency of the lease.  
8. Power to recover a share of the rate from occupancy tenant .—When a local rate is payable 
by a landholder in respect of lands held by a tenant with a right of occupancy holding at a favourable 
rent, the land holder may realize from the tenant a share of the rate, bearing the same proportion to the 
whole rate as the excess of the annual value over the rent paid by the tenant bears to half the annual 
value.  
9. Appropriation of proceeds of local rate .—Four -fifths of the net proceeds of the local rate levied 
in each district, after deducting the expenses of collection, s hall, except as provided in section 68, be 
allotted to the district board established for that district under this Act.  
The remaining one -fifth shall be carried to the  credit of the Local Government, and may — 
(a) be allotted by that Government to any dis trict board established under this Act ; or  
(b) be applied by that Government to provide in the territories to which this Act extends, or any 
part thereof, for any of the matters on which district boards may expend the funds at their disposal 
under this Act  : 
Provided that the Local Government may direct that the whole or any portion of the net proceeds of 
the local rate levied within the limits of any muni cipality or military cantonment,. after deducting the  
                                                      
1. Ins. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 6]
) Order, 1956.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 7]
7 
 expenses  collection, shall be carried to the cre dit of the municipal fund, or made available for the purpose of public 
improvement in the cantonment or for carrying out therein any rules made under section 25 of the Cantonments 
Act, 1880 (III of 11880),  as the case may be.  
CHAPTER III 
OF DISTRICT AND  LOCAL  BOARDS  
A.—Constituti on of District and Local Boards . 
10. Establishment of district and local boards .—(1) The Local  Government shall, by 
notification establish a district board for each district.  
(2) The Local Government may, by notification, establish  a local board or local boards within 
the limits of any district, and may cancel or vary any such notification.  
(3) A district board shall have authority through out the district for which it is established, and a local 
board shall have authority throughout such portion of the district in which it is established, as the Local 
Governmen t may, by notification, direct:  
Provided that a board shall not have authority over any portion of a district which is for the time 
being included in a military canto nment or a muni cipality.  
11. Number and appointment or election of members. —(1) A district board or local board shall 
consist of such number of members, not less than six, as the Local Government may fix in this behalf.  
(2) The members may be appointed b y the Local Government either by name or by official 
designation, or may be elected in accordance with rules made by the Local Government under this Act , or 
some may be appointed and  some elected, as the Local Govern ment di rects : 
Provided that —  
(a) when the Local Government has directed that  all or any proportion of the members shall 
be elected, it shall not thereafter direct that they shall be appointed, unless a majority of the 
electors declare that they so desire, 1***; 
(b) 2*** unless salaried officers of the Government are elected, not less than two -thirds of the 
members of every board shall be persons other tha
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 7]
ent are elected, not less than two -thirds of the 
members of every board shall be persons other than sala ried officers of the Government ; and  
(c) not less than one -half of the members of the board shall be landholders in the district.  
(3) When, under a direction issued under sub -section ( 2), any places on a board are required to be 
filled by election, and a sufficient number of members is not elected, the Local Government may fill those 
places by appointment.  
12. Term of office of mem bers.—(1) A member of a district board or local board, when appointed 
by virtue of an office, shall, unless and until the Local Government otherwise directs, continue to be 
a member of the board while he continues to hold that office.  
(2) The term of office of all other elected and ap pointed members respectively of a district 
board or local board shall be fixed by the Local Government by rules made under this Act, and 
may be so fixed as to provide for the retirement of members by rota tion, but shall not exceed three 
years.  
(3) An outgoing member shall, if otherwise quali fied, be again eligible for election or appointment.  
 13. Resignation of members. —A member of a local board or of a district board  may resign by 
notifying in writi ng his intention to do so to 3[Commissioner] ; and, on the ac ceptance by 3[Commissioner]  
of such resignation, the  member shall be deemed to have vacated his office.  
                                                      
1. The words “or the Governor General in Council, for some reason affecting the public interes ts, sanctions the 
direction,” omitted by Act 38 of 1920, s. 2 and the First Schedule  
2. The words “except with the approval of the Governor General in Council or” omitted by s. 2 and the First 
Schedule, ibid. 
3. Subs. by Act 4 of 1914, s. 2 and the Schedule, for “the local Government”  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 8]
8 
 14. Powers of the Local Government as to removal of members. —The Local Government may 
remove any mem ber of a d istrict board or local board —  
(a) if he refuses to act, or becomes incapable of acting, or is declared insolvent, or is 
convicted of any such offence, or subjected by a Criminal Court to any such order, as im -
plies, in the opinion of the Local Govern ment, a defect of character which unfits him to be a 
member ;  
(b) if he has been declared by notification to be disqualified for employment in the 
public service;  
(c) if he, being a member of a local board, with out an excuse sufficient in the opinion of 
the Local Government, neglects for more than three consecutive months to be present at the 
meetings of that board, or, being a mem ber of the district board, without such suffi cient 
excuse, neglects for more than six consecutive months to be present at the  meetings of that 
board;  
(d) if his continuance in office is, in the opinion of the Local Government, dangerous to the 
public peace or order ; or,  
(e) when he is a salaried officer of the Govern ment, if his continuance in office is; in the opinion 
of the Local Government, unneces sary or undesirable.  
15. Filling of casual vacancies. —(1) When the place of an elected member of a local board or 
district board becomes vacant by the resignation or removal of the member or by his death, a new 
member shall be cho sen in accordance with 'the rules made by the Local Government under this Act to 
fill the place :  
Provided that the Local Government may direct  in any such case that the vacancy shall be left 
unfilled.  
(2) When the place of a member  of a local board or district board appointed by name becomes 
vacant as aforesaid, the Local Government may, if it thinks fit, appoint a new member to fill the 
place.  
(3) A person chosen or appointed under this sec tion to fill a casual vacancy shall hold office until 
the person whose place he fills would regu larly have gone out o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 8]
al vacancy shall hold office until 
the person whose place he fills would regu larly have gone out of office, and shall then go out of 
office, but shall be  again eligible for election or appointment.  
16. Incorporation of district boards .—Every district board shall be a body corpo rate by the  
name of the district board of  its district, and shall have perpetual succession and a common seal, 
with power  to acquire and hold property,  both move able and immoveable, and, subject to any rules 
made by the Local Government under this Act, t o transfer any such property held by it, and to 
contract and do all other things necessary for the purposes of its con stitution, and  may sue and be 
sued in its corporate name.  
17. Time for district and local boards coming into existence .—The several distr ict boards and 
local boards constituted under this Act shall come into existence at such time as the Local 
Government may, by noti fication, fix in this behalf.  
18. Chairman .—(1) A member of every district board or local board shall be elected or 
appointed  to be chairman of the board, and shall hold office for such term, not exceeding three years, 
as the Local Government may, by  a rule made under this Act, fix.  
(2) The Local Government shall determine, as regards each board or as regards any class of 
boards , whether the chairman shall be a person appointed by virtue of his office or by name or be 
elected.  
19. Vice -chairman .—(1) A district board or local board may elect one of its members to be vice -
chairman.  
(2) A vice -chairman so elected shall hold office f or such term as the board may, by rule, fix.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 9]
9 
 B.—Duties of District and Local Boards  
20. Duties of district board. —(1) The following matters shall, subject to such exceptions and. 
conditions as the Local Govern ment may make and impose, be under the control and. administration of 
each district board within the area subject to its authority : —  
(a) the management of all property vested in the district board ;  
(b) the construction, repair and maintenance of public roads an d other means of communi -
cation ; 
(c) the establishment, management, maintenance and visiting of public hospitals, 
dispensaries, sarais and schools, and the construction and repair of all buildings co nnected with 
these institutions ; 
(d) the training  of teachers and the establishment of scholarships ;  
(e) the supply, storage and preservation from pol lution of water for drinking, cooking and bathing 
purposes ; and.  
(f) the planting and preservation of trees.  
(2) The Local Government may direct that an y of the following. matters shall, subject to such 
excep tions and conditions as it may make and impose, be under the control and administration of 
a district board Within the area subje ct to its authority : — 
(g) the management of any property vested in Her Majesty ;  
(h) the establishment, maintenance, visiting and management of markets, rest -houses, encamp ing-
grounds  and other  public institutions, and the construction and repair or all build ings connected with 
these institutions ;  
(i) the construction and repair of embankments, and the supply, storage and control of water for 
agricultural purposes ;  
(j) the preservation and reclamation of soil, and the drainage and reclamation of swamps ;  
(k) the construction, repair and maintenance of famine preventive  works, and the establish -
ment and maintenance of such relief -works, relief -houses and other measures in time of famine 
or scarcity as may be entrusted to the charge of the board by the Local Gov ernment ;  
(l) the registration of births, marr
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 9]
trusted to the charge of the board by the Local Gov ernment ;  
(l) the registration of births, marriages and deat hs ; 
(m) fairs and agricultural shows and industrial exhibitions ;  
(n) the establishment and management of pounds,   including, wher e the Cattle -trespass Act 
1871  (1 of 1871) , is in force, such functions of the Local Government and the Magistrate of 
the dis trict under that Act as may be transferred to the board by the Local Government ;  
(o) the management of such public ferries as may be entrusted to the char ge of the board 
under section 7 A of the Northern India Ferries Act, 1878, as amended by this Act  
(p) any other local works or measures likely to promote the health, comfort, convenience and 
interests of the public or the agricul tural or indus trial prosperity of the country ; and  
(q) any other matters which the Local Govern -went may declare to be fit and proper 
matters to be taken under the control and ad ministration of the board.  
(3) The Local Government may cancel or modify any direction given by it under sub -section ( 2). 
(4) A district board shall, so far as the funds at its disposal permit, make due provision for all matters 
placed under its control or administration by or under this section.  
21. Duties of local board. —(1) The Local Government, or, subject to the control of the Local 
Government, a district board, may direct that, within the area subje ct to the au thority of a local 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 10]
10 
 board, any matter placed under the control and administration of the district board by or under 
section 20 shall be transferred to the control and administration of the local board.  
(2) A local board, as the agent of, and su bject to the control of, the district board, shall, so far as the 
funds at its disposal permit, make due provision for all matters transferred to its control and administra -
tion under sub -section ( 1). 
(3) It shall be the duty of the district board to enfor ce the responsibility imposed on a local board by 
sub-section ( 2). 
22. Limits on expenditure of local board. —Except as other wise provided by this Act, a l ocal board 
shall not incur expenses or undertake liabilities  expenditure to any amount exceeding the l imit imposed 
by of local board the district board of its district.  
23. Power for district board to provide for performance  of duty in default of local board .—(1) If 
a local board makes default in the performance of any duty imposed on it by or under this  Act, the  district 
board  may, by order in writing, fix a period of board of its district.  
(2) If the duty is not pe rformed within that period, the district board may appoint some person 
to perform it, and may provide for the expenses of, and incidental to, i ts performance out of the funds 
appro priated to or for the purposes of the local board.  
C.—Joint Committees . 
24. Joint committees .—A district board may concur with any other district board, or with any 
municipal committee or with any cantonment authority,  or with more than one such board, committee or 
authority, in appointing, out of their respective bodies, a joint committee for any pu rpose in which they 
are jointly interested, and for delegating to any such joint committee any power which might be exerci sed 
by either or nay of the boards, committees or authorities concerned, and in framing or modifying 
regulations as to the proceedings of any such joint committee, and as to the conduct 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 10]
 or modifying 
regulations as to the proceedings of any such joint committee, and as to the conduct of correspondence 
relating to the purpose for which the joint committe e is appointed.  
D.—Conduct of Business . 
25. Record and publication of proceedings. —(1) Minutes of the proceedings at each meet -
ing of a district or local board shall be drawn up and recorded in a book to be kept for the 
purpose, and shall be signed by the chairman of the meeting or of the next ensuing meeting, and 
shall be published in such manner as the Local Government may, from time to time, direct, and 
shall, at all reasonable times and without charge, be open to the inspection of any inhabitant of 
the district who pays any rate or tax under this Act.  
(2) A copy of every resolution passed by a local board at a meeting shall, within three days 
from the date of the meeting, be forwarded to the district board and to the Deputy Commissioner.  
(3) A copy of ev ery resolution passed by a dis trict board at a meeting shall, within three days from 
the date of the meeting, be forwarded to the Deputy Commissioner.  
26. Power to make rules as to business and affairs. —Every district board, and every local 
board with the  sanction of the district board, may make rules as to —  
(a) the time and place of its meetings and the manner in which notice of meetings shall be 
given ;  
(b) the conduct of proceedings at meetings and the adjournment of meetings;  
(c) the custody of the co mmon seal and the pur poses for which it shall be used ;  
(d) the division of duties amongst its members ;  
(e) the powers to be exercised by sub -committees or members to whom particular duties have 
been assigned;  
(f) the persons by whom receipts shall be granted for money received under this Act;  
(g) the duties, appointment, leave, suspension   and removal of the officers and servants of the 
board;  
(h) the term for which the vice -chairman shall hold office, and  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 10]
 the term for which the vice -chairman shall hold office, and  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 11]
11 
 (i) other similar matters :  
Provided that ever y rule made under this section must be consistent with this Act and with any rules 
made by the Local Government under this Act, and shall be published in such manner as the Local Gov -
ernment may direct.  
E.—Officers  and Servants.  
27. Employment of officers and servants .—(1) Subject to the p rovisions of this Act and to any 
rules which may be made under this Act in servants  this behalf, every district board may employ and 
pay such officers and servants as may be necessary and proper for the efficient execution  of its duties and 
of the duties of the local boards acting under it :  
Provided that if, at any time, in the opinion of the Deputy Commissioner, —  
(a) the number  of persons employed by a board  under this section, or the remuneration 
assigned by the board to those persons, or to any of them, is excessive, or  
(b) any such person is unfit for his employment, the board shall, on the requirement of the 
Deputy Commissioner, reduce the number, or remu neration, of those persons, or, as the -case may be, 
dismiss the unfit person.  
(2) The  Commissioner of the divi sion, whose decision shall be final.  
28. Pensions of Government officials serving boards. —In the case of a Government official, a 
district board  may— 
(1) if his services are wholly lent to it, contribute to his pension or gratuity and leave -allowances in 
accordance with the rules of the 1[Civil  Service Regulations]  for the time being in force ; and  
(2) if he devotes only a part of his time to the performance of duties in behalf of the board, contri bute 
to his pension or gratuity and leave -allowances in such proportion as may be determined by the 
Government.  
29. Pensions of servants of boards. —In the case of an officer or servant, not being a Gover nment 
official referred to in section 28, a dis trict board may —  
(1) grant him leave -allowances and, if he is em ployed under the district committee when this Act 

<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 11]
(1) grant him leave -allowances and, if he is em ployed under the district committee when this Act 
comes into force and not entitled to pension, or if his monthly pay is less than ten rupees,  a gratuity ; and  
(2) if empowered in thi s behalf by the Local Governmen t—  
(a) subscribe in his behalf for pension or gratuity and leave -allowances under the rules of the 
Government Civil Pension and Leave Codes for the time being in force ; or  
(b) purcha se for him from the Government or otherwise an annuity on his retirement :  
Provided that no pension, gratuity, leave -allow ance or annuity shall exceed the sum to which, under 
the 1[Civil Service Regulations]  for the time being in force, the servant would be entitled if the service 
had been service under the Government.  
F.—Taxation and Finance . 
30. Powers of taxation conferred on district boards. —Subject to any general rules or special 
orders  which  the 2[Local Govern ment]  may make in this behalf, a district board may impose, in manner 
prescribed by section 31, such taxes as may be a pproved by the Local Government : 
Provided that no such tax shall be imposed in re spect of any property subject to the local rate.  
31. Procedur e in imposing taxes .—(1) A district board may resolve, at a meet ing, convened and 
constituted in such manner as the Local Government may prescribe, to propose the imposition of any 
tax under section 30.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and the Second Schedule, for “Government Civil Pension and Leave Codes”.  
2. Subs. by Act 38 of 1920, s. 2 and the First Schedule, for “Governor General in Council ”. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 12]
12 
 (2) When a resolution has been passed under sub section ( 1), the board shall publish a notice defining 
the class of persons or description of property proposed to be taxed, the amount or rate of the tax to be 
imposed and the system of assessment to be adopted.  
(3) Any person likely to be directly affected by the proposed tax, and objecting to the same, may, 
within thirty days from the publication of the notice, send his objection in writing to the board ; and the 
board shall, at a meeting convened and constituted as aforesaid, take his objection in to consideration.  
(4) If no objection is sent within the said period of thirty days, or if the objections received, having 
been considered as aforesaid, are deemed insufficient, the board may submit its proposals to the Local 
Government, with the objectio ns (if any) which have been sent in and with its decision thereon.  
(5) The Local Government, on receiving proposals under sub -section ( 4), may sanction the same, or 
refuse to sanction them, or return them to the board for further consideration.  
(6) When th e proposals of a district board in respect of a tax have been sanctioned by the Local 
Government, the board may, at a meeting convened and constituted as aforesaid, direct the imposition of 
the tax in accordance with those proposals : 
Provided that, in giving such direction, the board shall fix a date not less than one month from the 
date of the meeting on which the tax shall come into force.  
(7) Every direction under sub -section ( 6) shall be notified, and the notification shall be conclusive 
evidence that the tax has been imposed in accordance with law.  
32. Reduction and abolition of tax .—The Local Government may, by notification, and the district 
board may, with the sanction of the Local Government, by a resolution passed at a meeting convened and 
constitu ted as the Local Government may prescribe, abolish or reduce any tax imposed under sections 30 
and 31  
33. Levy of fees .—Wi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 12]
t may prescribe, abolish or reduce any tax imposed under sections 30 
and 31  
33. Levy of fees .—With the previous sanction of the Local Gov ernment, or of such officer as the 
Local Government may authorize in this behalf, a district  board or local board may fix and  levy school -
fees and fees for the use of, or benefits derived from, any of the works specified in section 20, clauses ( c), 
(e), (h), (i) and KB, and fees at fairs, agricultural shows and. industrial exhibitions held under its 
authority.  
34. Additional funds to be provided by the Government. —When the control and administration of 
any matter is by or under this Act transferred to a  district bo ard, and at the time of the transf er the cost of 
that control and administration  is defrayed from provincial revenue, the Local Government shall, from 
time to time, allot to the district board such funds, .or place at the disposal of the board such sou rces of 
income, as may, in the opinion of the Local Government and of the b oard, be sufficient for maintaining 
the control and ad ministration o f the said matter in  the state of efficiency existing at the date of transfer.  
35. District fund. —There Shall be formed for each district a fund, to be called the di strict fund, and-
there shall lie pla ced to the credit thereof — 
(a) the balance (if any) of the allotments made for the district under section 7 of the Panja b Local 
Bates Act, 1878  (V of 1887) , and of the road and school ceases, which m ay be available for  
expenditure in the district on the day on which the district board comes into existence;  
(b) all proceeds of rates allotted to t he district board under section 9; 
(c) the proceeds of all taxes imposed in the dis trict under sections 30 and 31 ; 
(d) the amo unt of all fees levied by the district board or by local boards i n the district under 
section 33 ; 
(e) all funds allotted to the district board and the income arising from 'all sources of income placed 
at its disposal
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 12]
ted to the district board and the income arising from 'all sources of income placed 
at its disposal under section 34;  
(f) all rents and pro fits accruing from property vested in the district board or managed by the 
district board or a local board in the district;  
(g) all sums contributed to the fund by Govern ment or by any committee, board or private person;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 13]
13 
 (h) all sums received by the district board or by a local board in the district in the discharge ,of 
functions  exercised by it under this Act ; and  
(i) the proceeds of all sources of income which the Local Government may order to be placed at, 
the disposal of the district board :  
Provided that the Meal Government may revoke any order made .under clause ( i). 
36. Vesting custody and investment of district fund. —(1) The district fund shall be vested in the 
district board, and the balance standing at the credit of the fund shall be kep t in the Government treasury or 
sub-treasury or in the bank to which the Govern ment treasury business has be en made over, unless the Local 
Government in any cases otherwise permits.  
(2) Subject to such rules as the  1[Local Government, subject to the control of the]  Governor Gen eral 
in Council may make in this behalf, the district  board may, with the previous sanction of the Local 
Government, invest any portion of the district fund in securities of the Government of India or such other 
securities as t he 1[Local Government, subject to the control of the]  Governor General in Council may 
approve in this behalf, and vary such invest ments for others of the same nature,  or dispose of them. The 
income  resulting from the securities, and the proceeds of the sa le of the same, shall be credited to the 
district fund .  
37. Application of district fund .—(1) The district fund shall be charged with the payment of the 
expenses of the district -post, the payment of the expenses of pauper lunatics sent to public asylums from 
the area under the authority of the district board, the expenses incurred in auditing the accounts of the 
district boards and local boards, and such portion of the cost of the Provincial Depart ments for education, 
sanitation, vaccination, medical rel ief and public works as may be held by the Local Government to be 
equitably debitable to the district board in return for services rendered to 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 13]
ocal Government to be 
equitably debitable to the district board in return for services rendered to the board by those Departments.  
(2) Subject to the charges specified in sub -section ( 1), and to such rules as th e Local Government may 
make with respect to the priority to be given to the several duties of the board or otherwise, the dis trict 
fund shall be applicable to the payment, in whole or in part, of the charges and expenses incidental to the 
matters specifie d in sections 20, 27, 28 and 29, and to the provision of grants -in-aid to educational and 
medical institutions, within the area subject to the authority of the district board, and, with the sanction of 
the Commissioner, outside that area when such applicat ion of the fund is for the benefit of the inhabitants 
of that area.  
38. Works or undertakings benefiting several districts .—In the case of works or undertakings 
which undertakings benefit more districts than one, when the district boards cannot agree, the 
Commissioner or Commissioners of the division or divisions, or, when the districts are in different 
divisions and the Commissioners cannot agree, the Local Government, may determine what proportion of 
the expenses of the work or under taking shall be borne  by each of the district funds of the districts 
benefited thereby ; and such proportion shall be payable out of the several district funds accordingly.  
39. Annual estimates of income and expenditure of district boards. —(1) Every district board shall 
appoin t a finance committee consisting of not less than three of its members.   
(2) Every district board shall, on or before a boards prescribed day in each year, hold a meeting at 
which the finance committee shall submit to the board an estimate of the income an d expenditure of the 
board for the next financial year, in such form as the Local Government may, by a rule made under this 
Act, prescribe.  
(3) The board shall consider the estimate, and may provisionally approve of 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 13]
this 
Act, prescribe.  
(3) The board shall consider the estimate, and may provisionally approve of it .with or without 
modification.  
(4) The board shall, on or before a prescribed day, cause copies of the estimate, as provisionally 
approved by it, to be sent to the Deputy Commissioner.  
(5) The Deputy Commissioner shall, on or before a, prescribed day, signify in writing to the board his 
appro val or disapproval of the estimate. When he disapproves of the estimate, he shall state the nature of 
                                                      
1. Ins. by s. 2 and t he Schedule.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 14]
14 
 his objection. The board shall then consider the matter, and either modify the estimate, so as to remove 
the objection, or refer it through the Deputy Com missioner to the Commissioner of the division. If the 
Commissioner concurs in the objection, he shall make such modification in the estimate as may, in his 
judgment, be necessary to remove the objection in whole or in part. If he does not concur in the o bjection, 
he shall pass the estimate, and his order shall be final and binding on the board.  
(6) When the Deputy Commissioner has signified his approval of an estimate, or the board has 
modified an estimate so as to remove the Deputy Commis sioner's object ions, or when the Commissioner 
has passed orders as provided in sub -section (5), no expen diture which is not provided for in the estimate 
as approved or modified shall be incurred during the year to which the estimate relates without the 
previous sanction  of the Deputy Commissioner.  
(7) When the Deputy Commissioner is a member of the district board, the Commissioner and the 
Local Government shall take the place of the Deputy Com missioner and the Commissioner respectively 
for the purposes of this section.  
40. Accounts of district boards. —Accounts of the receipts and expenditure of every district board 
shall be made up periodically to such days and in such form as the Local Government prescribes, and 
shall be examined and. audited as soon as may be after the y are so made up by such persons as the Local 
Government appoints in this behalf.  
41. Estimates and accounts of local boards. —(1) Every local board shall submit annually to the 
district board of its district, on or before such date as the district board ma y appoint in this behalf, a 
statement of the requirements, and an estimate of the probable expenditure, of the local board for the 
coming financial year, and shall submit, as often as the district board may require, accounts of its receipts 
and expenditure . 
(2) The distr
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 14]
 often as the district board may require, accounts of its receipts 
and expenditure . 
(2) The district board shall signify in. writing to the local board its approval or disapproval of an 
estimate submitted under this section, and powers similar to those conferred on the Deputy Commissioner 
and Commissioner by section 39, clauses, ( 5) and  (6), shall be exercised, in regard to the estimate, by the 
district board and the Deputy Commissioner, or (when the Deputy Commissioner is a member of the 
district board) the Commissioner, respectively  
Provided that, during the currency of any financial y ear, the Deputy Commissioner may sanction 
transfers of provision within the estimate finally' approved, when inconvenience or undue delay would be 
caused by a previous reference to the district board.  
(3) The district board shall make arrangements, subject  to the approval of the Deputy Commissioner, 
for the examination and. audit of accounts submitted to it under this section, and may arrange for the 
publication of such accounts.  
42. Inspection of estimates and accounts. —Every district board shall cause a c opy of every annual 
estimate provisionally or finally ap proved under section 39, and of every account made up under section 
40, to be kept at its office; and any person paying rates or taxes under this Act may, at all reasonable 
times, inspect any such es timate or account without payment of any fee.  
43. Publication of abstract of accounts. —A statement of the accounts of a district board for each 
financial year, showing the income of the district fund under each head. of receipt, the charges for 
establishme nt, the works undertaken, the sums expended on each work, and the balance, if any, of the 
fund remaining unspent at the end of the year, shall be prepared by the board in such form as the Local 
Government prescribes; and an abstract of the same shall be pu blished in the English and Vernacular 
official Gazettes, or in such other manner as the L
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 14]
all be pu blished in the English and Vernacular 
official Gazettes, or in such other manner as the Local Government may direct.  
G.—Control.  
44. Control of Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner over boards and joint comittees. —(1) 
The Commissioner of the division, or the Deputy Commissioner of the district when he is not a member 
of the district board, may —  
(a) enter on and inspect, or cause to be entered on and inspected, any immoveable property within 
the limits of the division  or district respectively occupied by any local board, district board or joint 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 15]
15 
 committee, or any work in progress within those limits under the direction of any such board or 
committee;  
(b) by order in writing call for and inspect any document in the posse ssion or under the control of 
any such board or committee hav ing authority within those limits;  
(c) by order in writing require any such board or committee to furnish such statements, ac counts, 
reports and copies of documents relating to the proceedings or duties of the board or committee, as he 
may think fit to call for; and  
(d) record in writing, for the consideration of any such board or committee, any observations he 
may think proper in regard to the pro ceedings or duties of the board or com mittee.  
(2) If any difference of opinion arises between officers exercising the powers conferred by                
sub-section ( 1), it shall be referred —  
(a) if it arises between two or more Deputy Com missioners in the same division —to the 
Commissioner ; and  
(b) if it arises between two or more Deputy Com missioners in different divisions or between two 
or more Commissioners —to the Local Government;  
and the decision thereon of the Commissioner or of the Local Government, as the case may be, shall be 
final.  
45. Po wer to suspend action. —The Commissioner of the division or the Deputy Commissioner of 
the district may, by order in writing, suspend, within the division or district respectively, the execution of 
any resolution or order of a district board or local board or joint committee, or prohibit the doing of any 
act within the said limits which is about to be done, or is being done, in pur suance of or under cover of 
this Act, if, in his opinion, the resolution, order or act is in. excess of the powers conferred by law, or the 
execution of the resolution or order, or the doing of the act, is likely to lead to a breach of the peace, or to 
cause injury or annoyance to the public or to any class or body or persons.  
46. Extraordinary powers of Deputy Commiss
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 15]
yance to the public or to any class or body or persons.  
46. Extraordinary powers of Deputy Commissioner in case  of emergency. —(1) In cases of 
emergency, the Deputy Com missioner may provide for the execution of any work, or the doing of any 
act, which a district board or local board is empowered to execute or do, and the immediate execution or 
doing of which is, in  his opinion, necessary for the service or safety of the public, and may direct that the 
expense of executing the work or of doing the act shall be forthwith paid by the district board.  
(2) if the expense is not so paid, the Deputy Com missioner may make a n order directing the• person 
having the custody of the balance of the district fund to pay the expense, or so much thereof as is, from 
time to time, possible, from that balance in priority to all other charges against the same.  
47. Power to provide for pe rformance of duties in case of default of board. —(1) When the 
Commissioner, after due en quiry, is satisfied that a district board has made de fault in performing any duty 
imposed upon it by or under this Act, he may, by an order in writing, fix a period f or the performance of 
that duty, and, if it is not performed within the period so fixed, he may appoint some person to perform it, 
and may direct that the expense of performing it shall be paid, within such time as he may fix, by the 
board to that person.  
(2) If the expense is not so paid, the Commis sioner may make an order directing the person having 
the custody of the balance of the district fund to pay the expense, or so much thereof as is, from time to 
time, possible, from that balance in priority to all other charges against the same.  
48. Power to invest other officers with. —When the control and administration of any public work is 
by or under this Act transferred to a district board, and at the time of the transfer the cost of that control 
and admini stration is defrayed from provincial revenue, the Local Governme
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 15]
he cost of that control 
and admini stration is defrayed from provincial revenue, the Local Government may invest any officer 
with respect to that work with the powers of a Commissioner under section 44 or section 47, or with the 
powers of a Deputy Commissioner under section 46.  
49. Report o f action under preceding sections. —When the Commissioner makes any order under 
section 45 or section 47, he shall forthwith forward to the Local Government, and when the Deputy 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 16]
16 
 Commissioner makes any order under section 45 or section 46, or an officer empo wered under sec tion 48 
makes any order under section 46 or section 47, he shall forthwith forward to the Commissioner, for 
submission to the Local Government, a copy of the order, with a statement of the reasons for making it, 
and with such explanation, i f any, as the board or committee concerned may wish to offer. The Local 
Government may thereupon confirm, modify or re scind the order.  
50. Powers of Local Government and its officers over boards. —(1) It shall be the duty of the 
Local Government and of all  Commissioners and Deputy Commissioners acting under its orders to 
require that the proceedings of district boards and local boards shall be in conformity with law and with 
the rules in force thereunder.  
(2) The Local Government may exercise all pow ers ne cessary for the purpose of sub -section ( 1), and 
may, amongst other things, by order in writing, annul any proceeding which it considers not to be in 
conformity with law and with the said rules.  
(3) The Commissioner of the division and the Deputy Commission er of the district may, within their 
jurisdiction, for the same purpose, exercise such .powers as may be conferred upon them by rules made in 
this behalf by the Local Government.  
51. Power of Local Government to supersede, in case of incompetency, persiste nt default or 
abuse of powers. —If a district board or local board is not com petent to perform, or persistently makes 
default in the performance of, the duties imposed on it by or under this or any other Act, or exceeds or 
abuses its powers, the Local Gove rnment may, 1*** in Council, by noti fication, in which the reasons for 
so doing shall be stated, declare the board to be superseded:  
Provided that, in case of public emergency, the notification may be issued without the previous 
approval of the Governor G eneral in Council, but shall be immediately reported to the Governor General 
in Counc
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 16]
he Governor G eneral in Council, but shall be immediately reported to the Governor General 
in Council and shall be subject to his orders.  
52. Consequences of supersession. —When a district board or local board is superseded under 
section 51, the following conse quences s hall ensue: —  
(a) All members of the board shall from the date of the notification vacate their offices as such 
members:  
(b) All powers and duties of the board may, until the board is re -constituted, be exercised and. 
performed by such person as the Local Government appoints in that behalf:  
(c) Where a district board is superseded, all pro perty vested in it shall, until it is re -consti tuted, 
vest in Tier Majesty.  
53. Constitution of new board, and transfer of functions of superseded local boards. —(1) When  
a district board is superseded, Constitution the Local Government shall, as soon as in its judgment 
conveniently may be, constitute another district board in its place.  
(2) When a local board is superseded, the Local Government may either constitute anoth er local 
board in its place, or transfer its functions to the district board or, by a notification under section 10, to 
any other local board.  
54. Disputes. —If any dispute, for the decision of which this Act does not otherwise provide, arises 
between two o r more boards constituted under this Act, or between a municipal committee or cantonment 
authority and any such board, the matter shall be re ferred — 
(a) to the Deputy Commissioner, if the local authorities concerned are in the same dis -
trict;  
(b) to the C ommissioner or Commissioners of the division or divisions, if the local authorities 
concerned are in different districts ; and  
(c) to the Local Government, if the local autho rities concerned are in different divisions and the 
Commissioners of those divisi ons cannot agree.  
                                                      
1. The words “with the previous approval of the Governor General in Counc
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 16]
                          
1. The words “with the previous approval of the Governor General in Council”  omitted by Act 4 of 1914, s. 2 and the Schedule.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 17]
17 
 (2) The decision of the authority to which any dispute is referred under this section shall be final.  
(3) If, in the case mentioned in clause ( a), the Deputy Commissioner is a member of one of the boards 
or committees concerned, his funct ions under this section shall be discharged by the Commissioner.  
(4) “Local authority” in this section means a district board, local board, municipal committee or 
cantonment authority.  
55. Power of the Governor General in Council and the local Government t o make rules. —So far 
as may be consistent with the provi sions of this Act —  
(1) the Governor General in Council may —  
(a) make general rules or special orders for the regulation of taxation under section 30; and  
1[(b) regulation the powers of district boards to make vary and dispose of investments;]  
(2) the Local Government may, for any district or local board, or any class of such boards, make 
rules for  2[Rules made under clause ( 2)(b) shall be subject to the control of the Governor General in 
Council] —  
(c) dividing boards into classes, and fixing the powers of boards of each class ;  
(d) determining the mode and time of appoint ment or election of members of boards, the term 
of office, allowances (if any), and the qualifications and disqualifications o f such members, and 
the qualifications and disqualifications of voters, and generally for regulating all elections under 
this Act;  
(e) regulating the. powers of boards to transfer property;  
(f) regulating the powers of boards to contract and do other thing s necessary for the pur poses 
of their constitution and the mode of executing contracts;  
(g) determining the intermediate offices, if any, through which correspondence between 
boards or members of boards and the Local Government or its officers shall pass;  
(h) determining the language in which business shall be transacted;  
(i) the employment, payment, suspension and removal of officers and servants under                  
section 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 17]
mployment, payment, suspension and removal of officers and servants under                  
section 27;  
(j) the apportionment of the district fund between the general purposes of the district and. the 
purposes of particular parts of the district;  
(k) the application of district funds;  
(l) the form of estimates of income and expendi ture under section 39;  
(m) the form of accounts and. the manner of periodical audit under section 40;  
(n) the publication of abstracts of accounts under section 43;  
(o) the preparation of plans and estimates for works which are to be partly or wholly con -
structed at the expense of bo ards, and as to the authority by which, and the conditions Subject to 
which, such plans and estimates may be sanctioned;  
(p) the powers of supervision to be exercised by Commissioners and Deputy Commissioners 
under section 50 ;  
(q) the conduct of proceedin gs of boards, includ ing the fixing of a quorum, the appointment 
or election of a chairman, and the term of office of a chairman and vice -chairman;  
(r) the appointment and payment of auditors of  the accounts of boards; and  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 4 of 1914, s. 2 and the Schedule.  
2. Added by s. 2 and the Schedule, ibid. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 18]
18 
 (s) the guidance of district boards when suits or other proceeding s are intended to be or have 
been instituted by or against them in Civil Courts; and  
(t) generally determining the relations between district boards and local boards, and guiding 
boards and Government officers in all ma tters connected with the carrying out of the pro visions 
of this Act.  
All such rules and alterations of rules shall be notified, and no rul es or alteration of rules under  clause ( 2) 
(d) shall come into ope ration until three months -after-they have been noti fied 1[Rules made under clause 
(2)(b) shall be subject to the control of the Governor General in Council ]. 
H.—Regulations.  
56. Power to make regulations. —(1) Every district board or local board empowered in. this behalf 
by the Local Government may make reg ulations for carrying out all or any of the purposes of this Act.  
(2) A regulation made under this section shall not have effect until it has been confirmed by the Local 
Government and published in such manner and for such time as the Local Government may direct.  
57. Penalty for infringement of regulations. —(1) In, making -any regulation under section 56, a 
board may direct that a breach of the same shall be punished with fine which may extend to fifty rupees, 
and, in the case of a continuing breach, with a further fine which may extend to five rupees for every day 
during which the breach is continued after the offender has been convicted of such breach . 
(2) In default of payment of any fine imposed under this section, the defaulter shall be liable to simple 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to eight days:  
58. Prosecutions. —(1) Prosecutions under this Act for breach of regulations may be instituted by any 
board, or by any person authorized by the board in this behalf.  
(2) A Judge or Magistrate shall not  be deemed to be within the meaning of section 555 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure a party to, or personally in terested in, an
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 18]
aning of section 555 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure a party to, or personally in terested in, any case under this section merely because he 
is a member of the board.  
I.—Supplemental and Exceptional Provisions.  
59. Liability  of members of boards. —Every person shall be liable for the loss, waste Liability of or 
misapplication of any money or other property members of belonging to the district board, if such loss, 
waste or misapplication is a direct consequence of his neglect o r misconduct while a member of a local 
board or of the district board, and a suit for compensation for the same may be instituted against him in 
such Court as the Local Government directs, by the district board with the sanction of the Commissioner, 
or by the Secretary of State for India in Council.  
60. Procedure for making rules and regulation. —(1) The Local Government, before making 
Procedure any rules under section 55 or section 67, and a district or local hoard, before making any 
regulations rules and regulations, under section 56, shall publish, in such manner as the Local 
Government may deem sufficient for giving information to persons interested, a draft of the pro posed 
rules or regulations, together with a notice specifying a date on or after which  the draft will be taken into 
consideration; and shall, before making the rules or regulations, receive and consider any objection or 
suggestion which may be made by any person with respect to the draft before the date so specified.  
(2) Every such rule or regulation shall be published in the official Gazette in English and in such 
other language as the Local Government directs, and such publication shall be conclusive evidence that 
the rule or regulation has been made as required by this section.  
61. Acquis ition of land. —Where any land is required for the purposes of this Act, the Local 
Government may, at the re quest of a district board, proceed to acquire it under the provisions of the Land 
Acquisition Act
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 18]
e quest of a district board, proceed to acquire it under the provisions of the Land 
Acquisition Act, 1870 (10 of 1870); and, on the payment by the board of the compensa tion awarded under 
that Act, and of the charges in curred by the Government in connection with the pro ceedings, the land 
shall vest in the board.  
                                                      
1. Added by Act 4 of 1914, s. 2 and the Schedule.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 19]
19 
 62. Penalty on member, officer or servant being interested in contracts made with a boa rd or 
joint committee. —(1) If any member, officer or servant of a dis trict or local board or joint committee 
appointed under this Act is, otherwise than with the permission in writing of the Commissioner, directly 
or indirectly interested in any contract made with that board or joint committee, he shall be deemed to 
have committed an offence under the Indian Penal Code, section 168.  
(2) A person shall not, by reason of being a share holder in, or a member of, any incorporated or 
register ed company, be hel d to be interested, in any contract entered into between the company and a 
board or committee; but he shall not take part in any pro ceedings of the board or committee relating to 
any such contract.  
63. Saving for Act 11 of 1879. —Nothing in this Act shall affect the Local Authorities Loans            
Act, 1879 (11 of 1879).  
64. General powers of Local Government and Commissioners. —In all matters connected with this 
Act, the Local Government shall have and exercise over Com missioners and Deputy Commissioner s, and 
Commis sioners shall have and exercise over Deputy Commis sioners,, the same authority and control as 
they re spectively have and. exercise over them in the general and revenue administration.  
65. Contract of local committees. —Every contract entered  into, whether in its own name or in the 
name of the Government, by the, committee appointed in a district under section 11 of the Panjab. Local 
Rates Act, 1878, may be enforced by and against the district board constituted for that district under this 
Act, in like manner as it might have been by and against the committee if this Act had not been passed . 
66. Government officers serving under committees to continue under board. —A Government 
officer employed under the committee appointed in a district as afor esaid at the time when a district board 
comes into existence for the district un
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 19]
a district as afor esaid at the time when a district board 
comes into existence for the district under section 17 of this Act shall be deemed to be similarly employed 
by the board, and shall not be dismissed from that employment without the sanction of the Local 
Government.  
67. Power of Local Government to except local area from operation of Act. —(1) If the 
circumstances of any district or part of a district are, in the opinion of the Local Government, such that all 
or any of the provisions of this chapter are unsuited theret o, the Local Govern ment may, by notification in 
the official Gazette, except the district or part from the operation of those provisions; and thereupon those 
provisions shall not apply to the excepted district or part until again ap plied thereto by a lik e notification.  
(2) While any notification under this section is in force, the Local Government may make rules to 
provide for any matter dealt with by the provisions to which the notification applies.  
68. Committee to be constituted for district wholly ex cepted from Act. —When a district is 
excepted, under section 67, from all the provisions of this chapter, a committee shall, except where the 
Local Government for special reasons otherwise directs, be constituted for the control and administration 
in that d istrict of the matters mentioned in section 20, or of such of them as the Local Government may, 
from time to time, specify; and the Local Government shall, from time to time, determine the manner in 
which the members of the committee shall be appointed and  removed, define the functions and authority 
of the committee, and place at its disposal, subject to such control as the Local Government thinks fit, —  
(a) the balance standing at the credit of the dis trict fund at the time when the district is excepted 
or, as the case may be, the balance of the allotments made for the district under section 7 of the 
Panjab Local Rates Act, 1878 (5 of 1878), and of the road and
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 19]
r the district under section 7 of the 
Panjab Local Rates Act, 1878 (5 of 1878), and of the road and school cesses, which may be available 
for expenditure in the district at that time;  
(b) all proc eeds of rates which, but for the district being excepted, would be allotted to the dis trict 
board under section 9 of this Act; and  
(c) such other sources of income mentioned in sec tion 35 of this Act as the Local Government 
thinks fit:  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 20]
20 
 Provided that not less than one -half of the mem bers of the committee shall be persons who own 
landed property or reside or carry on trade or business in the district and are not servants of the 
Government.  
69. Power to direct that Act 20 of 1856 shall cease to be in force. —(1) When any local area in 
which Act 20 of 1856 ( An Act to make better provision for the appointment and maintenance of Police 
Chaukidars in Cities, Towns, Stations, Suburbs and Bazars in the Presidency of Fort William in Bengal ) 
is in force is included i n any local area over which a district board established under this Act has 
authority, the Local Government may, by notification, direct that that Act shall cease to be in force in the 
local area BO included, and that every panchayat constituted under that  Act for that local area shall cease 
to exist.  
(2) When a direction is issued under this section in respect of any local area in. which the said Act 20 
of 1856 is in force, the amount, if any, then available under section 36 of that Act for purposes of 
improvement in that local area shall be expended therein by the Deputy Commissioner for such pur poses.  
CHAPTER IV  
SUPPLEMENTAL  PROVISIONS AS TO TAXATION  
70. Recovery of rates. —All rates and taxes imposed under this Act, and all arrears of such rates and 
taxes, may be recovered as if they were arrears of land -revenue.  
71. Local rate or tax how to be assessed and collected. —(1) The Local Government may, by 
notifica tion, determine the persons by whom the local rate or any tax imposed under this Act shall be 
assessed and collected, and make rules for the assessment and collection of the rate or tax, and direct in 
what manner persons employed in the assessment or collection shall be remunerated.  
(2) The provisions of section 60 shall apply to all rules made under this section.  
72. Appeals. —(1) In matters connected with the assessment and collection of any rate or tax leviable 
under this Act, an appeal sh
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 20]
nnected with the assessment and collection of any rate or tax leviable 
under this Act, an appeal shall lie from the order of any person authorized under this Act to make 
assessments or col lections to such person  as the Local Government appoints:  
Provided that the appeal shall be presented within 30 days from the date of the order.  
(2) The order passed on an appeal under this sec tion shall be final.  
73. Instalments of rates and taxes. —(1) The Local Government may , by notification, prescribe by 
what instalments and at what times any rate or tax leviable under this Act shall be, payable:  
Provided that every instalment of the local rate leviable under section 5 shall be payable with an 
instalment of the land -revenue.  
(2) In any local area subject to the authority of a district board the Local Government may, by 
notification, delegate to the board, subject to such conditions as ifs thinks fit, its powers under this 
section.  
74. Power of Local Government to exempt from taxation.—The Local Government may, by 
notification, remit or reduce any rate or tax imposed under this Act, or exempt any person or class of 
persons, or any description of property, wholly or in any part, from liability to any such rate or tax, and 
cancel  any such remission, reduction or exemption.  
75. Power to direct measurements. —When measurements are necessary for the assessment of the 
local rate or of any tax imposed under this Act, the Local Government may, by noti fication, direct such 
measurements t o be made.  
76. Suits relating to rates and taxes under this Act cognizable by Courts having cognizance of 
suits for rent. —Suits for the recovery from co -sharers, tenants or others of any sum on account of any 
rate or tax imposed under this Act, and suits o n account of illegal exaction of any such rate or tax, or for 
settlement of accounts connected therewith, shall, unless the Local Government otherwise directs, be 
cognizable by the Courts which for the time bein
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 20]
 unless the Local Government otherwise directs, be 
cognizable by the Courts which for the time being have cogni zance of suits for rent due on l and. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB DISTRICT BOARDS ACT, 18831.pdf - page 21]
21 
 77. Confirmation and recovery of existing rates. —All rates for the maintenance of roads, schools 
or the district -post, for the payment of which provi sion has been made in any settlement -record previous 
to the passing of this Act, or which have been h abitually levied by Government, shall be deemed to have 
been and to be legally imposed, and to have been and to be legally recoverable as if they were arrears of 
land-revenue payable directly to Government and due on the land in respect of which they are payable.  
[CHAPTER V AMENDMENT OF THE NORTHERN  INDIA  FERRIES  ACT, 1878.] Rep. by the Repealing Act , 
1938  (1 of 1938) , s. 2 and the Schedule . 
78. [Amendment of the Northern India Ferries Act .] Rep. by s. 2 and the Schedule, ibi d.  
79. [Further amendment .] Rep. by s. 2 and the Schedule, ibi d. 
__________  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE PUNJAB LAND -REVENUE ACT, 1887  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTION S. 
________  
SECTIONS.  
CHAPTER  I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Title, extent and commencement.  
2. Repeal.  
3. Definitions.  
4. Exclusion of certain land from operation of Act.  
5. Power t o vary limits and alter number of tahsils , districts and divisions.  
CHAPTER II . 
REVENUE -OFFICERS . 
Classes and Powers . 
6. Classes of R evenue -officers.  
7. Financial Commissioner.  
8. Appointment of Commissioners, and Deputy, Assistant and Extra Assistant Commissioners.  
9. Appointment of Tahsildars and Naib -tahsildars.  
10. Powers of Revenue -officers.  
Administrative Control . 
11. Superintendence and control of Revenue -officers.  
12. Power to distribute business and withdraw and transfer cases.  
Appeal, Review and Revision. 
13. Appeals.  
14. Limitation for appeals.  
15. Review by Revenue -officers.  
16. Power to call for, examine and revise proceedings of Revenue -officers.  
Procedure.  
17. Power to make rules as to procedure.  
18. Persons by whom appearances and applications may be made before and to Revenue -officers.  
19. Power of Revenue -officer to s ummon persons.  
20. Mode of service of summons.  
21. Mode of service of notice, order or proclamation or copy thereof.  
22. Mode of making proclamation.  
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 2]
2 
 SECTIONS.  
Supplemental Provisions . 
23. Place of sitting.  
24. Holidays.  
25. Discharge of duties of Collector dying or being disabled. 
26. Retention of powers by Revenue -officers on transfer.  
27. Conferment of powers of Revenue -officers .  
CHAPTER III.  
KANUNGOS , ZAILDARS , INAMDARS  AND VILLAGE -oFFICERS.  
28. Rules respecting kanungos, zaildars, inamdars and village -officers.  
29. Village -officers’ cess.  
30.  Restriction on attachment or assignment of remuneration of kanungos , Zaildars, Inamdar’s and 
village -officers.  
CHAPTER IV  
RECORDS . 
31. Record -of-rights and documents included therein.  
32. Making o r special revision of record- of-rights.  
33. Annual record.  
Procedure for making Records.  
34. Making of that part of the annual record which relates to land- owners, assignees of                     
revenue and occupancy , tenants.  
35. Making of that part of the annual record which relates to other persons.  
36. Determination of disputes.  
37. Restrictions on variation  of entries in records.  
38. Mutation- fees.  
39. Penalty for neglect to report acquisition of any right referred  to in section 34.  
40. Obligation to furnish information necessary for the preparation of records.  
Righ ts of the Government and presumptions with respect thereto and to other matters.  
41. Rights of the Government in mines and minerals.  
42. Presumption as to ownership  of forests, quarries and waste -lands.  
43. Compensation for infringement of rights of third parties  in exercise of a right of the Government. 
44. Presumption in favour of entries in records -of-rights and annual records.  
45. Suit for declaratory decree by person aggrieved by an entry in a record.  
Supplemental Provisions.  
46. Power to make rules respecting records and other matters connected therewith.  
47. Record -of-rights and annual records for groups of estates.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 2]
ates.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 3]
3 
  
SECTIONS.  
CHAPTER V . 
ASSESSMENT . 
48. Assessment of land -revenue.  
49. Notification of intended re -assessment and instruction s, as to principles of assessment.  
50. Mode of determining assessment.  
51. Announcement of assessment.  
52. Application for re -consideration of assessment .  
53. Confirmation and duration of assessment.  
54. Assessment to remain in force till new assessment takes effect.  
55. Refusal to be liable for assessment an d consequence thereof.  
56. Distribution of the assessment of an estate over the holdings comp rised therein.  
57. Application for amendment of the distribution of an assessment.  
58. Appeals from orders under section s 52 and 57.  
Special Assessments.  
59. Special assessment.  
60. Formation of waste -land into separate estates.  
 CHAPTER VI . 
COLLECTION OF  LAND -REVENUE . 
61. Security for payment of land -revenue.  
62. Further security for payment of land -revenue.  
63. Orders to regulate payment of land -revenue.  
64. Rules to regulate collection, remission and suspension of land- revenue.  
65. Costs recoverable as part of arrear.  
66. Certified account to be evidence as to arrear.  
67. Processes  for recovery of arrears.  
68. Writ of demand.  
69. Arrest and detention of defaulter.  
70. Distress and sale of moveable property and crops.  
71. Transfer of holding. 
72. Attachment of estate or holding.  
73. Annulment of assessment of estate or holding.  
74. Proclamation  of attachment or annulment of assessment, and consequences of the proclamation.  
75. Sale of e state or holding.  
76. Effect of sale on encumbrances.  
77. Proceedings against other immoveable property of defaulter .  
78. Remedies open to person denying his liability for an arrear.  
 
       
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 4]
4 
 SECTIONS.  
Procedure in S ales. 
79. Proclamation of sale.  
80. Indemnity to Revenue -officer with respect to contents of proclamation.  
81. Publication of proclamation. 
82. Time and conduct of sale.  
83. Power to postpone sale.  
84. Stay of sale.  
85. Payment of deposit by highest bidder.  
86. Consequences of failure to pay deposit.  
87. Exercise of right  of pre -emption .  
88. Time for payment in full.  
89. Procedure in default of payment.  
90. Report of sale to Commissioner.  
91. Application to set aside sale.  
92. Order confirming or setting aside sale.  
93. Refund of purchase -money on setting aside of sale.  
94. Proclamation after po stponement or on re -sale.  
95. On confirmation of sale, possession and certificate to be granted to purchaser.  
96. Proceeds of sale.  
CHAPTER VII . 
RECOVERY OF  OTHER DEMANDS BY REVENUE -OFFICERS . 
97. Recovery of certain arrears through Revenue -officer instead of by suit.  
98. Other sums recoverable as arrears of land -revenue.  
99. Application of Chapter VI to sums recoverable under this Chapter.  
CHAPTER VIII . 
SURVEYS AND  BOUNDARIES . 
100. Power of Financial Commissio ner to make rules for demarcation of boundaries and erection of 
survey -marks.  
101. Power of Revenue -officers to define boundaries.  
102. Cost of erection and repair of survey -marks.   
103. Recovery of cost incurred by the Government. 
104. Power of Revenue -offices to enter on land for purposes of survey and demarcation.  
105. Surveys for purpose  of preparation of records.  
106. Provision of flag  holders and chainmen for those surveys.  
107. Professional surveys.  
108. Penalty for destruction, injury or removal of survey -marks.  
109. Report of destruction or remova l of or injury to survey- marks.  
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 5]
5 
 SECTIONS.  
CHAPTER IX  
PARTITION . 
110. Effect of partitions of estates and tenancies on joint liability for revenue and rent.  
111. Application for partition.  
112. Restrictions and limitations on partition.  
113. Notice of application for partition.  
114. Addition of parties to application.  
115. Absolute disallowance of partition.  
116. Procedure on admission of application.  
117. Disposal of questions as to title in property to be divided.  
118. Disposal of other questions. 
119. Administration of property excluded from partition.  
120. Distribution of revenue and rent after partition.  
121. Instrument of partition.  
122. Delivery of possession s of property allotted on partition. 
123. Affirmation of partition  s privately effected.  
124. Power to make rules a s to costs of partition.  
125. Re-distribution of land according to custom. 
126. Officer  who may be  empowered to act under this Chapter.  
CHAPTER X . 
ARBITRATION . 
127. Power to refer to arbitration.  
128. Order of reference and contents thereof.  
129. Nomination of arbitrators.  
130. Substitution of arbitrators by parties.  
131. Nomination and substitution of arbitrators by Revenue -officers.  
132. Process for appearance before arbitrators.  
133. Award of arbitrators and presentation thereof.  
134. Procedure on presenta tion of award.  
135. Effect of award.  
CHAPTER XI . 
SPECIAL  JURISDICTION WITH  RESPECT TO  LAND . 
136. Power to  invest officers making records -of-rights or general re -assessments with power s of Civil 
Courts.  
137. Control ov er such officers and appeals from and revisi on of their decrees and orders.  
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 6]
6 
 SECTIONS.  
CHAPTER XII . 
SUPLEMENTAL  PROVISIONS . 
Revenue Deposits.  
138. Power to deposit certain sums other than rent.  
139. Procedure in case of deposit on account of a payment due to Government.  
140. Procedure in case of other deposits.  
Execution of Orders of Civil and Criminal Courts by Revenue -officers.  
141. Orders of Civil and Criminal Courts for execution of processes against land or the produce 
thereof  to be addressed to a Revenue -officer.  
142. Attachment of assigned land- revenue.  
Preservation of attached Produce.  
143. Preservation of attached produce.  
Division of Produce.  
144. Division of produce.  
Miscellaneous.  
145. Village c esses.  
146. Superior land- owners ’ dues.  
147. Substitution of service for payment of land- revenue.  
148. Recovery of cost of assessing assigned land -revenue.  
149. Penalty for failure to attend within limits of estate in obedience to order of Revenue -officers.  
150. Prevention of encroachment on common lands.  
151. Papers kept by village- officers to be deemed public documents.  
152. Costs.  
153. Computation of periods limited for appeals and application s for review.  
154. Restriction on Revenue -officers bidding at auctions or trading.  
155. Power to make rules.  
156. Rules to be made after previous publication.  
157. Power s exerciseable by the Financial Commissioner from time to time.  
Exclusion o f Jurisdiction of Civil Courts.  
158. Exclusion of jurisdiction of Civil Courts , in matters within the jurisdiction of Revenue -officers.  
THE SCHEDULE.  
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 7]
7 
 THE PUNJAB LAND -REVENUE ACT, 1887  
__________  
ACT NO. XVII  OF 1887 
PASSED BY THE  GOVERNOR  GENERAL OF  INDIA  IN COUNCIL . 
(Received the assent of the Governor General on the 23rd
__________   September, 1887.)  
An Act to amend and declare the Land -revenue Law of the Punjab.  
WHEREAS  it is expedient to amend and declare  the law in force in the P unjab with respect to the making 
and maintenance of records- of-rights in land,  the assessment and collection of  land- revenue, and other  
matters relating to land and the liabilities incident thereto; I t is hereby enacted as follows: — 
CHAPTER I . 
PRELIMINARY.  
1. Title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Punjab Land -revenue                        
Act, 1887.  
(2) It extends to the territories for the time being  administered by the Lieutenant -Governor of the 
Punjab, including the pargana of Spiti, but not so as to affect, otherwise than as expressly provided by this 
Act, any Regulation in force under the provisions of the Statute 33 Victoria, chapter 3, section 1, in any 
portion of those territories; and  
(3) It shall come into force on such day as the Local Gover nmen t, with the previous sanction of the  
Governor General in Council, may by notification appoint in this behalf.  
(4) Any pow er conferred by this Act on the Financial Commissioner to make rules, and on the Local 
Government to sanction them, may be exercised at  any time  after the passing of this Ad, but a rule so 
made shall not take effect till the commencement of this Act.  
2. Repeal .—(1) The enactments mentioned in the schedule are repealed to the extent specified in the 
third column thereof.  
(2) But all rules,  appointments, assessments and transfers made, notifications and proclamations 
issued, authorities and powers conferred, farms and leases granted, records -of-rights and other records 
framed, revised or confirmed, rights acquired, liabilities incurred, time s and places appointed and o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 7]
amed, revised or confirmed, rights acquired, liabilities incurred, time s and places appointed and other 
things done under any of t he repealed enactments shall, so  far as may be, be deemed to have been 
respectively made, issued, conf erred, granted, framed, revised, confi rmed, acquired, incurred, appointed 
and done under this A ct. 
    (3) Any enactment or document referring to any enactment hereby repealed shall be construed as 
referring to this Act.  
3. Definitions .—In this Act, unless there is something repugnant in the subject or context, — 
(1) “estate” means any area — 
(a) for which a separate record -of-right has been made; or  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 8]
8 
 (b) which has been separately assessed to land -revenue, or would have been so assessed if t he            
land- revenue had not been released, compounded for or redeemed; or  
(c) which the Local Government may, by general  rule or special order, declare to be an estate:  
(2) “landowner ” does not include a tenant or an assig nee of land -revenue, but does include a person to  
whom a holding has been trans ferred, or a n estate or  holding has been let in farm, under this Act for  the 
recovery of an arrear of land -revenue or of a  sum recoverable as such an arrear, under  every other  person 
not here  in before in this  clause mentioned  who is in possession of an estate or any share or portion  
thereof,  or in the enjoyment of  any part of the profits  of an estate:  
(3) “holding” means a share or portion of an estate held by one la ndowner or  jointly by two or more 
landowners :  
(4) “rent”, “tenant ”, “landlord”  and “tenancy ” have the meani ngs respectively assigned to th ose words 
in the Punjab tenancy Act , 1887 (XVI of 1877) : 
(5) “pay”, with its grammatical variations and  cognate expressions, includes, when used with reference   
to rent, “ deliver" and "render ” , with their  grammatical variations and cognate expressions:  
(6) “land-revenue ” includes assigned land- revenue and any sum payable in respect of land, by way  of 
quit-rent or of commutation for ser vice, to the Government or to a  person to whom the Government has  
assigned the right to receive the payment:  
(7) “arrear of land -reven ue” means land -revenue  which remains unpaid after the date on which it 
beco mes payable:  
(8) “defaulter” means a person liable for an arrear  of land- revenue, and includes a person who is  
responsible  as surety  for the payment of the arrear:  
(9) “rates and cesses”  means rates and ce sses which are primarily payable by landowners, and 
includes — 
(a) the local rate, if any, payable under the Punjab Local Rates Act, 1878 (V of 1878
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 8]
d 
includes — 
(a) the local rate, if any, payable under the Punjab Local Rates Act, 1878 (V of 1878) ; 
(b) the local rate, if any, payable under the Punjab District Boards Act, 1883 (XX of 1883) , and any  
fee leviable under section 33 of that Act from landowners for the use of or benefits derived from such 
works as are referred to in section 20, clauses ( i) and ( j), of that Act;  
(c) any annual rate chargeable on owners of lands under section 59 of the Northern India Canal and 
Drainage Act, 1873 (VIII of 1873);  
(d) the zaildari and village- officers ’ cesses; and  
(e) sums payable on account of village- expenses:  
(10) “village -cess” includes any cess, contribution or due which is customari ly leviable within an  
estate and is neither a payment for the use of private property or for personal service nor imposed by or  
under any enactment for the time being in force:  
(11) “village -officer” means a chief -headman, headman or patwari:  
(12) “Revenue -officer” , in any provision of this Act, means a Revenue, officer having authority under 
this Act to discharge the functions of a Revenue -officer under that provision:  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 9]
9 
 (13) “ legal practitioner ” means any legal practitioner with  in the meaning of the Legal Practitioners 
Act, 1879  (XVIII of 1879) , except a mukhtar:  
(14) “ agricultural year ” means the year commencing on the sixteenth day of June, or on such other 
date as the Local Government may by notification appoint for any local ar ea: 
(15) “notification”  means a notification published by authority of the Local Government in the official 
Gazette:   
(16) “ incumbrance ”  means a charge upon or claim against land a rising out of a private g rant or 
contract: and  
(17) “survey -mark” includes  boundary -mark.  
4. Exclusion of certain land from operation of Act .—(1) Except so far as may be necessary for the 
record, recovery  and administration of viIlage -cesses, nothing in this Act applies to land which is 
occupied as the site of a town or village and is not assessed to land -revenue.  
(2) A Revenue -officer may define for the purposes of this Act the limits of any such land.  
5. Power to vary limits and alter number of tahsils, districts and divisions .—The 1ocal 
Government may by notification vary the limits of the tahsils, districts and divisions into which the 
territories administered by it are divided, and may by notification alter the number of those  tahsils and, 
with the previous sanction of the Governor General in Council, the number of those dist ricts and 
divisions.  
CHAPTER II.  
REVENUE -OFFICERS . 
Classes and Power s. 
6. Classes of Revenue- officers. — (1) There shall be the following classes of Revenue -officers, 
namely — 
(a) the Financial Commissioner;  
(b) the Commissioner;  
(c) the Collector ; 
(d) the Assistant Collector of the first gr ade; and  
(e) the Assistant Collector of the second grade.  
(2) The Deputy Commissioner of a district shall be the Collector thereof.  
(3) The Local Government may appoint any Assistant Commissioner, Extra Assistant Commissi oner 
or Tahsildar to be an Assistant Collector of the first or of t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 9]
ioner, Extra Assistant Commissi oner 
or Tahsildar to be an Assistant Collector of the first or of the second grade, as it thinks  fit, and any                 
Naib -tahsildar  to be an Assistant Collector  of the second grade.  
(4) Appointments under sub- section  (3) shall be by notif ication, and may be of a person  specially by 
name or by virtue of his office or of more persons than one by any description sufficient for their 
identification.  
(5) Subject to the provisions or this Act the jurisdiction of the Commissioner extends to the whole of 
the territories for the time being administered by the Lieutenant- Governor of the Punjab, and of  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 10]
10 
 Commissioners and of Collectors and Assistant Collectors to the divisions and districts respectively in 
which they are for the time being employed.  
7. Financia l Commissioner .—(1) There shall he one o r more Financial Commissioners, who shall be 
appointed, and may be removed, by the Local Government with the previous  sanction of the Governor 
General in Council.  
(2) Where more Financial Commissioners than one have been appointed, the Local Government may 
make rules as to the distribution among them of business under this or any other Act, and by those rules 
require any case or class or classes of cases to be considered and disposed of by the Financial 
Commissioners collectively.  
(3) When there is a difference of opinion among the Financial Commissioners as to any decree or 
order to be made in a case which they are required by rules under the last foregoing sub- section to 
consider and dispose of collectively,  the foll owing rules shall apply, namely: — 
(a) where the case is an appeal or a case on review or revision, it shall be decided                                
in accordance with the opinion or the majority of the Financial Commissioners, or, if there is no such majority which concurs in a decision modifying or reversing the decree or order under appeal, review or revision, that decree or order shall be affirmed: and  
(b) where the case is not an appeal or a case on review or revision, the matter respecting which 
there is the difference of opinion shall be referred to the Local Government for decision, and the 
decision of that Government with respect thereto shall be final.  
(4) The expression “Financial Commissioner ” in this or any other Act shall, when there are m ore 
Financial Commissioners than one, be construed as meaning  one or more of the Financial  
Commissioner s as the rules for the time being in force under sub -section ( 2) may require.  
(5) The second Financial Commissioner appointed under section 52 of the Punjab Cou
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 10]
2) may require.  
(5) The second Financial Commissioner appointed under section 52 of the Punjab Courts Act, 1884 
(XVIII of 1884) , shall be deemed to have had jurisdiction on and after the first Day of November, 1884,   
to make any decree or order or dispose of any other business which might have been made or disposed of by the other Financial Com missioner.  
8. Appointment of Commissioners, and of Deputy, Assistant and Extra Assistant 
Commissioners .—Commissioners, Deputy Commissioners, Assistant  Commissioners and Extra 
Assistant Commissioners shall be  appointed and may be removed by the Local Gover nment. 
9. Appointment of Tahsildars and Naib -tahsildars .—The Lo cal Government shall fix the number of 
Tahsildars and Naib -tahsildars to be appointed, and the Financial Commissioner may make rules for their 
appointment and removal.  
10. Powers of Revenue -officers. —Except where the class of the Revenue -officer by whom any 
function is to be discharged is specified in this Act, the Local Government may by notification determine 
the functions to be discharged under this Act by any class of Revenue -officers.  
Administrative Control.  
11. Superintendence and control of Revenue- officers. —(1) The Financial Commissioner shall be 
subject to the control of the Local Government.  
(2) The general superintendence and control over all other Revenue -officers shall be vested in, and all 
such officers shall be subordinate to, the Financial Commissioner.  
(3) Subject to the general s uperintendence and control of the Financial Commissioner, a 
Commissioner shall control all other Revenue- officers in his division.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 11]
11 
 (4) Subject as aforesaid and to the control of the Commissioner, a Collector shall control all other 
Revenue -officers in his district.  
12. Power to distribute business and withdraw and transfer cases .—(1) The Financial 
Commissioner or a Commissioner or Collector may by written order distribute, in such manner as he 
thinks fit, any business cognizable by any Revenue -officer under his control.  
(2) The Financial Commissioner or a Commissioner or Collector may withdraw any case pending 
before any Revenue -officer under his control, and either dispose of it himself, or by written order refer it 
for disposal to any other Revenue -officer under his control.  
(3) An order under sub- section ( 1) or sub- section ( 2) shall not empower any officer to exercise any 
powers or deal with any business which he would not be competent to exercise or deal with within the 
local limits of his own jurisdiction.  
Appeal, Review and Revision. 
13. Appeals.—Save as otherwise provided by this Act, an appeal shall lie form an original or appellate 
order of a Revenue -officer as follows, namely : — 
(a) to the Collector when the order is made by an Assistant Collector of either grade;  
(b) to the Commissioner when the order is made by a Collector;  
(c) to the Financial Commissioner when the order is made by a  Commissioner.  
Provided that — 
(i) when an original order is confirmed on first appeal, a further appeal shall not lie;  
(ii) when any such order is modified or reversed on appeal by the Collector, the order made by the 
Commissioner on further appeal, if any, to him shall be final.  
14. Limitation for appeals .—Save as otherwise provided by this Act, the period of limitation for an 
appeal under the last foregoing section shall run from the date of the order appealed against, and shall be 
as follows, that is to  say:- 
(a) When the appeal lies to the Collector —thirty days.  
(b) when the appeal lies to the Commissioner —sixty days;  
(c) when the appeal lie
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 11]
 —thirty days.  
(b) when the appeal lies to the Commissioner —sixty days;  
(c) when the appeal lies to the Financial Commissioner —ninety days. 
15. Review by Revenue officers.— (1) A Revenue -officer may, either of his own motion or on the 
application of any party interested, review, and on so reviewing modify, reverse or confirm, any order  
passed  by himself or by any of his predecessors in office:  
Provided as follows: — 
(a) when a C ommissioner or Collector thinks it necessary to review any order which he has not 
himself passed, and when a Revenue -officer of a class below that of Collector proposes to review any 
order, whether passed by himself or by any of his predecessors in office, he shall first obtain the 
sanction of the Revenue -officer to whose control he is immediately subject;  
(b) an application for review of an order shall not be entertained unless it is made within ninety 
days from the passing of the order , or unless the applicant satisfies the Revenue -officer that he had 
sufficient cause for not making the application within that period;  
(c) an order shall not be modified or reversed unless reasonable notice has been given to the parties 
affected thereby to  appear and be heard in support of the order;  
(d) an order against which an appeal has been preferred shall not be reviewed.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 12]
12 
 (2) For the purposes of this section, the Collector shall be deemed to be the successor  in office of any 
Revenue -officer of a lower  class who has left the  district or has ceased to exercise powers as a                     
Revenue -officer and to whom there is no successor in office.  
(3) An appeal shall not lie from an order refusing to review or confirming on review a previous order .  
16. Power to call for, examine and revise proceedings of Revenue -officer. —(1) The Financial 
Commissioner may at any time call for the record of any case pending before,  or disposed of by, any 
Revenue -officer subordinate to him. 
(2) A Commissioner or Collector may call for the record of any case pending before, or  disposed of 
by, any Revenue -officer under his control.  
(3) If in any case in which a Commissioner or Collector has called for a record he is of opinion that the 
proceedings taken or order made should be modified or reversed, he shall report the case with his opinion 
thereon for the orders of the Financial Commissioner.  
(4) The Financial Commissioner may in any case called for by himself under sub section ( 1) or 
reported to him under sub- section ( 3) pass such order as he thinks fit:  
Provided that he shall not under this section pass an order reversing or modifying any proceeding or  
order subordinate Revenue officer and affecting any questi on of right between private per sons without 
giving tho se persons an opportunity of being heard.  
Procedure.  
17. Power to make Rules as to procedure .—(1) the Local Governm ent may make rules consistent 
with this Act for regulating the procedure of Revenue -officers under this Act in cases in which a 
procedure is not prescribed by this Act.  
(2) The rules may provide, among other matters, for the mode of enforcing orders of ejectment from, 
and delivery of possession of, immovable  property, and rules providing for those matters may confer on a 
Revenue -officer all or any of the  powers in regar
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 12]
les providing for those matters may confer on a 
Revenue -officer all or any of the  powers in regard to contempts, resistance and the like which a Civil 
Court may exercise in the execution of' a decree whereby it has adjudged ejectment from, or delivery of 
possession of, such proper ty. 
(3) Subject to the rules under this section, a Revenue -officer may refer any case which he is 
empowered to dispose of under this Act to another Revenue -officer for investigation and report, and may 
decide the case upon the report.  
18. Persons by whom appearances and appl ications may be made before and to Revenue-
officers.— (1) Appearances before a Revenue -officer,  and applications to and acts to be done before him,  
under this Act may be made or done — 
(a) by the parties themselves, or  
(b) by their recognized agents or a legal practitioner:  
Provided that the employment of a recognized agent or legal practitioner shall not excuse the personal 
attendance of a party to any proceeding in any case in which personal attendance is specially requ ired by 
an order of the officer.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 13]
13 
 (2) For the purposes of sub- section ( 1), recognized agents shall be such persons as the Local 
Government may by notification declare in this behalf.  
(3) The fees of a legal practitioner shall not be allowed as costs in an y proceeding before a                         
Revenue -officer under this Act unless that officer considers, for reasons to be recorded by him in writing, 
that the fees should be allowed.  
19. Power of Revenue -officer to summon persons. —(1) A Revenue -officer may summon any 
person whose attendance he considers necessary for the purpose of any business before him as a            
Revenue -officer.  
(2) A person so summoned shall be bound to appear at the time and place mentioned in the summons 
in person or, if the summons so allows, by his recognized agent or a legal practitioner.  
(3) The person at tending in obedience to the sum mons shall be bound to state the truth upon any  
matter respecting  which he is examined or makes statements, and to pr oduce su ch docum ents and ot her 
things relating to any such matter as the Revenue -officer m ay require . 
20. Mode of service of summons.— (1) A summons issued by a Revenue -officer shall, if practicable, 
be served ( a) personally on the person to whom it is addressed, or failing  him on (b) his recognized agent 
or (c) an adult male member of his family usually residing with him.  
(2) If service cannot be so made, or if acceptance of service so be made is refused, the summons may 
be served by positing a copy thereof at the usual or last  known place of residence of the person to whom it 
is addressed, or, if that person does not reside in the district in which the Revenue -officer is employed and 
the case to which the summons relates has reference to land in that district, then by posting a  copy of the 
summons on some conspicuous place in or near the estate wherein the land is situate.  
(3) If the summons relates to a case in  which persons having the same interest are so n
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 13]
 situate.  
(3) If the summons relates to a case in  which persons having the same interest are so numerous that  
personal service on all of them is not reasonably practica ble, it may, if the Revenue -officer so directs, be 
served by delivery of a copy thereof to such of those persons as the Revenue -officer nominates in this 
behalf and by proclamation of the co ntents thereof for  the inform ation  of the other persons interested . 
(4) A summons may, if the Revenue -officer so directs, be served on the person named therein, either 
in addition to, or in substitution for, any other mode of service, by forwarding the summons by post in a 
letter addressed to the person and registered under Part III of the Indian Post Office Act, 1866 (X IV of 
1866).  
(5) When a summons is so forwarded in a letter and it is proved that the letter was properly addressed 
and duly posted and registered, the Revenue -officer may presume that the summons was served at the 
time when the letter would be delivered in the ordinary course of post.  
21. Mode of service of notice, order or proclamation or copy thereof .—A notice, order or 
proclamation, or copy of any such document, issued by a Revenue -officer for servi ce of any person shall 
be served in the manner provided in the last foregoing section for the service of a summons.  
22. Mode of making proclamation .—When a proclamation relating to any land is issued by a 
Revenue -officer, it shall, in addition to any othe r mode of publication which may be prescribed in any 
provision of this Act, be made by beat of drum or other customary method, and by the posting of a copy thereof on a conspicuous place in or near the land to which it relates.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 14]
14 
 Supplemental Provisions.  
23. Place of sitting .—(1) An Assistant Collector may exercise his powers under this Act at any place 
within the limits of the district in which he is employed.  
(2) Any other Revenue -officer may only exercise his power s under this Act within the local limits  of 
his jurisdiction.  
24. Holidays .—(1) The Financial Commissioner, with the approval of the Local Government, shall 
publish in the local official Gazette before the commencement of each calendar year a list of days to be 
observed in that year as holidays  by all or any Revenue -officers.  
(2) A proceeding had before a Revenue -officer on a day specified in the list as a day to be observed by 
him as a holiday shall not be invalid by reason only of its having been had on that day.  
25. Discharge of duties of Collector dying or being disabled .—When a Collector dies or is disabled 
from performing his duties, the officer who succeeds temporarily to the chief executive administration of 
the district under any order which may be generally or specially issued by the L ocal Government in this 
behalf shall be deemed to be a Collector under this Act.  
26. Retention of p owers by Revenue -officer on transfer .—When a Revenue -officer of any class 
who has been invested under the foregoing provisions of this Act with any powers to be exercised in any local area is transferred from that local area to another as a Revenue -officer of the same or a higher class, 
he shall continue to exercise those powers in that  other  local area unless the Local Government otherwise 
directs or has ot herwise directed.  
27. Conferment of powers of  Revenue -officer. —(1) The Local Government  may by notification 
confer on any person—  
(a) all or any of the powers of a Financial Commissioner, Commissioner or Collector under this 
Act, or  
(b) all or any of the powers with which an Assistant Collector may be invested thereunder  
 and may by notification withdraw any powers so conferred. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 14]
t Collector may be invested thereunder  
 and may by notification withdraw any powers so conferred.  
(2) A person on whom powers are conferred under sub- section ( 1) shall exercise those powers within 
such local limits and in such classes of cases as the Local  Government may direct, and, except as 
otherwise directed by the l ocal Government, shall for all purposes connected with the exercise thereof be 
deemed to be a Financial Commissioner, Commissioner, Collector or Assistant Collec tor, as the case       
may be.  
(3) If any of the powers of a Collector under this Act are conferred on an Assistant Collector, they 
shall, unless the Local Government  by special order otherwise directs, be exercised by him subject to the 
control of the Co llector.  
CHAPTER III.  
K
ANUNGOS , ZAILDARS , INAMDARS  AND VILLAGE -OFFICERS.  
28. Rules respecting Kanungos,  zaildars, inamdars  and village -officers. —(1) The Financial 
Commissioner may make rules to regulate the appointment, duties, emoluments, punishment, suspension 
and removal of Kanungos, Zaildars, inamdars and village -officers.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 15]
15 
 (2) Rules under sub- section ( 1) may direct that the emoluments of a zaildar, inamdar or village- officer 
shall be such a percentage payable out of the land- revenue  as may be prescr ibed by the rules, and that, 
where the land -revenue has been released, compounded for or redeemed, the percentage shall be a charge 
payable by the person who would be liable for the land- revenue if it had not been released  compounded 
for or redeemed.  
29. Village -officers’  cess. —(1) The Local Government may by  notification impose on any estates, or 
on all or any  local area, a cess, to be called the village -officers’  cess, at a rate not exceeding one a nna for 
every rupee of the annual value, for remunerating village -officers and for defraying other expenditure 
directly connected with the supervision of those officers or with the performance of their duties.  
(2) “Annual value ” in the last for egoing sub-section has the meaning assigned to that e xpression in the 
Punjab District Board Act, 1883 (XX of 1883).  
(3) The Finan cial Commissioner may make rule for the c ollection, control and expenditure of the 
village -officers’ cess.  
(4) All cesses now levied in any local area for the purposes mentioned in  sub-section ( 1) shall be 
deemed to have been lawfully imposed and shall, until the village- officers’ cess is imposed in that local 
area under that sub- section, be deemed to be lawfully leviable and, for the purposes of this section, to be 
that cess.  
30. R estriction on attachment or assignment of remuneration of kanungos, Zaildars, inamdars 
and village -officers.—( 1) The emoluments of a Kanungo, Zaildar, inamdar or village -officers shall not 
be liable to attachment in execution of a decree or order of any Ci vil or Revenue Court.  
 (2) An assignment of or charge on, or an agreement to assign or charge, any such emoluments shall be 
void unless it is authorized by rules made by the Financial Commissioner in this behalf.  
CHAPTER IV . 
RECORDS 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 15]
t is authorized by rules made by the Financial Commissioner in this behalf.  
CHAPTER IV . 
RECORDS . 
Records- of-rights and Annual Records.  
31. Record -of-rights and documents included therein. —(1) Save as otherwise provided by this 
Chapter, there shall be record -of-rights for each estate.  
(2) The record -of-rights for an estate shall include the following documents, namely: — 
 (a) statements showing, so far as may be practicable: —  
(i) the persons who are landowners, tenants or assignees of land -revenue in the estate, or who 
are entitled to receive any of the rents, profits or produce of the estate or to occupy land therein;  
(ii) the nature and extent of the interests of those persons, and the conditions and liabilities 
attaching thereto; and  
(iii) the rent, land- revenue, rates, cesses or other payments due from and to each of those 
persons and to the Government  ; 
(b) a statement  of customs respecting rights and liabilities in the estate;  
(c) a map of the estate; and  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 16]
16 
 (d) such other documents as the Financial Commissioner may, with the pervious sanction of the 
Local Government , prescribe.  
32. Making or special revision o f record -of-rights .—(1) When it appears to the Local Government 
that a record -of-right s for an estate does not exist, or that the existing record -of-rights for an estate 
requires special revision, the Local Government may by notification direct that a record- of-rights be made 
or that the record- of-rights be specially revised, as the case may be.  
(2) The notification may direct that records -of-rights shall be made or specially revised for all or any 
estates in any local area.  
(3) A record -of-rights made or sp ecially revised for an estate under this section shall be deemed to be 
the record -of-rights for the estate, but shall not affect any presumption in favour of the Government which 
has already arisen from any previous record -of-rights.  
33. Annual Records .—(1) The Collector shall cause to be prepared by the patwari of each estate 
yearly, or at such other intervals as the Financial Commissioner may prescribe, an edition of the                  
record -of-rights amended in accordance with the provisions of this C hapter.  
(2) This edition of the record- of-rights shall be called the annual record for the estate, and shall 
comprise the statements mentioned in sub -section ( 2), clause ( a), of section 31 and such other documents, 
if any, as the Financial Commissioner may, with the previous sanction of the Local Government ,  
prescribe.  
(3) For the purposes of the preparation of the annual record, the Collector shall cause to be kept up by 
the patwari of each estate a register of mutations and such other registers as the F inancial Commissioner 
may p rescribe.  
Procedure for making Records.  
34. Making of that part of the annual record which relates to land- owners, assignees  of revenue 
and occupancy -tenants .—(1) Any person acquiring, by inheritance, purchase, mortgag
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 16]
es  of revenue 
and occupancy -tenants .—(1) Any person acquiring, by inheritance, purchase, mortgage, gift or 
otherwise, any right in an estate as a landowner, assignee of land -revenue or tenant having a right of 
occupancy, shall report his acquisition of the right to the patwari of the estate.  
(2) If the person acquiring the right is a minor or otherwise disquali fied, his guardian or other person 
having charge of his property shall make the report to the patwari.  
(3) The patwari shall enter in his register of mutations every report made to him under sub- section ( 1) 
or sub- section ( 2), and shall also make an entry therein respecting the acquisition of any such right as 
aforesaid which he has reason to believe to have taken place, and of which a report should have been 
made to him under one or other of those sub- sections and has not been so made.  
(4) A Revenue -office r shall from time to time inquire into the correctness of all entries in the register 
of mutations and into all such acquisitions as aforesaid coming to his knowledge of which, under the foregoing sub -sections, report should have been made to the patwari and entry made in that register , and 
shall in each case make such order as he thinks fit with respect to the entry in the annual record of the 
right acquired.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 17]
17 
 (5) Such an entry shall be made by the insertion in that record of a description of the right acqu ired 
and by the omission from that record of any entry in any record previously prepared which by reason of 
the acquisition has ceased to be correct.  
35. Making of that part of the annual record which relates to other persons .—The acquisition of 
any intere st in land other than a right refered to in sub- section ( 1) of t he last foregoing section shall, — 
(a) if it is undisputed, be recorded by the patwari in such manner as the Financial Commissioner 
may by rul es, in this behalf prescribe; and,  
(b) if it is disputed, be entered by the patwari in the register of mutations and dealt with in the 
manner prescribed in sub- sections ( 4) and ( 5) of the last foregoing section.  
36. Determination of disputes. —(1) If during the making, revision or preparation of any record or in 
the course of any inquiry under this Chapter a dispute arises as to any matter of which an entry is to be 
made in a record or in a register of mutations, a Revenue -officer may of his own motion, or on the 
application of any party interested , but s ubject to the provisions of the next following section, and after 
such inquiry as he thinks fit, determine the entry to be made as to that matter.  
(2) If any such dispute the Revenue -officer is unable to satisfy himself as to which of the parties 
thereto i s in possession of any property to which the dispute relates, he shall ascertain by summary 
inquiry who is the person best entitled to the property, and shall by order direct  that that person be put in 
possession thereof, and that an entry in accordance wi th that order be made in the record or register.  
(3) A direction of a Revenue -officer under sub- section ( 2) shall be subject to any decree or order 
which may be subsequently passed by any Court of competent jurisdiction.  
37. Restrictions on variations of entries in records.—Entries in record s-of-rights or in annua
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 17]
n.  
37. Restrictions on variations of entries in records.—Entries in record s-of-rights or in annual 
records, except entries made in annual records by Patwaris under clause ( a) of section 35 with respect to 
undisputed acquisitions of interest referred  to in that section, shall not be varied in subsequent records 
otherwise than by — 
(a) making entries in accordance with facts proved or admitted to have occurred;  
(b) making such entries as are agreed to by all the parties interested therein or are support ed by a 
decree or order binding on those parties;  
(c) making new maps where it is necessary to make them.  
38 Mutation fees .—(1) The Local Government may fix a scale of fees for all or any classes of entries 
in any record or register under this Chapter and for copies of any such entries.  
(2) A fee in respect of any entry shall be payable by the person in whose favour the entry is made.  
39. Penalty for neglect to report acquisition of any right referred to in section .—Any person 
neglecting to make the report required by section 34 within three months from the date of his acquisition 
of a right referred to in that section shall be liable, at the discretion of the Collector, to a fine not exceeding five times the amount of the fee which would have been payable  according to the scale fixed 
under the last foregoing section if the acquisition of the right had been reported immediately after its accrual.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 18]
18 
 40. Obligation to publish information necessary for the preparation of records .—Any person 
whose rights, interes ts or liabilities are required to be entered in any record under this Chapter shall be 
bound to furnish, on the requisition of any Revenue -officer or village -officer engaged in compiling the 
record, all information necessary for the correct compilation thereof.  
Rights of the Government and presumptions with respect thereto and to other matters.  
41. Right of the Government in mines and minerals .—All mines of metal and coal, and all earth -oil 
and gold washing shall be deemed to be the property of the Governme nt for the purposes of the State  and 
the State Government shall have all powers necessa ry for the proper enjoyment of the Government’s right 
thereto.  
42 Presumption as to ownership of forests, quarries and waste -lands .—(1) When in any record- of-
rights completed before the eighteenth day of November, 1871, it is not expressly provided that any 
forest, quarry, unclaimed, unoccupied, deserted or wasteland, spontaneous produce or other accessory 
interest in land belongs to the  landowners, it shall be presum ed to belong to the Government.  
(2) W hen in any record- of-rights completed after the date it is not expressly provided that any forest or 
quarry or any such land or interest belongs to the Government, it shall be presumed to belong to the 
landowners.  
(3) The presumption created by sub- section ( 1) may be rebutted by showing — 
(a) from the records or report made by the assessing officer at the time of assessment, or  
(b) if the record or report  is silent, then from a comparison between the assessment of villages in 
which there existed, and the assessment of villages of similar character in which there did not exist, any forest or quarry, or any such land or interest, that the forest, quarry, land or interest was taken into 
account in the assessment of the land -revenue.  
(4) Until the presumption is so rebutt
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 18]
taken into 
account in the assessment of the land -revenue.  
(4) Until the presumption is so rebutted, the forest, quarry, land or interest shall be held to belong to 
the Government.  
43. Compensation for infringement of rights of third parties in exercise of a right of the 
Government .—(1) Whenever, in the  exercise of any right of the Government referred to in either of the 
two last foregoing sections, the rights of any person are infringed by the occupation or disturbance of the 
surface of any land, the Government shall pay, or cause to be paid, to that pe rson compensation for the 
infringement.  
(2) The compensation shall be determined as nearly as may be in accordance with the provisions of the 
Land Acquisition Act, 1870 (X of 1870).  
44. Presumption in favour of entries in Records -of-rights and annual recor ds.—An entry made in 
a record -of-rights in accordance with the law for the time being in force, or in an annual record in 
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and the rules thereunder, shall be presumed to be true until the contrary is proved or a new entry is lawfully substituted therefor.  
45. Suit for dec laratory decree by persons, aggrieved by an entry in a record .—If any person 
considers himself aggrieved as to any right of which he is in the possession by an entry in a                      
record-of-rights or in an annual record, he may institute a suit for a declaration of his right under Chapter 
VI of the Specific Relief Act, 1877 (I of 1877) . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 19]
19 
 Supplemental Provisions . 
46. Power to make rules respecting records and other matters connected therewith .—The 
Financial Commissioner may make rules.—  
(a) prescribing the language in which records and registers under this Chapter are to be made;  
(b) prescribing the form of those records and registers, and the manner in which they are to be 
prepared, signed and attested;  
(c) for the survey of land so far as may be necessary for the preparation and correction of those 
records and registers;  
(d) for the conduct of inquiries by Revenue -officers under this Chapter; and  
(e) generally for the guidance of R evenue -officers and village -officers in matters pertaining to  
records and registers mentioned or referred to in this Chapter.  
 47. Records -of-rights and annual records for groups of estates.— (1) The Financial Commissioner 
may direct that a record -of-right s be made for any group of neighboring  estates instead of separately for 
each of the estates.  
(2) The provisions of this Chapter with respect to a record -of-rights and annual record for and estate 
shall then, so far as they can be made applicable, apply t o a record- of-rights and annual record for a group 
of estates.  
________  
CHAPTER V . 
ASSESSMENT . 
48. Assessment of land revenue.— (1) All land, to whatever purpos e applied and wher ever situate , is 
liable to the payment of land -revenue to the Government, except such land as has been wholly exempted 
from that liability by special contract with the Government or by the provisions of any law for the time 
being in force.  
(2) Land -revenue may be assessed in cash or in kind, or partly in cash and partly in kind, as the Local 
Government may direct.  
(3) Land may be assessed to land -revenue notwithstanding that  that revenue, by reason of its having 
been assigned, released  compounded for or redeemed is not payable to the Government.  
General Assessments.  
49. Notification of intended re -assessment and instructions 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 19]
e Government.  
General Assessments.  
49. Notification of intended re -assessment and instructions as to principles of assessment .—(1) A 
general re- assessment of the land -revenue of a district or tahsil shall not be undertaken without the 
previous sanction of the Governor General in Council and notification of that sanction.  
(2) In granting the sanction the Governor General in Council may prescribe such principles of 
assessment and give such other instructions as he thinks fit.  
50. Mode of determining assessment .—(1) The assessment shall be made by a Revenue -officer.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 20]
20 
 (2) Before making it that officer shall report his proposed method of  assessment for the sanction of the 
Financial Commissioner in such form as the Financial Commissioner, with the previous sanction of the 
Local Government, may prescribe.  
51. Announcement of assessment .—(1) When the Revenue -officer has obtained the sanction of the 
Financial Commissioner to his proposed method of assessment, he shall make an order determining the assessment proper for each estate and announce it in such manner as the Local Government may prescribe.  
(2) At the time of Announcing the assessme nt he shall also declare the date from which it is to take 
effect, and, subject to the other provisions of this Act, it shall take effect accordingly.  
52. Application for reconsideration of assessment .—(1) The landowner may, within thirty days 
from the da te of the announcement of the assessment, present a petition to the Revenue -officer for a 
reconsideration of the amount, form or conditions of the assessment.  
(2) Where the land -revenue is assigned, the assignee thereof may wit hin thirty days from that dat e 
present a like petition to the Revenue -officer.  
(3) The order passed by the Revenue -officer on the petition shall set forth his reasons for granting or 
refusing it. 
53. Confirmation and duration of assessment .—(1) An assessment of the land -revenue of a district 
or tahsil shall not be considered final until it has been confirmed by the Local Government.  
(2) At any time before an assessment is so confirmed the Commissioner or Financial Commissioner 
may modify the assessment of any estate in the district or tahsil.  
(3) The Local Government shall, when confirming an assessment under sub- section ( 1), fix the period 
for which the assessment is to be in force.  
54. Assessment to remain in force till new assessment takes effect. —Notwithstanding the 
expiration of the period fixed for the continuance of an assessment under sub -section ( 3) of the last 
fo
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 20]
ion of the period fixed for the continuance of an assessment under sub -section ( 3) of the last 
foregoing section, the assessment shall remain in force till a new assessment takes effect.  
55. Refusal to be liable for asse ssment and consequences thereof. —(1) At any time within ninety 
days from the date of the announcement  of an assessment the landowner  or, where there are more 
landowners than one, any of them who would be individually or collectively liable for more than ha lf the 
sum assessed  may give notice to the Revenue -officer of refusal to be liable for the assessment.  
 (2) When the Revenue -officer receives a notice under sub -section ( 1), the Collector may take 
possession of the estate and deal with it, as nearly as may  be, as if the annulment of the assessment 
thereof had been ordered as a process for the recovery of an arrear of land -revenue due thereon.  
(3) While the estate is in the possession of the Collector, the landowner or landowners shall be entitled 
to receive from the Government an allowance, to be fixed by the Financial Commissioner, which shall not be less than five or more than ten per cent . of the net income realized by the Government from the estate.  
56. Distribution of the assessment of an estate over th e holdings comprised therein .—(1) If the 
assessment announced under section 51 is in whole or in part a fixed assessment of an estate for a term of years, the Revenue -officer shall, before the date on which the first installment thereof becomes payable, 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 21]
21 
 make an order distributing it over the several holdings comprised in the estate and make and publish               
a record of the distribution.  
 (2) The Collector may for sufficient reason make an order revising that record at any time while the 
assessment continues to be in force, and publish the record so revised.  
(3) If the assessment announced under section 51 is in the form of rates chargeable according to the 
results of each year or harvest, a Revenue -officer shall from year to year or from harvest to h arvest , as the 
conditions of the assessment may require, make and publish, not later than one month before the first 
installment of the land -revenue falls due, a record of the amount payable in respect of each holding. 
(4) The Financial Commissioner may make rules for the guidance of Revenue- officers in making, 
publishing and revising records under this section.  
57. Application for amendment of the distribution of an assessment .—(1) Any person affected by 
a record made under su b-section ( 1) or sub- section ( 3) of the last foregoing section, or by the revision of a 
record under sub- section (2 ) of that section, may, within thirty days from the date of the publication of the 
record, present a petition to the Revenue -officer for a re -consideration of the record so far as it affects 
him. 
(2) The order passed by the Revenue -officer on the petition shall set forth reasons for granting or 
refusing it. 
58. Appeals from orders under sections 52 and 57. —An appeal from an order under the last  
foregoing section or section 52 shall lie to the Commissioner, and from the appellate order of the 
Commissioner to the Financial Commissioner.  
Special Assessments.  
59. Special assessments. —(1) Special assessment may be made by Revenue -officers in the foll owing 
cases, namely  
(a) when estates are formed under the next following section ;   
(b) when lands -revenue which has been released or assigned is resumed ;  
(c) when the  waste 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 21]
;   
(b) when lands -revenue which has been released or assigned is resumed ;  
(c) when the  waste -lands are sold, leased or granted by the Government ;   
(d) when the assessment of  any land has been annulled or the landowner has refused to be liable 
therefor, and the term for which the land was to be managed by the Collector or his agent or let in farm 
has expired ;   
(e) when assessments of land -revenue require revision in consequence of the action of water or 
sand or of calamity of season or from any other cause ;  
(f) when revenue due to the Government on account or pasture or oth er natural products of land,  or 
on account of mills, fisheries or natural products of water, or on account of other rights described in section 41 or section 42, has not been included in an assessment made under the foregoing provision 
of this Chapter.  
(2) The Financial Commissioner  may make rules for the guidance of Revenue- officers in making 
special assessments, and may confirm such assessments.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 22]
22 
 (3) The foregoing provisions of this Chapter with respect to general assessments shall, subject to such 
modifications thereof as the Fina ncial Commissioner may prescribe by rules under the last foregoing         
sub-section, regulate the procedure of Revenue -officers making special assessments.  
60. Formation of waste -land into separate estate. —(1) When in the opinion of the Collector or of  an 
officer making a general re- assessment  of land- revenue under the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, 
the waste- land belonging to or adjoining an estate is so extensive as to exceed the requirements of the 
owners of the estate with reference to pasturage or other useful purpose, the Collector or officer may at 
any time, with the previous sanction of the Financial Commissioner, make a separate assessment of the 
waste- land which he considers to be so in excess, and offer that land at that assessment, for such term and 
on such conditions as he thinks fit, to the owners of the estate to which it belongs , and, if they refuse the 
offer, to the owners of any estate which the land adjoins, and, if they also refuse the offer, to any other person.  
(2) When the o wners of the estate to which the waste- land belongs refuse the offer, the Collector shall 
assign to them an annual allowance not less than five and not more than ten per  cent. of the net income 
realized by the Government form the land.   
CHAPTER VI.  
C
OLLECTION OF LAND-REVENUE.  
61. Security for paym ent of land- revenue. —(1) In the case of every estate, the entire estate and the 
landowner or, if there are more than one, the land owners jointly or severally shall be liable for the       
land- revenue for the time being assessed on the estate :  
Provided that — 
(a) the Local Government, with the previous sanction of the Governor General in Council, may by  
notification declare that in any estate a holding or its owner shall not be liable for any part of the land-
revenue for the time bei
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 22]
estate a holding or its owner shall not be liable for any part of the land-
revenue for the time being assessed on the estate except that part which is payable in respect of the 
holding; and  
(b) when  there superior and inferior landowners in the same estate, the Financial Commissioner 
may by rule, or by special order in each case , determine weather the superior or inferior landowners 
shall be liable for the land -revenue, or weather both shall be so liable and, if so, in what proportions.  
(2) A notification under proviso ( a) to sub- section ( 1) may have reference to any single esta te or to any 
class of estates  or estates generally in any local area.  
62. Further security for payment of land -revenue.—( 1) The land- revenue for the time being 
assessed on an estate or payable in respect of a holding shall be th e first charge upon the rent s, and  
produce thereof.  
(2) Without the previous consent of the Collector, the rents, profits or produce of an estate or holding 
shall not be liable to be taken in execution of a decree or order of any Court until the land- revenue 
chargeable against the rents, profits or produce, and any arrear of land -revenue due in respect of the estate 
or holding, have been paid.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 23]
23 
 63. Orders to regulate payment of land -revenue.— (1) Notwithstanding anything in any record- of-
rights, the Financial Commissioner may fix the number and amount of the installments, and the times, 
places and manner, by, at and in which land- revenue is to be paid.  
(2) Until the Financial Commissioner otherwise directs , land-revenue shall be payable by the 
installments, at the times and places and in the manner by , at and in which it is payable at the 
commencement of this Act.  
64. Rules to regulate collection, remission and suspension of land -revenue. —(1) The Financial 
Commissioner may make rules consistent with this Act to regulate the collection, remission and 
suspension of land- revenue, and may by those rules determine the circumstances and terms in and on 
which assigned land revenue may , be collected by the assignee;  
(2) Where land -revenue due to an assignee is collected by a Revenue -officer, there shall be deducted 
from the sum collected such a percentage on account of the cost of collection as the  Financial 
commissioner may  by rule in this behalf prescribe.  
(3) A su it for an arrear of assigned land -revenue shall not be entertained unless there is annexed to the 
plaint at the time of the presentation thereof a document under the hand of the Collector specially authorizing the institution of the suit.  
65. Costs recover able as part of arrear. —The costs of any process issued under this Chapter shall be 
recoverable as part of the arrear of land -revenue in respect of which the process was issued.  
66. Certified account to be evidence as to arrear. —A statement of account cert ified by a Revenue -
officer shall be conclusive proof of the existence of an arrear of land- revenue, of its amount and of the 
person who is the defaulter.  
67. Processes for recovery of arrears. —Subject to the other provisions of this Act, an arrear of                  
land- revenue may be recovered by any one or more of the following processes, n
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 23]
of                  
land- revenue may be recovered by any one or more of the following processes, namely: — 
(a) by service of writ of demand on the defaulter;  
(b) by arrest and detention of his person;  
(c) by distress and sale of his movable property and uncut or u ngathered crops;  
(d) by transfer of the holding in respect of which the arrear is due;  
(e) by attachment of the estate or holding in respect of which the arrear is due;  
(f) by annulment of the assessment of that estate or holding;  
(g) by sale of that estate or holding;  
(h) by proceeding against other immovable property of the defaulter . 
68. Writ of demand. —A writ of demand may be issued by a Revenue -officer on or after the day 
following that on which an arrear of land- revenue accrues.  
69. Arrest and detent ion of defaulter. —(1) At any time after an arrear of land -revenue has accrued a 
Revenue -officer may issue a warrant directing an officer named therein to arrest the defaulter and bring 
him before the Revenue -officer.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 24]
24 
 (2) When the defaulter is brought before the Revenue -officer , the Revenue -officer may cause him to 
be taken before the Collector, or may keep him under personal restraint for a period not exceeding ten 
days and then, if the arrear is still unpaid, cause him to be taken before the Collector.  
(3) When the defaulter is brought before the Collector, the Collector may issue an order to the officer 
in charge of the civil jail of the district, directing him to confine the defaulter in the jail for such period, not exceeding one month from the date  of the order, as the Collector thinks fit.  
(4) The process of arrest and detention shall not be executed against a defaulter who is a female,                            
a minor, a lunatic or idiot.  
70. Distress and sale of move able property and crops. —(1) At any time after an arrear of                        
land- revenue has accrued, the moveable property and uncut or un -gathered crops of the defaulter may be 
distrained and sold by order of a Revenue -officer.  
(2) The distress and same shall be conducted, as nearly as may be, in accordance with the law for the 
time being enforced for the attachment and sale of moveable property under the decree of a  Revenue 
Court constituted under the Punjab T enancy Act, 1887 (XVI of 1887):  
Provided that, in addition to the  particulars exempted by that law from liability to sale, so much of the 
produce of the land of the defaulter as the Collector things necessary for seed -grain and for the 
subsistence, until the harvest next following, of the defaulter and his family, and of any cattle exempted by that law, shall be exempted from sale under this section.  
71. Transfer of holding. —(1) At any time after an arrear of land -revenue has accrued on a holding, 
the Collector may transfer the holding to any person being a landowner of the estate in which t he holding 
is situate and not being a defaulter in respect of his own holding, on condition of hi s paying th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 24]
 
is situate and not being a defaulter in respect of his own holding, on condition of hi s paying the arrear 
before being put in possession of the holding, and on such further conditions as the Collector may see fit 
to prescribe.  
(2) The transfer may, as the collector thinks fit, be either till the end of the agricultural year in which 
the de faulter pays to the transferee the amount of the arrear which the transferee paid before being put in 
possession of the holding, or for a term not exceeding fifteen years from the commencement of the 
agricultural year next following the date of the transfe r. 
(3) The Collector shall report to the Financial Commissioner any transfer made by him under this 
section, and the Financial Commissioner may set aside the transfer or alter the conditions thereof, or pass 
such other order as he thinks fit.  
(4) A transf er under this section shall not affect the joint and several liability of the landowners of the 
estate in which it is enforced.  
(5) In respect of all rights and liabilities arising under this Act the person to whom the holding is 
transferred shall, subject  to the conditions of the transfer, stand in the same position as that in which the 
defaulter would have stood if the holding had not been transferred.  
(6) When the transfer was for a term , the holding shall, on the expiration of the term, be restored by 
the Collector to the defaulter free of any claim on the part of the Government or the transferee for any arrear of land -revenue or rates and cesses due in respect thereof.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 25]
25 
 72. Attachment of estate or holding.—( 1) At any time after an arrear of land -revenue  has accrued, 
the Collector may cause the estate or holding in respect of which the arrear is due to be attached and taken 
under his own management or that of an agent appointed by him for that purpose.  
(2) The Collector or the agent shall be bound by all the engagements which existed between the 
defaulter and his tenants, if any, and shall be entitled to manage the land and to receive all rents and profits accruing therefrom to the exclusion of the defaulter until the arrear has been satisfied, or until the Collector restores the land to the defaulter.  
(3) All surplus profits of the land attached beyond the cost of attachment and management and the 
amount necessary to meet the current demand for land -revenue and rates and cesses shall be applied in 
dischar ge of the arrear.  
(4) Land shall not be attached for the same arrear for a  longer term than five years from the 
commencement of the agricultural year next following the date of the attachment, but, if the arrear is 
sooner discharged, the land shall be rele ased and the surplus , receipts,  if any, made over to the                     
landowner.  
73. Annulment of assessment of estate of holding .—(1) When an arrear of land -revenue has been 
due for a longer period than one month, and the foregoing processes are no t deemed sufficient for the 
recovery thereof, the financial Commissioner may, in addition to or instead of all or any of those 
processes, order the existing assessment of the estate or holding in respect of which the arrear is due to be annulled.  
(2) The provisions of this section shall not be put in force for the recovery of an arrear of land -revenue 
which has accrued on land  — 
(a) while under attachment under the last foregoing section, or  
(b) while under the charge of the Court of Wards.  
(3) When the assessment of any land has been annulled, the Collector may, with the previous san
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 25]
s.  
(3) When the assessment of any land has been annulled, the Collector may, with the previous sanction 
of the Financial Commissioner, either manage the land himself or through an agent, or let it in farm to any person willing to accept the farm, for such term and on such conditions as may be sanctioned by the 
Financial Commissioner:  
Provided that the term for which land may be so managed or farmed shall not be longer than fifteen 
years from the commencement of the agricultural year next following the date of t he annulment.  
(4) at some time before the expiration of that term the Collector shall determine the assessment to be 
paid in respect of the estate or holding for the remainder of the term of the current assessment of the 
district or tehsil, and, when that assessment has been sanctioned by the Financial Commissioner, shall 
announce it to the landowner.  
(5) The landowner may give notice to the Collector of refusal to be liable for the assessment within 
thirty days from the date on which the assessment was ann ounced to him.  
(6) If notice is so given, the Collector may, with the previous sanction of the Financial Commissioner, 
take the estate or holding under direct management or farm it for the remainder of the term of the current assessment of the district or  tehsil, or for any period within that term which the Financial Commissioner 
may fix.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 26]
26 
  (7) When the assessment of a holding is annulled, the joint responsibility of the other landowners of 
the estate for the land -revenue of that holding becoming due after the annulment shall be in abeyance 
until the  a new assessment takes effect.  
(8) The Financial Commissioner may direct that any contract made by the defaulter, or by any person 
through whom the defaulter claims, with respect to any land comprised in an est ate or holding of which 
the assessment has been annulled shall not be binding on the Collector or his agent or farmer during the 
period for which the estate or holding remains under the management of the Collector or his agent or is let 
in farm.  
74. Procla mation of attachment or annulment of assessment and consequence of the 
proclamation .—(1) When any land is attached under section 72, or when the assessment of any land has 
been annulled under the last foregoing section, the Collector shall make proclamation thereof.  
 (2) No payment made by any person to the defaulter before the making of the proclamation on 
account of rent or any other asset in anticipation of the usual time for the payment shall, without the 
special sanction of the Collector, be credited t o that person or relieve him from liability to make the 
payment to the Collector or his agent or farmer. 
 (3) No payment made after the making of the proclamation on account of rent or any other asset of the 
estate or holding to any person other than the C ollector or his agent or farmer shall be credited to the 
person making the payment or relieve him from liability to make the payment to the Collector or his agent or farmer.  
75. Sale of estate or holding.— When an arrear of land -revenue has accrued and the foregoing 
processes are not deemed sufficient for the recovery thereof, the Collector, with the previous sanction of 
the Financial Commissioner, may, in addition to, or instead of, all or any of those processes, and subject to the provisions hereinafter con
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 26]
tion to, or instead of, all or any of those processes, and subject to the provisions hereinafter contained, sell the estate or holding in respect of which the arrear is due :  
Provided that land shall not be sold for the recovery of — 
(a) any arrear which has accrued while the land was under the charge of the Court of Wards, or was 
so circumstanced that t he Court of Wards might have exercised jurisdiction over it under the 
provisions of section 35 of the Punjab Laws Act, 1872,  (IV of 1872)  clause ( a), (b), (c) or (d); or  
(b) any arrear which has accrued while the land was under attachment under section 72 of this                   
Act; or  
(c) any arrear which has accrued while the land was held under direct management by the Collector 
or in farm by any other person, under section 73, after either an annulment of assessment or a refusal 
to be liable therefor.  
76. Effect of sale on incumbrances. —(1) Land sold under the last foregoing section shall be sold free 
of all incumbrances; and all grants and contracts previousl y made by any person other than purchaser in 
respect of the land shall become void as against the purchaser at the sale.  
(2) Nothing in sub- section ( 1) shall affect — 
(a) a tenant’s right of occupancy, unless the right was creat ed by the defaulter himself, or 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 27]
27 
 (b) any lease at fair rent, temporary or perpetual, for the erection of a dwelling -house or 
manufactory , or for a mine, garden, tank, canal, place of wor ship, or burial ground, so long  as the land 
continues to be used for the purpose specified in the le ase, or  
(c) any incumbrance, grant, contract  or right of occupancy specially saved by order of the Financial 
Commissioner and proclaimed as hereinafter provided. 
77. Proceedings against other immovable property of defaulter.—( 1) If the arrear cannot be 
recovered by any of the processes hereinbefore provided, or if the Financial Commissioner considers the 
enforcement of any of those processes to be inexpedient, the Collector may, where the defaulter owns any 
other estate or holding, or any other immovable property, proceed under the provisions of this Act against that property as if it were the land in res pect of which the arrear is due :  
Provided that no interest save those of t he defaulter alone shall be so proceeded  against, and no 
incumbrances created, grants made or contracts entered into by him in good faith shall be rendered invalid 
by reason only of his interests being proceeded against.  
(2) When the Collector determines to proceed under this section against im movable property other 
than the land in respect of which the arrear is due, he shall issue a proclamation prohibiting the transfer or 
charging of the property.  
(3) The Collector may at any time by order in writing withdraw the proclamation, and it shall be 
deemed to be withdrawn when either the arrear has been paid or the interests of the defaulter in the property have been sold for the recovery of the arrear.  
(4) Any private alienation of the property, or of any interest of the defaulter therein, whether  by sale, 
gift, mortgage or otherwise, made after the issue of the proclamation and before the withdrawal thereof 
shall be void.  
(5) In proceedings against property under this section the Collector shall follow, 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 27]
shall be void.  
(5) In proceedings against property under this section the Collector shall follow, as nearly as the nature 
of the property will  admit, the procedure prescribed for the enforcement of process against land on which 
an arrear of land -revenue is due.  
78. Remedies open to person denying his liability for an arrear.— (1) Notwithstanding anything in 
section 66, when proceedings are taken under this Act for the recovery of an arrear, the person against 
whom the proceedings are taken may, if he denies his liability for the arrear or any part thereof and pays 
the same under protest made in writing at the time of payment and signed by him or his agent, institute a 
suit in a Civil Court for the recovery of the amount so paid.  
(2) A suit under sub- section ( 1) must be instituted in a Court having jurisdiction in the place where the 
office of the Collector of the district in which the arrear or some part thereof accrued is situate.  
Procedure in Sales.  
79. Proclamation of sales .—(1) On the receipt of the sanction of the Financial  Commissioner  to the 
sale of any immovable property, the Collector shall issue a proclamation of the intended sale, specifying –  
(a) the date, time and place of the sale;  
(b) the property to be sold, and, if it is an estate or holding, the land- revenue assessed thereon or 
payable in respect thereof;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 28]
28 
 (c) if the property is to be sold for the recovery of an arrear due in res pect thereof, the 
incumbrances, grants, contracts and rights of occupancy, if any, specially saved by order of the 
Financial Commissioner under section 76, sub- section ( 2), clause ( c); 
(d) if the property is to be sold otherwise than for the recovery of an arrear due in respect thereof 
any incumbrance, grant or contract to which the property is known to be liable; and 
(e) the amount for the recovery of which the sale is ordered.  
(2) The proclamation shall also state that any person intending to claim a rig ht of pre -emption must, on 
pain of forfeiting the right, give notice of his intention to the Collect or on an office -day before that fixed 
for the sale.  
(3) The place of sale specified under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1) must be either the office of the 
Collector or some place appointed by the Collector in this behalf and situate in or near the property to be 
sold.  
80. Indemnity to Revenue -officer with respect to contents of proclamation. —A Revenue -officer 
shall not be answerable for any error, mis- statemen t or omission in any proclamation under the last 
foregoing section, unless the same has been committed or made dishonestly.  
81. Publication of proclamation.— (1) A copy of the proclamation shall be served on the defaulter 
and be posted in a conspicuous part  of the office of the Tahsildar of the tahsil in which the property is to 
be sold is situate .  
(2) After a copy of the proclamation has been served on the defaulter and posted in the office of the 
Tahsildar, a copy thereof shall be posted in the office of  the Collector.  
(3) The proclamation shall be further published in manner prescribed in section 22 and in such other 
manner as the Collector thinks expedient.  
82. Time and conduct of sale .—(1) The sale shall not take place on a Sunday or other holiday, or  till 
after the expiration of at least thirty days from the date on which the copy 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 28]
her holiday, or  till 
after the expiration of at least thirty days from the date on which the copy of the proclamation was posted in the office of the Collector.  
(2) The sale shall be by public auction and shall be conducted either by the Collector in person or by a 
Reve nue-officer specially appointed by him in this behalf.  
83. Power to postpone sale .— The Collector may from time to time postpone the sale.  
84. Stay of sale .—If at any time before the bidding at the auction is completed the defaulter pays the 
arrears in respect of which the property has been proclaimed for sale, together with the costs incurred for 
the recovery thereof, to the officer conducting the sale, or proves to the satisfaction of that officer that he 
has already paid the same either at the place and in the manner prescribed under section 63 or into the 
Government treasury, the sale shall be stayed.  
85. Payment of deposit by highest bidder .—When the highest bid at the auction has been ascertained 
the person who made that bid shall, on the requisition of the officer conducting the sale, pay to that officer 
a deposit of twenty- five per centum on the amount of his bid, and shall, on payment thereof , be declared 
to be the purchaser subject to the provisions of this Chapter with respect to the exercise of a ny right of                        
pre-emption.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 29]
29 
 86. Consequences of failure to pay deposit. —If the person who made the highest bid fails to pay the 
deposit as required by the last foregoing section, the property shall forthwith be put up again and sol d, an d 
all expenses attending  the first sale, and the deficiency of price, if any, which may happen on the resale, 
may be recovered from him by the Collector as if the same were an arrear of land -revenue.  
87. Exercise of right of pre- emption .—(1) At any time before the close of the day on which the s ale 
takes place any person who h as given notice of his intention to claim a right of pre -emption under               
section 79, sub- section ( 2), may, on payment to the officer conducting the sale of a deposit of t wenty -five 
per centum on the highest bid made at the sale, claim to take the property at that bid.  
(2) If the right is not disputed, he shall be declared to be the purchaser.  
(3) If the right is disputed, the Collector shall inquire into and decide the d ispute and declare the 
purchaser, and his decision and declaration shall be final.  
88. Time for payment in full.— The full amount of the purchaser -money shall be paid by the 
purchaser before the close of the fifteenth day from that on which the purchaser w as declared.  
89. Procedure in default of payment. —In default of payment of the full amount of the purchase -
money within the period mentioned in the last foregoing section, the deposit referred to in section 85 or 
section 87, as the case may be, shall, after defraying the expenses of the sale, be forfeited to the 
Government and may, if the Collector, with the previous sanction of the Commissioner, so dir ects, be 
applied in reduction of  the arrear , and the property shall be re -sold, and the defaulting pur chaser shall 
have no claim to the property or to any part of the sum for which it may subsequently be sold.  
90. Report of sale to Commissioner.—Every sale of immov eable property under this Chapter shall 
be re
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 29]
. Report of sale to Commissioner.—Every sale of immov eable property under this Chapter shall 
be reported by the Collector to the Commissioner.  
91. Application to set aside sale.— (1) At any time within thirty days from the date of sale, 
application may be made to the Commissioner to set aside the sale on the ground of some material 
irregularity or mistake in publishing or conducting it.  
(2) But a sa le shall not be set aside on that  ground unless the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the 
Commissioner that he has sustained substantial injury by reason of the irregularity or mistake.  
92. Order confirming or setting aside sale. —(1) After the expirat ion of thirty days from the date of 
the sale, if such application as is mentioned in the last foregoing section has not been made, or if such 
application has been made and rejected, the Commissioner shall make an order confirming the sale, and, if such application has been made and allowed, the Commissioner shall make an order setting aside the 
sale. 
(2) An order made under this section shall be final.  
93. Refund of purchase money on setting aside of sale. —Whenever the sale of any property is set 
aside, the purchaser shall be entitl ed to receive back his purchase- money.  
94. Proclamation after postponement or on re -sale.—A sale made after a postponement under 
section 83 , and a re -sale consequent on a purchaser’s default under section 89 or on the setting aside of a 
sale under section 92, shall be made after the issue of a fresh proclamation in the manner herein before  
prescribed for the sale.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 30]
30 
 95. On confirmation of sale , possession and certificate to be granted to purchaser. —(1) After a 
sale has been confirmed in manner aforesaid, the Collector shall put the person declared to be the 
purchaser into possession of the property sold, and shall grant him a certificate to the effect that he has 
purchased that property.  
(2) The certificate shall state whether or not t he property was sold for the recovery of an arrear due in 
respect thereof, and if it was so sold, shall set forth the incumbrances, grants, contracts and rights of 
occupancy, if any, specified in the proclamation of the sale as specially saved by order of the Financial 
Commissioner under section 76, sub- section (2) , clause (c).  
(3) The certificate shall be deemed to be a valid transfer of the property but need not to be registered 
as a conveyance.  
(4) Any suit brought in any Court against the certified purchaser on the ground that the purchase was 
made on behalf of a person other than the certified purchaser shall be dismissed with costs.  
(5) The certified purchaser of any immovable property shall be entitled to all rents and profits falling 
due in respe ct of the property after the date of the confirmation of the sa le and be liable for all instalments 
of land- revenue and rates and cesses falling due in respect thereof after that date.  
96. Proceeds of sale. —(1) When a sale of immov eable property under this  Chapter has been 
confirmed, the proceeds of the sale shall be applied in the first place to the payment of any arrears,  
including costs incurred for the recovery thereof, due to the Government from the defaulter at the date of 
the confirmation of the sale , whether the arrears are of land -revenue, or of sums recoverable as arrears of 
land- revenue, and the surplus, if any, shall be paid to the person whose property has been sold, or, if the 
property sold was owned by more than one person, then to the owners either collectively or according to 
the amount
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 30]
as owned by more than one person, then to the owners either collectively or according to 
the amount of their recorded interests, as the Collector thinks fit.  
(2) The surplus shall not, except under an order of a Court, be paid to any creditor of a person whose 
property has been sold.  
(3) If the proceeds of the sale fall short of such arrears as are referred to in sub -section ( 1), the balance 
remaining due from the defaulter may be recovered from him by further proceedings under this Chapter 
or by any other means authorized by law.  
CHAPTER VII  
RECOVERY OF  OTHER DEMANDS  BY REVENUE -OFFICERS . 
97. Recovery of certain arrears through Revenue officer instead of suit. —When a village- officer 
required by rules under section 28 to collect any land- revenue or sum recoverable as an arrear of land -
revenue satisfies a Revenue -officer that the revenue or sums has fallen due and has not been paid to him, 
the Revenue -officer may, subject to any rules which the Financial Commissioner may make in this behalf, 
recover it is if it were an arrear of land -revenue.  
98. Other sums  recoverable as arrears of L and-revenue. —In addition to any sums recoverable as 
arrears of land -revenue under this Act or any other enactment for the time being in force, the following 
sums may be so recovered, namely : —  
(a) fees, fines, costs and other charges, including the village -officers’ cess, payable under this Act ;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 31]
31 
 (b) revenue due to the Government on account of pasture or other natural products of land, or on 
account of mills, fisheries or natural products of water, or on account of other rights  described in      
section 41 or section 42 in cases in which the revenue so due has not been included in the assessment of 
an estate;  
(c) fees payable to district boards or local boards under section 33 of the Punjab Districts Boards                 
Act, 1 883 (XX of 1883) , for the use of or benefits derived from such works as are referred to in section 
20, clauses ( i) and     (j) , of that Act;  
(d) sums leviable by or under the authority of the Government as water -rates, or on account of the 
maintenance or management of canals, embankments or other irrigation -works , not being sums 
recoverable as arrears of land -revenue under any enactment for the time being in force ; and  
(e) Sums payable to the Government by a person who is surety for the payment of any of the foregoing 
sums or of any other sum recoverable as an arrear of land -revenue.  
99. Application of Chapter VI to sums recoverable under this Chapter. —(1) The provisions of 
Chapter VI shall, with respect to any sum mentioned or referred to in this Chapter, apply, so far as they 
can be made applicable , as if the sum were an arrear of land -revenue and the person from whom, either as 
principal or as surety, it is due were a defaulter in respect of such an arrear.  
(2) Unless any such sum is declared by an y enactment for the time being in force to be recoverable as 
if it were an arrear of land -revenue due in respect of the land charged therewith, the provisions of                      
section 77 shall apply under sub- section ( 1) to the recovery thereof.  
________  
CHAPTER VIII.  
SURVEYS  AND BOUNDARIES.  
100. Power  of Financial Commissioner to make rules for demarcation of boundaries and 
erection of survey -marks .—(1) The Financial Commissioner may make rules as to the manner in which 

<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 31]
rection of survey -marks .—(1) The Financial Commissioner may make rules as to the manner in which 
the boundaries of all or any estat es in any local area are to be demarcated and as to the survey -marks to be 
erected within those estates.  
(2) Rules under this section may prescribe, among other matters, the forms of survey- marks and the 
material to be used in their construction.  
101 Power of Revenue -officers to define boundaries. —(1) A Revenue -officer  may, for the purpose 
of framing  any record or making any assessment under this Act, or on the application of any person 
interested, define the limits of any  estate, or of any holding , field or other portion of an estate, and may, 
for the purpose of indicating those limits, require survey -marks to be erected or repaired.  
(2) In defining the limits of any land under sub -section ( 1), the R evenue -officer may cause                          
survey-marks to be erected on any boundary already determined by, or by order of, any Court,                    
Revenue -officer or Forest  settlement -officer, or restore any survey -marks already set up by, or by order 
of, any Court or any such officer.  
102. C ost of erection and repair of survey -marks .—Subject to any rules which the Financial 
Commissioner may make in this behalf, survey -marks shall be erected and kept in repair by or at the cost 
of the persons interested in the land for the indication of the limits of which they are required:  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 32]
32 
 Provided that the Local Government may in any case direct that the cost of erection shall be borne by 
the Government or be paid out of the proceeds of the village -officers’ cess.   
103. Recovery of cost incurred by the Government. —(1) If the persons interested in the land fail to 
erect or repair a survey -mark within thirty days from the date of their being required by a  Revenue -officer 
to do so, the R evenue -officer may cause it to be erected or repaired.  
(2) Where the Revenue -officer causes a survey -mark to be erected or repaired, he shall, subject to any 
rules or direction under the last foregoing section, apportion the cost amongst the persons interested in the 
land in such manner as he deems just, and certify the same to the Collector.  
(3) The Collector may recover the cost as if it were an arrear of land -revenue.  
104. Power of Revenue -officers to enter o n land for purposes of survey and demarcation. —Any 
Revenue -officer, and any person acting under the orders of a Revenue -officer, may, in the discharge of 
any duty under this Act, enter upon and survey land and erect survey- marks thereon and demarcate the 
boundaries thereof, and do all other acts necessary for the proper performance of that duty. 
105. Survey for purpose of preparation of records. —(1) When any land is being surveyed in 
pursuance of rules under section 46, clause ( c), any Revenue -officer direc ting the survey may, by notice 
or proclamation, require all persons having rights or interests in the land to indicate, within a specified 
time, by temporary marks of a kind to be described in the notice or proclamation, the limits of those rights 
or inter ests. 
(2) If a person to whom the notice or proclamation is addressed fails to comply with the requisition, he 
shall be liable at the discretion of the Revenue -officer to fine , which may extend to ten rupees.  
106. Provision of flagholders and chai men for those surveys. —(1) For the purposes of the survey of 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 32]
06. Provision of flagholders and chai men for those surveys. —(1) For the purposes of the survey of 
any land in pursuance of rules under section 46, clause ( c), the land- owner s shall be bound to provide fit 
persons to  act as flag holders and chainmen. 
(2) If the land -owners fail to provide such persons  or to provide them in sufficient number, such other 
persons as a Revenue -officer considers necessary may be employed and the cost of employing them 
recovered from the land -owners as if it were an arrear of land -revenue.  
107. Professional surveys.—( 1) If i t is necessary to make a survey by other agency than that of 
Revenue -officers or village- officers, the Local Government may publish a notification stating — 
(a) the local area to be surveyed and the nature of the survey;  
(b) the names or official designati ons of the officers by whom the survey is to be made; and  
(c) the kind of survey- marks to be erected by those officers.  
(2) From the date of the notification the officers specified therein, and the persons acting under their 
orders, shall have for the purp oses of the survey the powers conferred on Revenue -officers by                   
section 104.  
108. Penalty for destruction , injury or removal of survey -marks. —(1) If any person willfully 
destroys or injures or without lawful authority removes a survey -mark  lawfully erected, he may be 
ordered by a Revenue -officer to pay such fine not exceeding fifty rupees for each mark so destroyed, 
injured or removed as may, in the opinion of the Revenue -officer, be necessary to defray the expense of 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 33]
33 
 restoring the same and  of rewarding the person, if any, who gave information of the destruction, injury or 
removal.  
(2) The imposition of a fine under this section shall not bar a prosecution under section 434 of the 
Indian Penal Code.  
109. Report of destruction or removal  of or injury to survey -marks. —Every village -officer of an 
estate shall be legally bound to furnish a Revenue -officer with information respecting the destruction or 
removal of, or any injury done to, any survey- mark lawfully erected in the estate.  
________  
CHAP TER IX . 
PARTITION . 
110. Effect of partitions of estates and tenancies on joint liability for revenue and rent. —(1) A 
partition of land, either under this Chapter or otherwise, shall not, without the express consent of the 
Financial Commissioner, affect the joint liability of the land or of the land- owners thereof for the revenue 
payable in respect of the land, or operate to create a new e state, and, if any conditions are attached to that 
consent, those conditions shall be binding on the parties to the partition.  
(2) A partition of a tenancy shall not , without the express consent of the landlor d, affect the joint 
liability of  the co -sharers therein for the payment of the rent thereof.  
111. Application for partition. —Any joint owner of land, or any joint tenant of a tenancy in which a 
right of occupancy subsists, may apply to a Revenue -officer for partition of his share in the land or 
tenancy , as the case may be, if — 
(a) at the date of the application the share is recorded under Chapter IV as belonging to hi m, or 
(b) his right to the share has been established by a decree which is still subsisting at the date,  or 
(c) a written acknowledgement of that right has been executed by all persons interested in the 
admission or denial thereof.  
112. Restriction and limitations on partition.—Notwithstanding anything in the last foregoing 
section — 
(1) places of worship and burial grounds held in
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 33]
standing anything in the last foregoing 
section — 
(1) places of worship and burial grounds held in common bef ore partition shall continue to be so held 
after partition, unless the parties otherwise agree among themselves and record their agreement and file it 
with the Revenue -officer;  
(2) partition of any of the following properties, namely:  —  
(a) any embankment, watercourse, well or tank, and any land on which the supply of wat er to any 
such work may depend, 
(b) any grazing -ground, and 
(c) any land which is occupied as the site of a town or village and is assessed to land revenue;            
may be ref used if in the opinion of the R evenue -officer the partition of such property is likely to cause  
inconvenience to the co- shares or other persons directly o r indirectly interested therein  or to diminish 
the utility thereof to these persons;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 34]
34 
 (3) the fact tha t a partition on the application of a joint owner of land would render necessary the 
severance into two or more parts of the land comprised in the tenancy of a tenant having a right of 
occupancy may, unless the tenant assents to the severance, be a suffici ent reason for the disallowance of 
the partition in so far as it would affect that tenancy; and  
(4) the fact that the landlord objects to the partition of a tenancy may be sufficient reason for the 
absolute disallowance of the partition thereof.  
113. Notic e of application for partition. —The Revenue -officer, on receiving the application under 
section 111, shall, if it is in order and not open to objection on the face of it, fix a day for the hearing thereof , and — 
(a) cause notice of the application and of th e day so fixed to be served on such of the recorded         
co-shares as have not joined in the application, and, if the share of which partition is applied for is a 
share in a tenancy, on the landlord also; and  
(b) if he thinks fit, cause the notice to be served on, or proclaimed for the information of , any other 
persons whom he may deem to be directly or indirectly interested in the application. 
114. Addition of parties to application. —On the day fixed for  the hearing, or on any day to which 
the hearing ma y be adjourned, the Revenue -officer shall ascertain whether  any of the  other  co-sharers 
desire the partition of their share also, and, if any of them so  desire, he shall add them as applicants                  
for partition.  
115. Absolute disallowance of partition. —After examining such of the co -shares and other persons 
as may be present on that day, the Revenue -officer may, if he is of opinion that there is good and 
sufficient cause why partition should be absolutely disallowed, refuse the application, re cording the 
grounds of his refusal.  
116. Procedure on admission of application. —If the Revenue -officer does not refuse the application 
un
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 34]
 Procedure on admission of application. —If the Revenue -officer does not refuse the application 
under the last foregoing section, he shall ascertain the question, if any, in dispute between any of the 
persons interest ed, distinguishing between — 
(a) question s as to title in the property of which partition is sought; and  
(b) questions as to the property to be divided, or the mode of making the partition.  
117. Disposal of questions as to title in property to be divided.— (1) When there is a question as to 
title in any of the property of which partition is sought, the Revenue -officer may de cline to grant the 
application for partition until the question has been determined by a competent Court, or he may himself 
proceed to determine the question as though he were such a Court.  
(2) Where the Revenue -officer himself proceeds to determine the question, the following rules shall 
apply, namely :— 
(a) If the question is one over which a Revenue Court has jurisdiction, the Revenue -officer shall 
proceed as a Revenue Court under the provisions of the Punjab Tenancy Act, 1887 (XVI of 1887) .  
(b) If the question is one over which a Civil Court has jurisdiction, the procedure of the Revenue -
officer shall be that applicable to the  trial of an original suit by a Civil Court , and he shall record a 
judgment and decree containing the particulars required by the Code of Civil Procedure to be specified 
therein.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 35]
35 
 (c) An appeal shall lie from the decree of the Revenue -officer under clause ( b) as though that 
decree were a decree of a district Judge in an original suit.  
(d) Upon such an appeal being made, the Divisional Court or Chief Court, as the case may be, may 
issue an injunction to the Revenue -officer requiring him to stay proceeding pe nding the disposal of the 
appeal.  
(e) From the appellate decree of a Divisi onal Court upon such an appeal a further appeal shall lie to 
the Chief  Court if such a further appeal is allowed by the law for the time being in force.  
118. Disposal of other ques tions.—(1) When there is a question as to the property to be divided, or 
the mode of making a partition, the Revenue -officer shall, after, such inquiry as he deems necessary, 
record an order stating his decision on the question and his reasons for the deci sion.  
(2) An appeal may be preferred to the Commissioner from an order under sub- section ( 1) within 
fifteen days from the date thereof, and, when such an appeal is preferred and the institution thereof has 
been certified to the Revenue -officer by the Comm issioner, the Revenue -officer shall stay proceeding s 
pending the disposal of the appeal.  
(3) If an  applicant for partition is dissatisfied with an  original or appellate order under this section, and 
applies for permission to withdraw from the proceeding s in so far as they relate to the partition of his 
shares, he shall be permitted to withdraw therefrom on such terms as the Revenue -officer thinks fit.  
(4) When an applicant withdraw , under the last foregoing sub- section, the R evenue -officer may, where 
the other applicants , if any, desire the continuance of the proceeding, continue them in so  as far they 
relate to the partition of the shares of those other applicants.  
119. Administration of property excluded from partition. —When any such property as is refer red 
to in section 112, clause ( 2), is excluded from partition, the Revenue 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 35]
h property as is refer red 
to in section 112, clause ( 2), is excluded from partition, the Revenue -officer may determine the extent and 
manner to and in which the co- sharer s and other persons interested therein may make use thereof, and the 
proportion in which the expenditure inc urred thereon and profits derived therefrom, respectively, are to be 
borne by and divided among those persons or any of them.  
120. Distribution of revenue and rent after partition. —(1) The amount of revenue to be paid in 
respect of each of the holdings int o which land has been divided on a partition, and the amount of rent to 
be paid in respect of each of the portions into which a tenancy has been so divided, shall be determined by 
the Revenue -officer making the partition.  
(2) The deter mination of the Reven ue-officer  as to the revenue to be p aid in respect of each holding 
shall, where the estate in which the holding is situate in subject to a fixed assessment, be deemed to be an 
order under section 56, sub -section ( 1).  
(3) Where new estates have been created at a  partition and the land- revenue has been fraudulently or 
erroneously distributed among them, the Local Government may, within t welve years from the time of  
discovery of the fraud or error, order a new distribution of the land- revenue among the sever al estates , on 
a estimate of the assets of each estate at the time of the partition, to be made conformably to the best evidence and information procurable respecting the same.  
121. Instrument of partition .—When a partition is completed, the Revenue -office r shall cause an 
instrument of partition to be prepared, and the date on which the partition is to take effect to be recorded 
therein.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 36]
36 
 122. Delivery of possession of property allotted on partition .—An owner or tenant to whom any 
land or portion of a tenancy, as the case may be, is allotted in proceedings for partition shall be entitled to 
possession thereof as against the other parties to the proceedings and their legal representatives, and a 
Revenue -officer shall, on application made to him for the purpos e by any such owner or tenant at any 
time within three years from the date recorded in the instrument of partition under the last foregoing 
section, give effect to that instrument so far a s it concerns the applicant as i f it were a decree for 
immovable pro perty.  
123. Affirmation of partition s privately affected. —(1) In any case in which a partition has been 
made without the interve ntion of a Revenue -officer, any party thereto may apply to a Revenue -officer for 
an order affirming the partition.  
(2) On rece iving the application, the Revenue -officer shall inquire into the case, and, if he finds that 
the partition has in fact been made, he may make an order affirming it and proceed under sections  119, 
120, 121 and 122, or any of those sections, as circumstances may require, in the same manner as if the partition had been made on an application to himself under this Chapter.  
124. Power to make rules as to costs of partitions. —The Financial Commissi oner may make rules 
for determining the costs of partitions under this Chapter and the mode in which such costs are to be 
apportioned.  
125. Re -distribution of land according to custom. —When by established custom any land in an 
estate is subject to periodic al re- distribution of a Revenue -officer may, on the application of any of the 
land- owners, enforce the re -distribution according to the custom, and for this  purpose may exercise all or 
any of the powers of a Revenue -officer in proceeding s, for partition.  
126. Officers who may be empowered to act under this Chapter. —The Revenue -officer by whom 
proceed
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 36]
126. Officers who may be empowered to act under this Chapter. —The Revenue -officer by whom 
proceedings may be taken under this Chapter shall be a Revenue -officer of a class not below that of 
Assistant Collector of the first grade.  
________  
CHAPTER X . 
A
RBITRATION . 
127. Power to refer to arbitration.— (1) Any Revenue -officer may, with the consent of the parties , 
refer to arbitration any dispute arising before him in any matter under this Act.  
(2) A Collector or any Assistant Collector of the first grade may, without the consent of the parties, 
refer to arbitration any dispute before him with respect to—  
(a) any matter of which an entry is to be made in any record or register under Chapter IV;  
(b) any matter relating to the distribution of an assessment und er section 56;  
(c) the limits of any estate or of any holding, field or other portion of an estate; or  
(d) the property to be divided at a partition or the mode of making a partition.  
128. Order of reference and contents thereof. —(1) In referring a dispute to arbitration a               
Revenue -officer shall make an order of reference, and specify therein the precise matter submitted to 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 37]
37 
 arbitration, the number of arbitrators which each party to the dispute is to nominate, the period within 
which arbitrators are to be nominated, and the period within which the award is to be delivered.  
(2) The number of arbitrators which each party may nominate must be the same and must not exceed 
two. 
(3) If from any cause arbitrators are not nominat ed, or an award is not delivered, within the period 
fixed therefor in the order of reference, the Revenue -officer may from time to time enlarge that period, or 
may cancel the order of reference.  
129. Nomination of arbitrators.— (1) When an order of referenc e has been made, the parties may 
each nominate the number of arbitrators specified in the order, and the Revenue -officer shall nominate 
one other arbitrator.  
(2) The Revenue -officer may, for reasons to be recorded by him, make an order disallowing any 
nomi nation made by either party and requiring the party to make another nomination within a time to be 
specified in the order.  
(3) An order under the last foregoing sub- section shall be final.  
130. Substitution of arbitrators by parties.—If an arbitrator nomi nated by the party dies, desires to 
be discharged or refuses or becomes incapable to act, the party may nominate another person in his stead.  
131. Nomination and substitution of arbitrators by Revenue -officers. —In any of the fol lowing 
cases, namely; — 
(a) if either of the parties fails to nominate an arbitrator under sub- section ( 1) of section 129 within 
the period fixed in the order of reference, or  
(b) if the nomination of an arbitrator has been disallowed under sub- section ( 2) of section 129, and 
another arbitrator is no nominated within the time specified in the order under that sub- section or , 
having been so nominated, his nomination is also disallowed, or  
(c) if a party entitled to nominate an arbitrator in the place of another arbitrator under                   
section 130, fails to nominate him within one 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 37]
 place of another arbitrator under                   
section 130, fails to nominate him within one week from the date of the communication to him of a 
notice requiring him to make the nomination, or  
(d) if an arbitrator nominated by the Revenue -officer dies, desires to be discharged or refuses or 
becomes incapable to act,  
the Revenue -officer may nominate a person as arbitrator.  
132. Process for appearance before arbitrators. —(1) The Revenue -officer shall , on the application 
of the arbitrators, issue the same processes to the parties and witnesses whom the arbitrators desire to examine as he may issue in any proceeding under this Act before himself.  
(2) Any such party or witness shall be bound to appear be fore the arbitrators in obedience to a process 
issued under sub -section ( 1), either in person or by agent, as the arbitrators may require.  
(3) The person attending in obedience to the process shall be bound to state the truth upon any matter 
respecting whi ch he is examined or makes statements, and to produce such documents and other things 
relating to any such matter as may be specified in the process.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 38]
38 
 133. Award of arbitrators and presentation thereof.— (1) The arbitrators shall make an award in 
writing under their hands concerning the matters referred to them for arbitration, and state therein their 
reasons therefor, and any arbitrator dissenting from the award made by a majority of the arbitrators shall 
state the grounds of his dissent.  
(2) The arbitrator s shall present the award to the Revenue -officer in person unless that officer permits 
them to present it by agent.  
134. Procedure on  presentation of award. —(1) When the award has been received, the Revenue -
officer shall, if the parties are present, consid er forthwith any objection which they may have to make 
thereto, and, if they are not present , fix a date for the consideration thereof.  
(2) Where a date has been fixed for the consideration of an award, the Revenue- officer shall on that 
date, or on any subsequent date to which an adjournment may be made, hear any objections which the 
parties may have to make to the award.  
(3) The Revenue -officer may also, if he thinks fit, question the arbitrators as to the grounds of their 
award.  
135 Effect of award. —(1) The Revenue -officer may accept, modify or reject the award, recording his 
reason s for doing so in his decision  respecting the dispute which was referred to arbitration.  
(2) An appeal shall lie from the decision as if arbitrators had not been appointed.  
_______  
CHAPTER XI.  
SPECIAL JURISDICTION  wITH RESPECT  TO LAND. 
136. Power to invest officers making records- of-rights or general re -assessments with powers of 
Civil Courts. —(1) The Local Government may , by order published in the official Gazette, invest any 
Revenue -officer making or specially revising records -of-rights in any local area in pursuance of a 
notification under section 32 or making re -assessment of land -revenue in any local area in pursuance of a 
notification under section 49, or any Revenue -officer to whose control that officer is subjec
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 38]
of a 
notification under section 49, or any Revenue -officer to whose control that officer is subject, with all or 
any of the powers of any Court constituted under the Punjab Courts Act, 1884 (XVIII of 1884) , for the 
purpose of trying all or any specified cl asses of suits or appeals relating to land arising in the local area.  
(2) The Local Government  may cancel an order under sub- section ( 1) wholly or in part.  
(3) While an order or any part of an order under that sub- section continues in force, the powers 
conferred thereby shall be exercised by the officer invested therewith and not otherwise.  
(4) Any cases pending before that officer under the order or a subsisting part of the order at the time of 
cancellation thereof may be disposed of by him as if the order or that part of it continued in force, unless 
the Local Government directs, as it is hereby empowered to do, that those cases shall be transferred for disposal to the Courts by which they would have been disposed of if the order had not been publishe d. 
137. Control over such officers and appeals from and revision of their decrees and                       
orders. —(1) The Local Government may by notification direct that the provisions of this Act with 
respect to the superintendence and control over Rev enue -officers shall, su bject to any modification of 
those provisions which the Local Government thinks fit, apply to any Revenue -officer, except the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 39]
39 
 Financial Commissioner, who has been invested with the powers of a Civil Court of any of the classes 
specif ied in clauses ( a) , (b), (c) and ( d) of section 17 of the Punjab Courts Act, 1884 (XVIII of 1884), 
and that appeals shall lie from his decrees and orders to, and his decrees and orders be subject to revision 
by, a Revenue -officer invested under the last f oregoing section with the powers of a Court which would 
be competent under the  Punjab Courts Act, 1884, to hear appeals from, or revise, such decree s and orders 
if they had been made by a Court with the powers of which the Revenue -officer who made them ha s been 
invested.  
(2) In the absence of any such notification, a Revenue -officer invested under the last foregoing section 
with the powers of any such Civil Court as aforesaid shall, with respect to the exercise of those powers, 
be deemed to be such a Civil  Court for the purpose of the Punjab Courts Act, 1884. 
________  
CHAPTER XII.  
SUPPLEMENTAL  RPOVISIONS . 
Revenue Deposits.  
138. Power to deposit certain sums other than rent. —(1) In either of the following cases,                
namely: — 
(a) when a headman or other landowner, or an assignee of land -revenue, to whom any sum other 
than rent is payable on account of a liability under this Act refuses to receive the sum from, or to grant 
a receipt therefor  to, the person by whom it is payable , 
(b) when the person by whom any such sum is payable is in doubt as to the headman or other 
landowner, or the assignee of land- revenue, entitled to receive it.  
that person may apply to a Revenue -officer for leave to deposit the sum in his office, and the 
Revenue -officer shall receive the deposit if, after examining the applicant, he is satisfied that there is 
sufficient ground for the application, and if the applicant pays the fee, if any, which may be chargeable 
on any notice to be issued of the receipt thereof.  
(2) When a deposit has been so received, the liability of th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 39]
 to be issued of the receipt thereof.  
(2) When a deposit has been so received, the liability of the depositor to the headman or other land-
owner, or the assignee of land–revenue , for the amount thereof shall be discharged.  
139. Procedure in case of deposit on account of a payment due to Government. —If the deposit 
purports to be made on account of any payment due to the Government , it may be credited accordingly . 
140. Procedure in case of other deposits .—(1) A Revenue -officer receiving a deposit purporting to 
be made on any other account shall give notice of the receipt thereof to every person who  he has reason to 
believe claims or is entitled to the deposit, and may pay the amount thereof to any person appearing to him to be entitled to the same, or may, if he thinks fit, retain t he deposit pending the decision of a Civil 
Court as to the person so entitled.  
(2) No suit or other proceeding shall be instituted against the  Secretary of State for India in Council, or 
against any o fficer of the Government, in respect of anything done by  a Revenue -officer under this 
section, but nothing in this sub-section shall prevent any person entitled to receive the amount of any such 
deposit from recovering it from a person to whom it has been paid by a Revenue -officer.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 40]
40 
 Execution of Orders of Civil and Criminal Courts by Revenue -officers.  
141. Orders of Civil and Criminal Courts for execution of processes against land or the produce 
thereof to be addressed to a Revenue- officer. —Orders issued  by any Civil or Criminal Court  for the 
attachment, sale or delivery of any land or interest in land, or for the attachment or sale of the produce of 
any land, shall be addressed to the Collector or such Revenue -officer as the Collector may appoint in this 
behalf, and be executed by the Collector or that officer in accordance with the provisions of the law 
applicable to the Court issuing the orders and with any rules consistent there with made by the Financial 
Commissioner with the concurrence of the Chief  Court and the previous sanction of the Local 
Government. 
142. Attachment of assigned land- revenue.— (1) Not withstanding anything in any other enactment 
for the time being in force, an order issued by any Court for the attachment of assigned land- revenue shall 
require the person by whom the revenue is payable to pay  it to the Collector, and the Collector to hold it 
subject to the further orders of the court.  
(2) A payment to the Collector under sub- section ( 1) shall be an effectual discharge to the person 
making it.  
Preservation of attached Produce.  
 143. Preservation of attached Produce.— (1) The attachment of the produce of any land in 
pursuance of an order of any Court or other authority shall not prevent the person to whom the produce 
belongs from reaping, gathering or storing it or doing any other  act necessary for its preservation.  
(2) The attaching officer shall do or cause to be done all acts necessary for the preservation of the 
produce if the person to whom it belongs fails to do so.  
(3) When sale of produce follows on its attachment, the pur chaser shall be entitled, by himself or by 
any person appointed by him in his behalf, to enter on the place where the produce is and do all that is 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 40]
erson appointed by him in his behalf, to enter on the place where the produce is and do all that is necessary for the purpose of preserving and removing it.  
Division of Produce.  
144. Division of produce .—In e ither of the following cases, namely:  —  
(a) where land- revenue is paid by division or appraisement of the produce,  
(b) where a superior and an inferior landowner, or two or more shareholders in a holding or 
tenancy, are jointly interested in any produce,  and either or any of the landowners  or tenants, as the 
case may be, desires the assistance of a Revenue -officer for the purpose of dividing or appraising the 
produce, the provisions of the Punjab Tenancy Act, 1887 (XVI of 1887) , with respect to the divisi on 
or appraisement of produce shall apply so far as they can be made applicable.  
Miscellaneous . 
145. Village -cesses.—(1) At any  of the following times, namely: — 
(a) when a record -of-rights is being made or specially revised for an estate,  
(b) when the local area in which an estate is situate is being generally re- assessed and before the 
assessment has been confirmed,  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 41]
41 
 (c) at any other time on an order made with respect to any estate by the Local Government with the 
previous sanction of the Governor General in Council,  
a Revenue -officer shall prepare a list of village- cesses, if any, levied in the estate which have been 
generally or specially approved by the Local Government, or the title to which has before the passing of 
this Act been judicially established.  
(2) When a list has been prepared for an estate under sub -section ( 1), a village- cess not comprised 
therein shall  not be recoverable by suit in any Court.  
(3) The Local Government may impose on the collection of any village -cess comprised in the list such 
conditions as to police or other establishments connected with the village, market or fair in or on account 
of which the cess is levied, as it thinks fit.  
(4) The Governor General in Council may, on a reference from the Local Government, declare 
weather any cess, contribution or due levied in a n estate is or is not a village- cess.  
(5) A declaration of the Governor General in Council under the last foregoing sub- section shall be 
conclusive, and shall not be liable to be questioned in any Court.  
146. Superior landowners ’ dues. —Where a superior landowner is entitled to receive in respect of 
any land from an inferior landowner dues in kind or in cash of fluctuating quantity or amount, the 
Collector may — 
(a) on the application of both landowners, or  
(b) with the previous sanction of the Local Government, on the application either of them,  
commute those dues into a fixed  percentage of the land -revenue payable by the inferior landowner in 
respect of the land.  
147. Substitution of service for payment of land- revenue .—(1) The  Local Government may, with 
the previous sanction of the Governor General in Council, authorize the remission of land -revenue in 
whole or in part in consideration of the person liable therefor undertaking to render in lieu thereof such public service as may
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 41]
ation of the person liable therefor undertaking to render in lieu thereof such public service as may be specified in an agreement to be approved by the Local Government and executed by that person.  
(2) The Local Government may, with the like sanction, cancel any remission authorized,  and  
agreement made , under sub -section ( 1). 
 (3) If a landowner bound by an agreement under that sub- section to render public service in lieu of 
paying land- revenue fails, to render the serv ice to the satisfaction of the c ollector, the collector may 
determine the portion of the land- revenue remitted which is represented by the servi ce in respect of which 
the land owner is in default, and, with the previous sanction of the f inancial Commissioner, recover that 
portion as if it were an arrear of land- revenue  due in respect of the land for the land- revenue  whereof the 
service was substituted.  
148. Recovery of cost of assessing assigned land -revenue. —(1) When land of which the land -
revenue has been assigned in whole or in part is re- assessed, the assignee shall be liable to pay such a 
share of the cost of making the re- assessment as the Financial Commissioner may determine to be just.   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 42]
42 
 (2) That share may be recovered by the Colle ctor by the deduction of the amount thereof from the 
land- revenue due to the assignee.  
149. Penalty for failure to attend within limits of estate in obedience to order of Revenue-
officer. —If a person required by a summons, notice, order or proclamation proceeding from a R evenue -
officer to atte nd at a certain time and place within the limits of the estate in which he ordinarily resides, or 
in which he holds or cultivates land, fails to comply with the requisition, he shall be liable at the 
discret ion of t he Revenue -officer to fine which may extend to fifty rupees.  
150. Prevention of encroachment on common lands.—( 1) Where land which has been reserved for 
the common purposes of the co- sharers therein has been encroached on by any co -sharer, a Revenue -
office r may, on the application of any other co- sharer, eject the encroaching co -sharer from the land and, 
by order proclaimed in manner mentioned in section 22, forbid repetition of the encroachment.  
(2) The proceedings of the Revenue -officer under sub -section (1) shall be subject to any decree or 
order which may be subsequently passed by any Court of competent jurisdiction.  
151. Papers kept by village -officers to be deemed public documents. —(1) Any record or paper 
which a village- officer is required by law, or by any rule under this Act, to prepare or keep shall be 
deemed to be the property of the Government.  
(2) A village -officer shall, with respect to any such record or paper in his custody, be deemed for the 
purpose s of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (I of 1872), to be a public officer having the custody of a 
public document which any person has a right to inspect.  
152. Costs.— (1) A Revenue -officer may give and apportion the costs of any proceeding under this 
Act in any manner he thinks fit.  
(2) But if he orde rs that the cost of any such proceeding shall not follow the event, he shall record his 
reasons for the orde
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 42]
he cost of any such proceeding shall not follow the event, he shall record his 
reasons for the order.  
153 Computation of periods limited for appeals and application s for review .—In the computation 
of the period for an appeal from, or an application for the review of, an order under this Act  the limitation 
therefor shall be governed by the Indian Limitation Act, 1877 (XV of 1877) . 
154. Restriction on Revenue -officer s bidding at auctions or trading .—(1) A Revenue -officer, or a 
person employed in a revenue -office, shall not — 
(a) purchase or bid for, either in person or by agent, in his own name or in that of another, or jointly 
or in shares with others, any property which any Revenue -officer or Revenue Court in the District in 
which he is employed ha s ordered to be sold, or , 
(b) in contravention of any rules made by the Local  Government in this behalf, engage in trade in 
that district.  
(2) Nothing in sub- section ( 1) shall be deemed to preclude any person from becoming a member of a 
company incorporate d under the Indian Companies Act, 1882, (VI of 1882)  or other law.  
155. Power to make rules.—( 1) The Financial Commissioner may, in addition to other rules which 
may be made by him under this Act, make rules consistent with this Act,  and any other enactment for the 
time being in force — 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 43]
43 
 (a) fixing the number and amount of the installment s, and the times and places and the manner, by, 
at and in which any sum other than rent or land- revenue which is payable under this Act or of which a 
record has been made the re under is to be paid;  
(b) fixing the dates on which profits are to be divisible by headman or other persons by whom they 
are realized on behalf of co -sharers;  
(c) prescribing the fees to be charged for the service and execution of processes issued by       
Revenue -office rs and Revenue  Courts, the mode in which those fees are to be collected, the number of 
persons to be employed in the service and execution of those processes, and the remuneration and 
duties of those persons;  
(d) regulating the procedur e in the cases where persons are entitled to inspect records of Revenue -
officers, or records or papers in the custody of village -officer, or to obtain copies of the same, and 
prescribing the fees payable for searches and copies;   
(e) prescribing forms for such books, entries, statistics and accounts as the Financial Commissioner 
thinks necessary to be kept, made  or compiled in revenue -offices  or submitted to any authority;  
(f) declaring what shall be the language of any of those offices , and determini ng in  what cases 
persons practis ing in those offices shall be permitted to address the presiding off icers thereof in 
English; and  
(g) generally for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Until rules are made under clauses ( a) and ( b) of sub- section ( 1) the sums therein referred to shall 
be payable by the installments , at the times and places, and in the manner by, at and in which they are 
now payable.  
(3) Rules made by the Financial Commissioner under this or any other sec tion of this Act  shall not 
take effect until they have been sanctioned by the Local Government, and rules under clause ( c) of               
sub-section ( 1) shall not take effect until they have also been confirmed by
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 43]
( c) of               
sub-section ( 1) shall not take effect until they have also been confirmed by the Governor General in 
Council.  
156. Rules to be made after previous publication. —The power to make any rules under this Act is 
subject to the control of the Governor General in Council, and to the condition of the rules being made after previous publication:  
157. Powers exercis eable by the Financial Commissioner from time to time. —All powers 
conferred by this Act on The Financial Commissioner may be exercise d from time to time as occasion  
requires.  
Exclusion of Jurisdiction of Civil Courts.  
158. Exclusion of jurisdiction of Civil Courts in matters within the jurisdiction of  Revenue -
officers—Except as otherwise provided by this Act — 
(1) a Civil Court shall not have jurisdiction in any ma tter which the Local Government or a Revenue -
officer is empowered by this A ct to dispose of , or take cognizance of the manner in which the Lo cal 
Government or any Revenue -officer exercises any powers vested in it or him by or under this Act; and in 
particular — 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 44]
44 
 (2) a Civil Court shall not exercise jurisdiction over any of the following matters, namely: —  
(i) any question as to the limits of any la nd which has been defined by a R evenue -officer as land to 
which this Act does or does not apply;  
(ii) any claim to compel the performance of any duties imposed by this Act or any other enactment 
for the time being in force on any Revenue -officer, as suc h;  
(iii) any claim to the office of kanungo, zaildar, inamdar or v illage -officer, or in respect of any 
injury caused by exclusion from such office, or to compel the performance of the duties or a division 
of the emoluments thereof ;  
(iv) any notification directing the mak ing or revision of a record -of-rights;  
(v) the framing of a record -of-rights or annual record, or the preparation, signing or attestation of 
any of the documents included in such a record;  
(vi) the correction of any entry in a record- of-rights, annual record or register of mutations;  
(vii) any notification of the undertaking of the general re -assessment of a district or tahsil  having 
been sanctioned by the Governor General in Council ;  
(viii) the claim of any person to be liable for an assessment of land -revenue or of any other revenue 
assessed under this Act ;  
(ix) the amount of land- revenue to be assessed on any estate or to be paid in respect of any holding 
under this Act;  
(x) the amount of, or the liability of any person to pay, any other revenue to be assessed under this Act, 
or any cess, charge or rate to be assessed on an estate or holding under this Act or any other enactment for 
the time being in force;  
(xi) any claim r elating to the allowance to be received by a landowner who has given notice of his 
refusal to be liable for an assessment, or any claim connected with, or arising out of, any proceedings taken in consequence of the refusal of any person  to be liable for an  assessment under this Act;  
(xii) the formation of an estate out of waste land;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 44]
be liable for an  assessment under this Act;  
(xii) the formation of an estate out of waste land;  
(xiii) any claim to hold free of revenue any land, mills, fisheries or natural products of land or              
water;  
(xiv) any claim connected with, or arising out of , the collection by the Government, or the enforcement 
by th e Government of  any process for the recovery, of land -revenue or any sum recoverable as an arrear of 
land-revenue;  
(xv) any claim to set aside, on any ground other than fraud, a sale for the recovery of  an arrear of land -
revenue or any sum recoverable as an arrear of land -revenue;  
(xvi) the amount of, or the liability of any person to pay , any fees, fines, costs or other charges imposed 
under this Act;  
(xvii) any claim for partition of an estate, holdi ng or tenancy, or any question connected with, or arising 
out of, proceedings for partition, not being a question as to title in any of the property of which partition is 
sought;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 45]
45 
 (xviii) any question as to the allotment of land on the partition of an estat e, holding or tenancy , or as to 
the distribution of land subject by established custom to periodical re -distribution , or as to the distribution 
of land- revenue on the partition of an estate or holding or on a periodical re -distribution of land, or as to the 
distribution of  rent on the partition of a tenancy;  
 (xix) any claim to set aside or disturb a division or appraisement of produce confirmed or verified by a 
Revenue -officer under this Act;  
 (xx) any question relating to the preparation of a list of v illage -cesses or the imposition by the Local  
Government of conditions on the collection of such cesses;  
(xxi) any proceeding under this Act for the commuta tion of the dues of a superior land -owner;  
(xxii) any claim arising out of the enforcement of an agr eement to render public service in lieu of paying 
land-revenue; or  
(xxiii) any claim arising out of the liability of an assignee of land- revenue to pay a share of the cost of 
collecting or re -assessing such revenue, or arising out of the liability of an as signee  to pay out of assigned 
land-revenue, or of a person who would be liable for land- revenue if it had not been released, compounded 
for or redeemed to pay on the land- revenue for which he would but for such release, composition or 
redemption be liable, such a percentage for the remuneration of a zaildar, inamdar or village -officer as may 
be prescribed by rules for the time being in force under this Act.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAND-REVENUE ACT, 1887.pdf - page 46]
46 
 THE SCHEDULE.  
(See section 2.)  
ENACTMENTS  REPEALED.  
Number and year . Title or subject of enactment.  Extent of repeal.  
1 2 3 
Act XXI of 1836  Creation of new Zilas.  So much as has not been 
repealed.  
Act VI of 1867.  To enable the Lieutenant Governor of the 
Punjab to alter the limits of existing 
districts in any part of the territories under 
his government.  The whole.  
 
Act VI I of 1870. The Court fees Act, 1870.  In section 20, clause ( i), the 
words “and Revenue,” and the 
whole of section 23.  
Act XXXII I of 1871.  The Punjab Land -Revenue Act, 1871 . The whole.  
Act IV of 1872 . The Punjab Laws Act, 1872.  Section 21 . 
Act XVIII of 1884 . The Punjab Courts Act, 1884.  Chapter VI . 
Regulation I of 1872.  The Punjab Frontier Regulation, 1872.  Rules 26 to 46 (both inclusive), 
comprising sections G, H, I and 
K of the Hazara Settlement 
Rules.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAWS ACT, 1872.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE PUNJAB LAWS ACT, 1872  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTION S 
____________  
PREAMBLE.  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Local extent.  
Commencement.  
3. Enactments in force . 
4. [Repealed .]. 
Civil Judicature  
5. Decisions in certain cases to be according to Native law . 
6. Decisions in cases not specially provided for . 
7. Local customs and mercantile usages when valid . 
Descent of Jaghirs  
8. [Repealed .]. 
8A. [Repealed .]. 
8B. [Repealed .]. 
8C. [Repealed .]. 
Pre-Emption  
9. [Repealed .]. 
10. [Repealed .]. 
11. [Repealed .]. 
12. [Repealed .]. 
13. [Repealed .]. 
14. [Repealed .]. 
15. [Repealed .]. 
16. [Repealed .]. 
17. [Repealed .]. 
18. [Repealed .]. 
19. [Repealed .]. 
20. [Repealed .]. 
Decrees Concerning Land  
21. [Repealed .]. 
Insolvency  
22. [Repealed .]. 
23. [Repealed .]. 
24. [Repealed .]. 
25. [Repealed .]. 
26. [Repealed .]. 
27. [Repealed .]. 
28. [Repealed .]. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAWS ACT, 1872.pdf - page 2]
2 
 SECTIONS  
29. [Repealed .]. 
30. [Repealed .]. 
31. [Repealed .]. 
32. [Repealed .]. 
33. [Repealed .]. 
Minors and the Court of Wards  
34. [Repealed .]. 
35. [Repealed .]. 
36. [Repealed .]. 
37. [Repealed .]. 
38. [Repealed .]. 
Criminal Judicature  
39. Indian Penal Code to apply to offences committed previous to 1st January, 1862 . 
Saving of privileges conferred on  certain Chiefs.  
39A. Power to establish system of village -watchmen, and municipal -watchmen and to make rules . 
39B. Obligation to assist watchmen and headmen . 
Person obstructing watchman or headman may be arrested without warrant.  
39C. Power to direct loca l taxation for payment of police enrolled under Act 5 of 1861 . 
39D. Notice of taxes proposed to be levied . 
Objections to taxation.  
Procedure thereon.  
39E. Power to fix rates of tax . 
39F. Power to make rules for collection of taxes . 
39G. [Repealed .]. 
Honorary police -officers  
40. State Government may confer powers of police -officer . 
Track Law  
41. Trackers may call for assistance in carrying on tracks . 
Limit  
42. Penalty f or withholding assistance or conniving at offence or escape . 
Limit to fine.  
Appeal to High Court.  
Fine may be awarded to injured parties, and fee to tracker.  
Slaughter of kine 
43. Control of slaughter of kine and sale of beef . 
Armed Men and Foreign Vagrants  
44. Control of entry into towns of bands of armed men . 
45. Powers of Magistrate of district as to foreign vagrants . 
46. Surveillance, etc., of band failing to comply with Magistrate's order . 
Miscellaneous  
47. Crossing of streams on buoys or skins . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAWS ACT, 1872.pdf - page 3]
3 
 SECTIONS  
48. Use of pasturage or natural product of Government land . 
49.  [Repealed.]. 
50. Power to make rules as to matters mentioned in sections 43 to 48 . 
Existing Rules.  
50A. Conditions of validity of rules hereafter made under this Act . 
50B. Penalties for breach of such rules . 
51. Republication of rules and orders . 
52. [Repealed .]. 
Schedule I .—ENACTMENTS  DECLARED TO BE IN FORCE . 
Schedule II .—[Repealed .]. 
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAWS ACT, 1872.pdf - page 4]
4 
 THE PUNJAB LAWS ACT, 1872  
ACT NO. IV OF 1872  
[28th March, 1872.]  
An Act for declaring which of certain rules, laws and regulations have  the force of law in the P unjab, and 
for other purposes . 
Preamble .—WHEREAS  certain rules, laws and regulations, made heretofore for the Punjab, acquired the 
force of law under the provisions of section 25 of the  1[Indian Councils Act, 186 1; and whereas it is expedient 
to declare which of the said rules, laws and regulations shal l henceforth be in force in the P unjab, and to 
amend, consolidate or repeal others of the said rules, orders and regulations; It is hereby enacted as 
follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called “The Punjab Laws Act, 1872.  
2. Local extent. Commencement .—It extends to the territories  2[which immediately before the 1st 
November, 1956, were compris ed in the States of P unjab and Delhi], but not so as to alter the effect of any 
regulations made for any parts of the said territories under the  3Statute 33 Vict .  Section 1;  
And it shall come into force on the first day of June, 1872.  
3. Enactments in force .—The Regulations, Acts and orders specified in the First Schedule hereto 
annexed are in force in the  4[territories to which this Act extends] to the extent specified in the third column 
of the said Schedule.  
4. Enactments repealed .—[Rep. by the Second Repealing and Amending Act, 1914  (17 of 
1914),  Section 3 and Schedule II .] 
Civil Judicature  
 5[5. Decisions in certain cases to be according to Native law .—In questions regarding succession, 
special property of females, betrothal, marriage, divorce, dower, adoption, guardianship, minority, bastardy, 
family relations, wills, legacies, gifts, partitions, or any religious usage or institution  the rule of decision 
shall be — 
(1) any cus tom applicable to the parties concerned, which is not contrary to justice, equity or good 
conscience, and has not been by this or any other enactment altered or abolished , 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAWS ACT, 1872.pdf - page 4]
 equity or good 
conscience, and has not been by this or any other enactment altered or abolished , and has not been 
declared to be void by any competent authority;  
                                                           
1. Rep.  by the Government of India Act, 1915.  
2. Subs.  for “constituting the States of Punjab and Delhi” by 2 A.L.O., 1956 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1956).  
3. Rep. by the Government of India Act, 1915.  
4. Subs.  by s. 2 A.L.O., 1956 for “States of Punjab and Delhi” (w.e.f. 1 -11-1956).  
5. Subs . by Act 12 of 1878, s. 1, for the section 5.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAWS ACT, 1872.pdf - page 5]
5 
 (2) the Muhammadan law, in cases where the parties are Muhammadans, and the Hindu law, in cases 
where the parties are Hindus, except in so far as such law has been altered or abolished by legislative 
enactment, or is opposed to the provisions of this Act, or has been modifie d by any such custom as is 
above referred to.]  
6. Decisions in cases not specially provided for .—In cases not otherwise specially provided for, the 
Judges shall decide according  to justice, equity and good conscience.  
7. Local customs and mercantile usages when valid .—All local customs and mercantile usages shall 
be regarded as valid, unless they are c ontrary to justic e, equity or good conscience, or have, before the 
passing of this Act, been declared to be void by any competent authority.  
1[Descent Of Jaghi rs] 
8. Repealed. —[Subs. by the Punjab Descent of Jaghirs Act , 1900 ( Pun. Act 4 of 1900 ), s. 2.]  
8A. Repealed .— [Subs. by the Punjab Descent of Jaghirs Act, 1900 ( Pun. Act 4 of 1900 ), s. 2.] 
8B. Repealed . — [Subs. by the Punjab Descent of Jaghirs Act, 1900 ( Pun. Act 4 of 1900 ), s. 2.] 
8C. Repealed . — [Subs. by the Punjab Descent of Jaghirs Act, 1900 ( Pun. Act 4 of 1900 ), s. 2.] 
Pre-Emption  
9. Repealed .— [Repealed by the Punjab Pre -emption Act, 1905  (Punjab Act 2 of 1905 ), Section 2 (1).] 
10. Repealed .— [Repealed by the Punjab Pre -emption Act, 1905  (Punjab Act 2 of 1905 ), Section 2 (1).] 
11. Repealed .— [Repealed by the Punjab Pre -emption Act, 1905  (Punjab Act 2 of 1905 ), Section 2 (1).] 
12. Repealed .— [Repealed by the Punjab Pre -emption Act, 1905  (Punjab Act 2 of  1905 ), Section 2 (1).] 
13. Repealed .— [Repealed by the Punjab Pre -emption Act, 1905  (Punjab Act 2 of 1905 ), Section 2 (1).] 
14. Repealed .— [Repealed by the Punjab Pre -emption Act, 1905  (Punjab Act 2 of 1905 ), Section 2 (1).] 
15. Repealed .— [Repealed by the Punjab Pre -emption Act, 1905  (Punjab Act 2 of 1905 ), Section 2 (1).] 
16. Repealed .— [Repealed by the P
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAWS ACT, 1872.pdf - page 5]
Pre -emption Act, 1905  (Punjab Act 2 of 1905 ), Section 2 (1).] 
16. Repealed .— [Repealed by the Punjab Pre -emption Act, 1905  (Punjab Act 2 of 1905 ), Section 2 (1).] 
17. Repealed .— [Repealed by the Punjab Pre -emption Act, 1905  (Punjab Act 2 of 1905 ), Section 2 (1).] 
18. Repealed .— [Repealed b y the Punjab Pre -emption Act, 1905  (Punjab Act 2 of 1905 ), Section 2 (1).] 
19. Repealed .— [Repealed by the Punjab Pre -emption Act, 1905  (Punjab Act 2 of 1905 ), Section 2 (1).] 
20. Repealed .— [Repealed by the Punjab Pre -emption Act, 1905  (Punjab Act 2 of 1905 ), Section 2 (1).] 
                                                           
1. Rep. by the Punjab Jaghirs Act, 1941 (Pun. Act 5 of 1941), s. 13. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAWS ACT, 1872.pdf - page 6]
6 
 Decrees Concerning Land  
21. Copy of decrees affecting land to be forwarded to Deputy Commissioner .— [Repealed by the 
Punjab Land Revenue Act, 1887  (17 of 1887 ).] 
Insolvency  
22. Repealed .— [Repealed by the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1907  (3 of 1907 ).] 
23. Repealed .— [Repealed by the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1907  (3 of 1907 ).] 
24. Repealed .— [Repeal ed by the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1907  (3 of 1907 ).] 
25. Repealed .— [Repealed by the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1907  (3 of 1907 ).] 
26. Repealed .— [Repealed by the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1907  (3 of 1907 ).] 
27. Repealed .— [Repealed by the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1907  (3 of 1907 ).] 
28. Repealed .— [Repealed by the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1907  (3 of 1907 ).] 
29. R epealed .— [Repealed by the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1907  (3 of 1907 ).] 
30. Repealed .— [Repealed by the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1907  (3 of 1907 ).] 
31. Repealed .— [Repealed by the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1907  (3 of 1907 ).] 
32. Repealed .— [Repeal ed by the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1907  (3 of 1907 ).] 
33. Saving of previous insolvency proceedings .— [Repealed by the Amending Act, 1891  (12 of 1891 ).] 
Minors and the Court of Wards  
34. Repealed .— [Repealed by the Punjab Court of Wards Act, 1903  (Punjab Act 2 of 1903 ), Section 
2(1).] 
35. Repealed .— [Repealed by the Punjab Court of Wards Act, 1903  (Punjab Act 2 of 1903 ), Section 
2(1).] 
36. Repealed .— [Repealed by the Punjab Court of Wards Act, 1903  (Punjab Act 2 of 1903 ), Section 
2(1).] 
37. Repealed .— [Repealed by the Punjab Court of Wards Act, 1903  (Punjab Act 2 of 1903 ), Section 
2(1).] 
38. Repealed .— [Repealed by the Punjab Court of Wards Act, 1903  (Punjab Act 2 of 1903 ), Section 
2(1).] 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAWS ACT, 1872.pdf - page 7]
7 
 39. Indian Penal Code to apply to offences committed previous to 1st January, 1862 .—The 
provisions of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), with the exception of Chapter VI, shall b e applicable to 
all offences committed before first January, 1862, in territory which was, at the time of the commission of 
such offence, subject to the State Government of the Punjab:  
Saving of privileges conferred on certain Chiefs .—Provided that nothing  contained in this section 
shall affect any privilege conferred on certain Chiefs in the Punjab by the Central Government, or by the 
Board of Administration for the affairs of the Punjab, nor any indemnity or pardon granted by competent 
authority.  
1[39A. Power to establish system of village -watchmen and municipal -watchmen , and to make 
rules .—The State Government may establish a system of village -watchmen or municipal -watchmen in  any 
part of the territories under its administration, and in furtherance of this object may, from time to time, make 
rules to provide for the following matters: — 
(a) the definition of the limits of watchmen's beats;  
(b) the determination of the several grades of watchmen, and the number of each grade to be 
appointed to each beat;  
(c) the appointment, suspension, dismissal and resignation of watchmen of each grade;  
(d) the equipment and discipline of, and the control and supervision over, such watchmen;  
(e) the conferring upon them, and the exercise by them, of any powers and the enjoyment by them 
of any protection or privilege, which may be exercised and enjoyed by a police -officer under any law 
for the time being in force;  
(f) the performance by them of such duties relating to police, sanitation or statistics, or for the benefit 
of the village communities or municipalities within their respective beats, as the State Government thinks 
fit; 
(g) the exercise of authority over, and the rendering of aid to, su ch watchmen by headmen of the 
villages or members of the Munic
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAWS ACT, 1872.pdf - page 7]
ver, and the rendering of aid to, su ch watchmen by headmen of the 
villages or members of the Municipal Committees of the towns comprised in their respective beats;  
(h) the performance, by the headmen of villages comprised in the beat of any watchmen, of any of 
the duties of a village -watchma n in aid of, or substitution for, such watchman;  
(i) the exercise, by such village -headmen for the purposes referred to in clauses ( g) and ( h), or by 
members of Municipal Committees for the purposes referred to in clause ( g) of this section, of any of 
the powers, and the enjoyment by such headmen or members of any privilege or protection, of a                         
village -watchman, or a municipal -watchman, as the case may be;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 24 of 1881, s. 2, for ss. 39A and 39B.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAWS ACT, 1872.pdf - page 8]
8 
 (j) the determination of the rate at which, and the mode in which, watchmen shall be paid, and, in 
the case of village -watchmen, of the mode in which their pay, the expenses of their equipment, and other 
charges connected with the village -watchman -system sha ll be provided for, whether out of cesses or funds 
already leviable or available in the villages comprised in the beat, or by a special tax in money or kind to 
be imposed on any class of persons residing or owning property in, or resorting to, such village s, or partly 
in one of these ways and partly in the other;  
(k) the collection with or without the aid of the village -headmen, and by any process available for 
the realisation of the land -revenue, of any tax imposed under clause ( j) of this section, and the  application 
of, and the mode of accounting for, the same; and generally for ; 
(l) the efficient working of the system of village -watchmen or municipal -watchmen:  
Provided — 
first, that the rules to be made regarding the appointment of village -watchmen shall allow to the 
headmen of the villages comprised in the beat to which such a watchman is to be appointed a power of 
nomination to be exercised in such manner and subject to such reasonable conditions as may be 
prescribed by such rules;  
secondly , that the rul es to be made under clause ( j) of this section with regard to village -watchmen 
shall include provisions for recording and securing due consideration of the views and opinions on the 
matters therein referred to of the headmen of the villages comprised in ea ch beat.  
39B. Obligation to assist watchmen and headmen .—Every person is bound to render to a                          
village -watchman, or municipal watchman, or village -headm an discharging the duties of a police -officer 
under the rules made hereunder, all the assistance which he is bound to render to a police -officer.  
Person obstructing watchman or headman may be arrested without warrant .—Any person w
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAWS ACT, 1872.pdf - page 8]
ce -officer.  
Person obstructing watchman or headman may be arrested without warrant .—Any person who 
obstructs such watchman  or headman in the discharge of such duties may be arrested without warrant by a 
police -officer or by any watchman or village -headman empowered in this behalf by the State Government.]  
1[39C. Power to direct local taxation for payment of police enrolled under Act 5 of                                  
1861 .—Whenever it seems to the State Government expedient that the duties of watch -and-ward and other 
internal police -service of a ny town or village not comprised within the limits of a municipality or within the 
limits of a village -watchman's beat as defined under the power conferred by section 39A should be performed 
by police -officers enrolled under  2Act V of 1861, the State Government may direct that the said service shall 
be so performed, and may also  3*** direct that the charges for the time being fixed by such Government on 
account of such service shall be defrayed by taxes to be levied in such town or village.  
                                                           
1. Ins.  by Act 15 of 1875, s. 2.  
2. The Police Act.  
3. The words “subject to the control of the G.G. in C.”  rep. by the A.O. 1937.  
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAWS ACT, 1872.pdf - page 9]
9 
 39D. Notice of taxes proposed to be levied .—When the State Government has, under section 39C, 
directed that taxes shall be levied in any town or village, the Deputy Co mmissioner may from time to time 
issue a public notice in such town or village explaining the nature of the taxes he proposes to levy.  
Objections to taxation .—Any inhabitant of such town or village objecting to the taxation thus proposed 
may, within fiftee n days from the publication of such notice, send his objection in writing to the Deputy 
Commissioner.  
Procedure thereon .—After the expiry of fifteen days from the publication of the notice, the Deputy 
Commissioner may submit for the information of the Stat e Government a report of the proposal made by 
him. Such report shall contain specific mention of the objections (if any) urged to his proposal and his 
opinion on such objections.  
No such tax shall be levied until it has, upon such report, been approved by the State Government.  
39E. Power to fix rates of tax .—When any such tax has been so approved by the State Government, 
the Deputy Commissioner may from time to time, subject to such rules consistent with this Act as the State 
Government may from time to time prescribe, determine the rates at which it is to be levied.  
39F. Power to make rules for colle ction of taxes .—The State Government may from time to time make 
rules to provide for the collection of such taxes by any process available for the realisation of the land -
revenue and to regulate the application and mode of accounting for the same.  
39G. Validation clause .—[Rep. by the Amending Act,  1891  (12 of 1891 ).] 
Honorary police -officers  
40. State Government may confer powers of police -officer .— The State Government may, if it thinks 
fit, confer on any person any of the powers which may be exercised by a police -officer under any Act for 
the time being in force,  1[and may withdraw any powers so conferred].  
Track law 
41. Trackers may call for assist
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAWS ACT, 1872.pdf - page 9]
n force,  1[and may withdraw any powers so conferred].  
Track law 
41. Trackers may call for assistance in carrying on tracks .—When an offence is, has been, or may 
reasonabl y be supposed to have been committed, and the tracks of the persons who may reasonably be 
supposed to have committed such offence, or of any animal or other property reasonably supposed to be 
connected with such offence, are followed to a spot within the im mediate vicinity of a village, the person 
following such tracks may call upon any headman or village -watchman in such village to assist in carrying 
on the tracks.  
42. Penalty fo r withholding assistance or conniving at offence or escape .—If such headman or 
watchman do not forthwith give such assistance, or if the inhabitants of such village do not afford full 
opportunity for search in their houses for the offenders, or, if from th e circumstances of the case, there shall 
appear good reason to believe that the inhabitants of such village, or any of them were conniving at the  
offence or at the escape of the offenders, and such offenders cannot be traced beyond the village, the 
Magistr ate of the district may, with the previous sanction of the Commissioner of the Division inflict a fine 
upon such village not exceeding five hundred rupees, except in the case of stolen property over five hundred 
rupees in value, in which case the fine shal l not exceed the value of such property.  
Appeal to High Court .—An appeal against all convictions under this section shall lie to the High Court 
of Punjab  2[and Haryana].  
Fine may be awarded to injured parties, and fee to tracker .—The Magistrate may direct that the fine 
imposed under this section or any part thereof shall be awarded to any persons injured by such offence in 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 12 of 1878, s. 5.  
2. Ins. by Punjab Adaptations of Laws (State and Concurrent Subjects) Order, 1968 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1966).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAWS ACT, 1872.pdf - page 9]
daptations of Laws (State and Concurrent Subjects) Order, 1968 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1966).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAWS ACT, 1872.pdf - page 10]
10 
 compensation for such injury; and, in the case of stolen property recovered through the agency of a tracker,  
may direct that such property be not restored to its owner until he has paid to such tracker such fee, not 
exceeding one -fourth part of the value of the stolen property, as  to the said Magistrate seems fit.  
Slaughter Of kine 
43. Control of slaughter of kine and sale of beef .—The slaughter of kine and the sale of beef shall not 
take place except  1[* * *] subject to rules to be from time to time, either generally or in any particular 
instance, prescribed by the State Government.  
Armed men and foreign vagrants  
44. Control of entry into towns of bands of armed men .—No band of armed men shall enter into any 
city or town, except  1[* * *] subject to rules to be from time to time, either generally or in any particular 
instance, prescribed by the State Government.  
45. Powers of Magistrate of district as to foreign vagrants .—The Magistrate of the district may, if he 
considers that any band of foreign vagrants is likely to occasion a breach of the peace or to commit any 
offence under the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), prohibit such band from entering his district; or, if they 
are already in his district, may require them within  a given time to leave it.  
46. Surveillance, etc., of band failing to comply with Magistrate's order .— If any such band fail to 
comply with the orders of the said Magistrate wit hin the prescribed period, he shall report the matter to the 
State Government, and the State Government may give such directions for the surveillance, control or 
deportation of such band , as to it seems fit.  
Miscellaneous  
47. Crossing of streams on buoys or skins .—No person shall cross any river or stream on a buoy or 
inflated skin, nor shall have in h is possession or custody any buoy or skin for the purpose of being used in 
crossing any river or stream, except  1[* * *] subject to rules to be from time to time, either genera
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAWS ACT, 1872.pdf - page 10]
ossing any river or stream, except  1[* * *] subject to rules to be from time to time, either generally or in 
any particular instance, prescribed by the State Government.  
48. Use of pasturage or natural product of Government land .—No person shall make use of the 
pasturage or other natural product of any land being the property of the Government, except wi th the consent 
and subject to rules to be from time to time, either generally or in any particular instance, prescribed                
by 2[the Government concerned].  
49. Growing, selling or keeping opium .—[Rep. by the Opium Act, 1878  (1 of 1878 ), s. 2 and Schedule .] 
3[50. Power to make rules as to matters mentioned in sections 43 to 48 .—The Stat e Government may 
from time to time make rules as to the matters mentioned in  4[sections 43 to 48] inclusive.  
Existing rules .—All existing rules upon such matters, which might have been made under this section 
had it been in force, shall be deemed to have b een made hereunder.  
50A. Conditions of validity of rules hereafter made under this Act .—5[(1)] 6[Rules made under this 
Act shall not be valid unless]: — 
                                                           
1. The words “with the consent and”  omitted  by Act 12 of 1878, s. 6. 
2. Subs.  by the A.O. 1950 for “the Govt. for whose purposes the land is vested in His Majesty”.  
3. Subs. by Act 15 of 1875,  s. 3, for s . 50. 
4. Subs . by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and Schedule II, for  “sections forty -three to forty -nine”.  
5. Ins. by Act 4 of 2005, s. 2 and Schedule . 
6. Subs. by the A.O. 1937 for “All rules hereafter made by the L.G. under any power conferred by this Act shall be subject to the 
control of the G.G. in C. and no such rule s shall be valid unless ”. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAWS ACT, 1872.pdf - page 11]
11 
 (a) they are consistent with the laws for the time being in force in the  1[territories to which this Act 
extends];  
(b) they are published in the Official Gazette;  
2[*                                           *                                                  *                                                       *] 
3[(2) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before the State Legislature.]  
50B. Penalties for breach of such rules .—The State Government may, in making any rule under any 
of the powers conferred by this Act, attach to the breach of it, in addition to any other consequences that 
would ensue from such breach, a punishment on conviction before a Magistrate not exceeding six months' 
imprisonment, or three hundred rupees fine, or both.]  
4[51. Republication of rules and orders .—All rules which the State  Government is empowered to issue 
under this Act, and all circulars issued by the High Court of Punjab  5[and Haryana], shall be republished 
from time to time by the State Government, and upon such republication, shall be arranged in the order of 
their subj ect-matter, and all such alterations or amendments as may have been made since the last preceding 
publication thereof, or may have become necessary or advisable, shall be embodied therewith, and upon 
such republication all such rules and circulars previous ly issued shall be repealed.]  
52. Recovery of advances made by Government .—[Rep. by the Northern India Takkavi Act,                      
1879  (10 of 1879 ).] 
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by for “States of Punjab and Delhi” by 2 A.L.O., 1956 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1956).  
2. Clause ( c) of Section 50A  repealed  by Act 4 of 1914 . 
3. Ins. by Act 4 of 2005, s. 2 and Schedule.  
4. Subs.  by Punjab Act 1 of 1910, for the original s. 51. 
5. Ins. by Punjab Adaptation of Laws (State and Concurrent Subjects) Order, 1968 (w.e.f
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAWS ACT, 1872.pdf - page 11]
inal s. 51. 
5. Ins. by Punjab Adaptation of Laws (State and Concurrent Subjects) Order, 1968 (w.e.f. 1 -11-1966).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAWS ACT, 1872.pdf - page 12]
12 
 1[SCHEDULE  I 
ENACTMENTS DECLARED TO BE IN FORCE  
Explanation .—This schedule does not refer to any Act which is in its terms applicable to the Punjab, or 
which has been extended to the Punjab by competent authority.  
No. and year  Title  Extent to which the enactment is in force  
2[Reg. I of 
1798  A Regulation to prevent Fraud and Injustice in Conditional Sales of 
Land under Deeds of bai -bil-wuffa, or other Deeds of the same nature.  The whole, except such parts as relate to 
interest.  
3[*                                                 *                                                 *                                                 *                                          *] 
2[Reg. 
XVII of 
1806  A Regulation for extending to the State of Benares the Rates of Interest 
on future Loans and Provisions relative thereto, contained in Regulation 
XV, 1793; also for a general extension of the period fixed by Regulations 
I, 1798, and XXXIV, 1803, for the re demption of Mortgages and 
Conditional Sales of Land, under Deeds of bai -bil-wuffa Kutcubaleb, or 
other similar designation.      Sections 7 and 8.  
4[*                                                *                                                    *                                               *                                           *] 
Reg. XI of 
1825  A Regulation for declaring the Rules to be observed in determining 
Claims to Lands gained by alluvion or by dereliction of a river or the 
sea.  The w hole.  
 1[*                                              *                                                          *                                            *                                       *] 
 
Rules for the conservancy of Forests and Jungles in the Hill Districts of 
the Punjab Territories, sanctioned by the Governor General in Council 
in letter of the Secretary to the Government of India, No. 1789, 21st May 
1855.     The whole.  
 
                                   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAWS ACT, 1872.pdf - page 12]
overnment of India, No. 1789, 21st May 
1855.     The whole.  
 
                                                           
1. As so much of Act 4 of 1872 as related to Bengal Regulations 5 of 1817 and 20 of 1825 and Acts 40 of 1858 and 17 of 1861 
was rep. by Acts 6 of 1878, 10 of 1882, 8 of 1890 and 12 of 1891, respectively, the references to those Regulations and Acts in 
this Schedule are  omitted . 
2. See the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (4 of 1882), ss. 1, 2 and Schedul e. 
3.  So much of the First Schedule as relates to Bengal State Offences Regulation, 1804 (10 of 1804), was  rep. by Act 4 of 1922.  
4. Entry relating to Bengal Regulation 3 of 1818 was  omitted  by Act 42 of 195 3 s. 4 and Schedule III.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB LAWS ACT, 1872.pdf - page 13]
13 
 SCHEDULE  II 
Enactments Repealed .—[Rep. by the Second Repealing and Amending Act, 1914  (17 of 1914).]  
———  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887 . 
___________  
ARRANGEMENT  OF SECTION S. 
__________  
SECTIONS.  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
 1. Title, extent and commencement.  
 2. Power to make rules in anticipation of commencement.  
 3. Repealed.  
 4. Definitions.  
CHAPTER  II 
RIGHT OF OCCUPANCY  
5. Tenants having right of occupancy.  
6. Right of occupancy of other tenants recorded as having the right before passing of Punjab Tenancy 
Act, 1868.  
7.  Right of occupancy in land taken in exchange.  
8.  Establishment of right of occupancy on grounds other than those expressly stated in Act.  
9.  Right of occupancy not to be acquired by mere lapse of time. 
10. Right of occupancy not to be acquired by joint owner in land held in joint ownership.  
11. Continuance of existing occupancy rights.  
CHAP TER III  
RENT  
Rents generally . 
12. Respective rights of landlord and tenant to produce.  
13. Commutation and alteration of rent.  
14. Payments for land occupied without consent of landlord.  
15. Collection of rents of undivided property.  
Produce  – rent s. 
16. Presumption with respect to produce removed before division or appraisement.  
17. Appointment of referee for division or appraisement.  
18. Appointment of assessors and procedure of referee.  
19. Procedure after division or appraisement.  
20. Enhancement  of produce  - rents of occupancy tenants.  
21. Reduction of rents referred to in the last foregoing section.  
Cash -rents paid by tenants  having rights of occupancy  
22. Enhancement of cash rents of occupancy tenants.  
23. Reduction of rent referred to in the last foregoing section.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 2]
2 
 SECTIONS.  
General P rovisions relating to Suits  for E nhancement or Reduction of R ent. 
24. Enhancement and reduction of rent by suit.  
25. Discretion as to extent of enhancement or reduction.  
26. Time for enhancement or reduction to take effect.  
Adjustment of R ents expressed  in terms of the L and-revenue.  
27. Adjustment of rents expressed in terms of the land revenue.  
Alteration of R ent on A lteration of A rea. 
28. Alteration of rent on alterati on of area.  
Remission . 
29. Remission of rent by Courts decreeing arrears.  
30. Remission and suspension of rent consequent on like treatment of land revenue.  
Deposits . 
31. Power to deposit rent in certain cases with Revenue officer.  
32. Effect of depositi ng rent.  
Recovery of R ent from attached produce . 
33. Recovery of rent from attached produce.  
Leases for P eriod exceeding Term of Assessment of Land -revenue.  
34. Treatment of leases for period exceeding or equal to term of assessment of land revenue.  
CHAPTER IV  
RELINQUISHMENT, ABANDONMENT AND EJECTMENT . 
Relinquishment . 
35. Relinquishment by tenant for a fixed term.  
36. Relinquishment by any other tenant.  
37. Relinquishment of part only of a tenancy.  
Abandonment  
38. Abandonment of tenancy by occupancy  tenant.  
Ejectment.  
LIABILITY TO EJECTMENT  
 39. Grounds of ejectment of occupancy tenant.  
 40. Grounds of ejectment of tenant for a fixed term. 
 41. Ejectment of tenant from year to year.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 3]
3 
 SECTIONS.  
PROCEDURE ON EJECTMENT . 
 42. Restriction on ejectment.  
 43. Application to Revenue officer for ejectment.  
 44. Ejectment for failure to satisfy decree for arrear of rent.  
 45. Ejectment of tenant from year to year by notice.  
 46. Power to make rules.  
GENERAL PROVISIONS RESPECTING EJECTMENT . 
47. Time for ejectment.  
48. Relief against forfeiture. 
49. Rights of ejected tenants in respect of crops and land prepared for sowing.  
RELIEF FOR WRONGFUL DESPOSSESSION . 
50. Relief of wrongful dispossession or ejectment.  
51. Bar of relief by suit under section 9, Act I of 1877.  
Power to vary D ates prescribed by this Chapter.  
 52. Power for local Government to fix dates for certain purposes.  
CHAPTER V 
ALIENATION OF, AND SUCCESSION TO,  RIGHT OF OCCUPANCY . 
Alienation.  
53. Private transfer of right of occupancy under section 5 by tenant.  
54. Procedure on foreclosure of mortgage of right of occupancy under section 5.  
55. Sale of right of occupancy under section 5 in execution of decree.  
56. Transfer of right of occupanc y under any other section than section 5.  
57. Rights and liabilities of transferee of right of occupancy.  
58. Subletting.  
Succession . 
59. Succession to right of occupancy.  
Irregular transfers.  
 60. Irregular transfer of right of occupancy.  
CHAPTER VI . 
IMPROVEMENTS AND COMPENSATION.  
Improvements by L andlords . 
 61. Improvements by landlords on tenancies of occupancy- tenants.  
 62. Enhancement of rent in consideration of an improvement made by a landlord on the tenancy of an 
occupancy -tenant.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 4]
4 
 SECTIONS.  
Improvements by T enants . 
 63. Title of occupancy -tenant to make improvements. 
 64. Title of tenants not having right of occupancy to make improvements. 
 65. Improvements made before commencement of this Act.  
 66. Improvements begun in anticipation of eject ment.  
 67. Tender of lease for twenty years to tenant to be a bar to right to compensation.  
 68. Liability to pay compensation for improvements to tenants on ejectment or on enhancement of his     
rent. 
Compensation for Disturbance of  Clearing T enants . 
69. Compensation for disturbance of clearing tenants.  
Procedure in determining C ompensation.  
70. Determination of compensation by Revenue Court.  
71. Determination of compensation by Revenue -officers.  
72. Matters to be regarded in assessment of compensation for improvements. 
73. Form of compensation.  
Relief in case of ejectment before  determination of C ompensation  
 74. Relief in case of ejectment before determination of compensation.  
CHAPTER VII . 
JURISDICTION AND PROCEDURE . 
Jurisdiction . 
75. Revenue -officers.  
76. Applications and proceedings cognizable by Revenue -officers.  
FIRST GROUP.  
SECOND  GROUP . 
THIRD  GROUP . 
77. Revenue Courts and suits cognizable by them.  
FIRST GROUP.  
SECOND  GROUP . 
THIRD  GROUP . 
Administrative C ontrol . 
78. Superin tendence and control of Revenue -officers and Revenue Courts.  
79. Power to distribute business and withdraw and transfer cases.  
Appeal, Review and Revision . 
80. Appeals.  
81. Limitation for appeals.  
82. Review by Revenue officers.  
83. Computation of periods limited for appeals and applications for review.  
84. Power to call for, examine and revise proceedings of Revenue o fficers and Revenue Courts.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 5]
5 
  
SECTIONS.  
Procedure.  
85. Procedure of Revenue o fficers.  
86. Persons by whom appearances may be made before Revenue officers as such and not as Revenue 
Courts.  
 87. Costs.  
 88. Procedure of Revenue Courts.  
 89. Power of Revenue -officer or Revenue Court to summon persons.  
 90. Mode of service of summons.  
 91. Mode of service of notice, order or proclamation or copy thereof.  
 92. M ode of maki ng proclamation.  
 93. Joinder of tenants as parties to proceeding s relating to rent.   
 94. Exception of suits under this Act from operation of certain enactments.  
 95. Payment into Court of money admitted to be due to a third person.  
 96. Execution of decree s for arrears of rent.  
 97. Prohibition of imprisonment of tenants in execution of decrees for arrears of rent.  
 98. Power to refer party to Civil Court.  
 99. Power to refer to Chief  Court questions as to jurisdiction.  
 100. Power of Chief  Court to validate proceedings had  under mistake as to jurisdiction.  
Miscellaneous . 
101. Place of sitting.  
102. Holidays.  
103. Discharge of duties of Collector dying or being disabled.  
104. Retention of powers by Revenue officer on transfer.  
105. C onferment of powers of Revenue o fficer or Revenue Court.  
106. Power for Financial Commissioner  to make rules.  
107. Rules to be made after previous publication.  
108. Powers exercis able by Financial Commissioner from time to time.  
CHAPTER VIII 
EFFECT OF THIS ACT ON RECORDS -OF-RIGHTS AND AGREEMENTS . 
109. Nullity of certain entries in records -of-rights.  
110. Nullity of certain agreements contrary to the Act.  
111. Saving of other agreements when in writing.  
112. Effect of certain entries made in records -of-rights before November, 1871.  
THE SCHEDULE.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 6]
6 
 THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887  
ACT NO. 16 OF  1887  
PASSED  BY THE  GOVERNOR  GENERAL  OF INDIA I N COUNCIL . 
(Received the assent of the Governor General on the 23rd
__________  September, 1887.)  
An Act to amend the Law relating to the Tenancy of Land in the Punjab.  
WHEREAS  it is expedient  to amend  the law relating  to the tenancy  of land in the Punjab;  It is hereby  
enacted  as follows:  — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Punjab                          
Tenancy Act, 1887.  
(2) It extent to the whole of the territories (including the pargana of Spiti) for the time being 
administered by the Lieutenant – Governor of the Punjab, expect the Hazara district; and  
(3) It shall come into force on such day as the Local Government, with the previous sanction of the 
Governor General in Council, may by notification appointment in this behalf.  
2. Power to make rules in anticipation of commencement. — Any power conferred by this Act on 
the Financial Commissioner to make rules, and on the Local Government to sanction them, may be 
exercised at any time after the passing of this Act, but a rule so made shall not take effect till the 
commencement of this Act.  
3. Repeal.— The enactments mentioned in the schedule are repealed to the extent specified in the third 
column thereof.  
4. Definitions.—In this Act, unless there is something repugnant in the subject or context, — 
(1) “Land” means  land which is not occupied as the site of any building in a town or village and is 
occupied or has been let for ag ricultural purposes or for purposes subservient to agriculture, or for 
pasture, and includes the sites of buildings and other structures on such land;  
(2) “pay”, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, includes, when used with reference 
to rent, “deliver” and “render”, with their grammatical variations and cognate expressions:  
(3) “rent” means whatever is payable to a land
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 6]
eir grammatical variations and cognate expressions:  
(3) “rent” means whatever is payable to a land -lord in money, kind or service by a tenant on account 
of the use or occupation of land held by him :  
(4) “arrear of re nt” means rent which remains unpaid after the date on which it becomes payable:  
(5) “tenant” means a person who holds land under another person, and is, or put for a special contract 
would be, liable to pay rent for that land to that other person ; but it does not include — 
(a) an inferior landowner, or  
(b) a mortgagee of the rights of landowner, or  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 7]
7 
 (c) a person to whom a holding has been transferred, or an estate or holding has been let in farm, 
under the Punjab Land- revenue Act, 1887 ( XVII of 1887), for the recovery of an arrear of land -
revenue or of a sum recoverable as such an arrear, or   
(d) a person who takes from the Government a lease of unoccupied land for the purpose of                    
subletting it:  
(6) “landlord” means a person under whom a tenant holds land, and to whom the tenant is, or but for a 
special contract would be, liable to pay rent for that land:  
(7) “tenant” and “landlord” include the predecessors and successors in interest of a tenant and landlord 
respectively:  
(8) “tena ncy” means a parcel of land held by a tenant of a landlord under one lease or one set of 
conditions:  
(9) “estate”. “landowner” and “holding” have the meanings respectively assigned to those words in the 
Punjab Land- revenue Act, 1887 (XVII of 1887) : 
(10) “l and-revenue” means land -revenue assessed under any law for the time being in force or 
assessable under the Punjab Land -revenue Act, 1887, and includes.—  
(a) any rate imposed in respect of the increased value of land due to irrigation, and  
(b) any sum paya ble in respect of land, by way of quit -rent or of commutation for service, to the 
Government or to a person to whom the Government has assigned the right to receive the payment:  
(11) “ rates and cesses” means rates and cesses which are primarily payable by  landowners, and 
includes — 
(a) the local rate, if any, payable under the Punjab Local Rates Act, 1878 (v of 1878);  
(b) the local rate, if any, payable under the Punjab District Boards Act, 1883 (XX of 1883) , and any 
fee leviable under section 33 of that Act from landowners for the use of or benefits derived from such 
works as are referred to in section 20, clauses ( i) and ( j), of that Act;  
(c) any annual rate chargeable on owners of lands under section 59 of the Northern India Canal and 
Drainage Act, 1873  (VII
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 7]
geable on owners of lands under section 59 of the Northern India Canal and 
Drainage Act, 1873  (VIII of 1873) ; 
(d) the zaildari and village -officers’ cesses; and  
(e) sums payable on account of village -expenses : 
(12) “village -cess” includes any cess, contribution or due which is customarily leviable within an 
estate and is neither a payment for the  use of private property or for personal service nor imposed by or 
under any enactment for the time being in force:  
(13) “village -officer”  means a chief - headman, headman or patwari : 
(14) “Revenue -officer” or “Revenue Court”, in any provision of this Act, means a Revenue -officer or 
Revenue Court having authority under this Act to discharge the functions of a Revenue -officer or 
Revenue Court, as the case may be, under that provision:  
(15) “jagirdar” includes any person, other than a village -servant, to whom  the land -revenue of any land 
has been assigned in whole or in part by the Government or by an officer of the Government:  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 8]
8 
 (16) “legal practitioner ” means any legal practitioner  within the meaning of the Legal Practitioners Act 
1879 ( XVIII of 1879) except a  mukhtar:  
(17) “agricultural year” means the year commencing on the sixteenth day of June, or on such other 
date as the Local Government may by notification appoint for any local area;  
(18) “notification” means a notification published by authority of the Local Government in the official 
Gazette : and  
(19) “improvement” means, with reference to a tenancy, any work which is suitable to the tenancy and 
consistent with the conditions on which it is held, by which it is held, by which the value of the tenancy 
has been and continues to be increased, and which, if not executed on the tenancy, is either executed 
directly for its benefit, or is, after execution, made directly beneficial to it;  
Explanation I. — It includes, among other  things,  
(a)  The construction of wells and other works for the storage or supply of water for agricultural 
purposes;  
(b) the construction of works for drainage and for protection against floods ;  
(c) the planting of tre es, the reclaiming, enclosing, levelling and terracing of land for agricultural 
purposes and other works of a like nature;  
(d) the erection of buildings required for the more convenient or profitable cultivation of a                  
tenancy; and  
(e) the renewal or re- construction of any of the foregoing works, or such alterations therein, or 
additions thereto, as are not of the nature of mere repairs and as durably increase their value;  
But it does not include such clearances, embankments, levellings, enclosures, temporary wells and 
water -channels as are made by tenants in the ordinary course of cultivation and without any special 
expenditure, or any other benefit accruing to land from the ordinary operations of husbandry;  
Explanation II.—A work whi ch benefits several tenancies may be deemed to be. with respect to each 
of them, an improvement;  
Exp
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 8]
benefits several tenancies may be deemed to be. with respect to each 
of them, an improvement;  
Explanation III.—A work executed by a tenant is not an improvement if it substantially diminishes the 
value of any other part of his landlord’s property.  
CHAPTER II.  
RIGHT OF OCCUPANCY.  
5. Tenants having right of occupancy.—( 1) A tenant — 
(a) who at the commencement of this Act has for more than two generations in the male line of 
descent through a grandfather or grand- uncle and for a period of not less than twenty years been 
occupying land paying no rent thereof beyond the amount of the land -revenue thereof and the rates 
and cesses for the time being chargeable thereon, or  
(b) who having owned land, and having ceased to be landowner thereof otherwise than by 
forfeiture to the Government or than by any voluntary act, has, since he ceased to b e landowner, 
continuously occupied the land, or  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 9]
9 
 (c) who, in a village or estate in which he settled along with, or was settled by, the founder thereof 
as a cultivator therein, occupied land on the twenty -first day of October, 1868, and has continuously 
occupied the land since that date, or  
(d) who, being jagirdar of the estate or any part of the estate in which the land occupied by him is 
situate, has continuously occupied the land for not less than twenty years, or , having been such 
jagirdar, occupied t he land while  he was jagirdar and has continuously occupied it for not less than 
twenty years,  
Has a right of occupancy in the land so occupied , unless, in the case of a tenant belonging to the 
class specified in clause ( c), the landlord proves that the tenant was settled on land previously cleared 
and brought under cultivation by, or at the expense of, the founder.  
 (2) If a tenant proves that he has continuously occupied land for thirty years and paid no rent there for 
beyond the amount of the land- revenue thereof and the rates and cesses for the time being chargeable 
thereon, it may be presumed that he has fulfilled the conditions of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1). 
(3) the words in that clause denoting natural relationship denote also relationship by adoption, 
including therein the customary appointment of an heir, and relationship by the usage of a religious community.  
6. Right of occupancy of other tenants recorded as having the right before passing of Punjab 
Tenancy Act, 1868.—A tenant recorded in a r ecord -of-rights sanctioned by the Local Government before 
the twenty first day of October, 1868, as a tenant having a right of occupancy in land which he has 
continuously occupied from the time of the preparation of that record, shall be deemed to have a right of 
occupancy in that land unless the contrary has been established by a decree of a competent Court in a suit 
instituted before the passing of this Act.  
7. Right of occu pancy in land taken in exchange .— If the ten
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 9]
ted before the passing of this Act.  
7. Right of occu pancy in land taken in exchange .— If the tenant has voluntarily exchanged the land, 
or any  portion of the land, formerly occupied by him for other land belonging to the same landlord, the 
land taken in exchange shall be held to be subject to the same right of occupancy as that to which the land 
given in exchange would have been subject if the e xchange had not taken place . 
8. Establishment of right of occupancy on grounds other than those expressly stated in                       
Act.—Nothing in the foregoing sections of this Chapter shall preclude any person from establishing a 
right of occupanc y on any ground other than the grounds specified in those sections.  
9. Right of occupancy not to be acquired by mere lapse of time. —No tenant shall acquire a right of 
occupancy by mere lapse of time.  
10. Right of occupancy not to be acquired by joint own er in land held in joint ownership. — In 
the absence of a custom to the contrary no one of several joint owners of land shall acquire a right of 
occupancy under this Chapter in land jointly owned by them.  
11. Continuance of exciting occupancy rights.—  Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing sections 
of this Chapter, a tenant who immediately before the commencement of this Act has a right of occupancy in any land under an enactment specified  in any line of the first column of the following table shall, whe n 
this Act comes into force, be held to have, for all the purposes of this Act, a right of occupancy in that 
land under the enactment specified in the same line of the second column of the table : — 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 10]
10 
 PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1868  
(XXVIII 1868)  THIS ACT.  
FIRST COLUMN  SECOND  COLUMN  
Section.  Clause.  Section.  Sub-Section.  Clause.  
5 (1) 5 (1) (a) 
5 (2) 5 (1) (b) 
5 (3) 5 (1) (c) 
5 (4) 5 (1) (d) 
6 ... 6 ... ... 
8 ... 8 ... ... 
CHAPTER  III 
RENT.  
Rents generally.  
12. Respective rights of landlord and tenant to produce .—(1) The rent for the time being payable 
in respect of a tenancy shall be the first charge on the produce thereof.  
(2) A tenant shall be entitled to tend, cut and harvest the produce of his tenancy in due course of 
husbandry without any interferen ce on the part of his landlord.  
(3) Except where rent is taken by division of the produce, the tenant shall be entitled to the exclusive 
possession of the produce.  
(4) Where rent is taken by division of the produce. — 
(a) the tenanat shall be  entitled to the exclusive possession of the wh ole produce until it is divided:  
(b) the landlord shall be entitled to be present at, and take part in, the division of the produce ; and  
(c) when the pro duce has been divided, the land lord shall be entitled to the possession or his share 
thereof.  
13. Commutation and alteration of rent.—( 1) Where rent is taken by any o f the following methods, 
namely :— 
(a) by division or appraisement of the produce,  
(b) by rates fixed with reference to the nature of the crops grown,  
(c) by a rate on a recognized measure of area,  
(d) by a rent in gross on the tenency, or  
(e) partly by one of the methods specified in clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) of this sub- section and partly 
by another or others of them,  
One of those methods shall not be commuted in whole or in part into another without the consent of 
both landlord and tenant.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 11]
11 
 (2) In the absence of a contract or a decree or order of competent authority to the contrary, a tenant 
whose rent is taken by any of the methods specified in clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) of sub- section ( 1), or by the 
method specified in clause ( d) of that sub -section, shall not be liable to pay for a tenancy rent at any 
higher rate, or of a higher amount, as the case may be, than the rat e or amount payable in respect of the 
tenancy for the preceding agricultural year.  
14. Payments for land occupied without consent of landlord.— Any person in possession of land 
occupied without the consent of the landlord shall be liable to pay for the us e or occupation of that land at 
the rate of rent payable in the preceding agricultural year, or,  if rent was not payable in that year, at such 
rate as the Court may determine to be fair and equitable.  
15. Collection of rents of undivided property . — When t wo or more persons are landlord of a tenant 
in respect of the same tenancy, the tenant shall not be bound to pay part of the rent of his tenancy to one 
of those persons and part to another  
Produce -rents.  
16. Presumption with respect to produce remove before division of appraisement .— Where rent 
is taken by division  or appraisement of the produce,  if the tenant removes any portion of the produce at 
such a time or in such a manner as to prevent the due division or appraisement thereof ,or deals therewith  
in a manners contrary to established usage the produce may be deemed to ha ve been as full as the  fullest 
crop of the same description on similar lands in the neighborhood for that harvest.  
17. Appointment of referee for division or appraisement .—If either  the landlord or the tenant 
neglects to attend, either personally  or by agent, at the proper time for making the division or 
appraisement of the produce, or if there is a dispute about the division or appraisement, a Revenue -officer 
may, on the application of either party, appoint such 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 11]
division or appraisement, a Revenue -officer 
may, on the application of either party, appoint such person as he thinks fit to be a referee to divide or 
appraise the produce.  
18. Appointment of assessors and procedure of referee.— (1) When a Revenue -officer appoints 
referee under the last forgoing section, he may, in his discretion, give him instructions with respect to the 
association with himself of an y other persons as assessors, the number, qualification and selection of 
those assessor, and the procedure to be followed in making the division or appraisement.  
(2) The refe ree so appointed shall make the division or appraisement in accordance with any 
instructions which he may have received from the Revenue -officer under the last foregoing                       
sub-section.  
(3) Before making the division or appraisement the  referee shall give notice to the landlord and the 
tenant of the time and place at which the division or appraisement will be made, but , of either the landlord 
or the tenant fails to attend either personally or by agent, the referee may proceed exparte.  
(4) For the purpose of making the division or appraisement , the referee, with his assessors, if any , may  
enter upon any land on which or into any building in which the produce is.  
19. Procedure after division or appraisement .—(1) The result of the division or appraisement shall 
be recorded and signed by the referee, and the record shall be submitted to the Revenue -officer.  
 (2) The Revenue -officer shall consider the record, and, after such further inquiry, if any, as he may 
deem necessary, shall make an order either confirming or varying the division or appraisement.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 12]
12 
 (3) The Revenue -officer shall also make such order as to the costs of the reference as he thinks fit.  
(4) The costs may include the remuneration of the referee and of the assessors, if any, and may be 
levied from the applicant before the appointment of the referee subject to adjustment at the close of the 
proceedings. 
20. Enhancement of produce -rents of occupancy tenants. —Where the rent of a tenant having a 
right of occupancy in any land is a share of the produce, or of the appraised value thereof, with or without 
an addition in money, or is paid according to rates fixed with reference to the nature of the crops grown, 
or is a rent in gross payable in kind, the tenant shall be entitled to occupy the land at that rent :  
Provided that, when the land or any part thereof previously not irrigated or flooded becomes irrigated 
or flooded, the rent payable in respect of the land or  part may, subject to the provisions of this Act, be 
enhanced to the share or rates, or with reference to the rent in gross, as the case may be, paid by tenants, 
having a similar right of occupancy, for irrigated or flooded land of a similar description and with similar 
advantages.  
21. Reduction of rents refereed to in the last foregoing  section .— When the land, or any part of the 
land, held by a tenant having a right of occupancy to whom the last foregoing section applies ceases to be 
irrigated or flooded , the rent payable in respect of the land or part may be reduced to the share or rates, or 
with reference to the rent in gross, as the case may be, paid by tenants, having a similar right of occupancy for unirrigated or unflooded land of a similar descript ion and with similar advantages . 
Cash -rents paid by Tenants having right of Occupancy. 
22. Enhancement of cash rents of occupancy tenants .—(1) Where a tenant having a right of 
occupancy pays his rent entirely by a cash-rate on a recognized measure of area or by a cash -rent in 
gross on his tenancy, the rent
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 12]
by a cash-rate on a recognized measure of area or by a cash -rent in 
gross on his tenancy, the rent may be enhanced on the ground that , after deduction therefrom of  the 
land revenue of, and the rates and cesses chargeable on, the tenancy, it is — 
(a) if the tenant belongs to the class specified in clause  (a) of sub-section (1) of section 5, less 
than two annas per rupee of the amount of the land- revenue;  
 (b) if he belongs to any of the classes specified in clauses ( b) , (c ) and (d) of that sub-section 
less than six annas per rupee of the  amount of the land-revenue ;  
(c) if he belongs to the class specified in section 6, or if his right of occupancy is established 
under section 8 and his rent is not regulated by contract , less than twelve annas per rupee of the 
amount of the land-revenue.  
(2) In a case to which sub-section (1) applies, the rent may be enhanced to an amount not 
exceeding two, six or twelve annas per rupee of the amount of the land -revenue as the case may be , 
in addition to the amount of the land-revenue of the tenancy and the rates and cessers chargeable 
thereon.  
23. Reduction of rents referred to in the last foregoing section .—The rent payable buy a tenant 
to whom the last foregoing section applies may be reduce d on the ground that the productive powers 
of his tenancy have been decreased  by a cause beyond his control.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 13]
13 
 General Provisions relating to  Suits for Enhancement or Reduction of Rent.  
24. Enhancement and reduction of rent by suit .—(1) A Revenue Court, on the suit of either 
landlord or tenant, may , subject to the provisions of this and other sections of this Act, enhance or reduce 
the rent of any tenant having a right of occupancy.  
(2) Where a decree for the enhancement of the rent of such a tenant has been passed under the Punjab 
Tenancy Act, 1868, (XXVIII of 1868)  a suit for a further enhancement of his rent shall not lie till the 
expiration of five years from the date of the decree, unless in the meantime the local area in which the 
land comprised in the decree is situate has been generally reass essed and the revenue payable in respect of 
that land has been increased. 
 (3) Subject to the provision s of sub -section (2), a suit instituted for the enhancement of the rent of a 
tenant having a right of occupancy shall not be entertained in either  of the  following cases, namely :— 
(a) if within the ten years next preceding its institution his rent has been commuted under                      
section 13 or enhanced under this section,  
 (b) if within that period a decree has been passed under this Act dismis sing on the merits a suit for 
the enhancement of his rent, unless the land or some part of the land comprised in his tenancy, not 
having been irrigated  or flooded at the time of such commutation, enhancement or decree, has become 
irrigated or flooded.  
25. Discretion as to extent of enhancement or reduction .—In enhancing or reducing the rent of any 
land under the foregoing provisions of this chapter, the Court shall within the limits prescribed by those 
provisions, enhance or reduce the rent to such an amount as it considers fair and equitable, but shall not in 
any case fix the rent at a sum less than th e amount of the land- revenue of the land and the rates and cesses 
chargeable thereon.  
26. Time for enhancement or reduction to take
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 13]
e land and the rates and cesses 
chargeable thereon.  
26. Time for enhancement or reduction to take effect .—(1) Unless the Court decreeing an 
enhancement of rent otherwise directs,  the enhancement shall take effect from the  commencement of the 
agricultural year next following the date of the decree.  
(2) A Court decreeing a reduction of rent shall specify in the decree the date on from which the 
reduction is to take effect.  
Adjustment of Rents expressed in terms of the Land -revenue . 
27. Adjustment of rents expressed in terms of the land -revenue. —(1) Where the rent of a tenancy 
is the whole or a share of the land -revenue thereof, with or without an addition in money, kind or service, 
and the land-revenue of the holding in which the tenancy is situate is altered, a Revenue -officer having 
authority under section 56 of the Punjab Land- revenue Act, 1887 (XVII of 1887) , to determine the                  
land- revenue payable in respect of the several holdings comprised in the estate in which the tenancy is 
situate shall determine also the amount of the land- revenue of the tenancy , or the proportionate share 
thereof, payable by the tenant as rent.  
 (2) Where an addition referred to in sub- section ( 1) is a percentage fixed with reference to the                  
land- revenue of the tenancy, or the whole or a share of the rates and cesses chargeable thereon, or both, 
the R evenue -officer shall in like manner from time to time alter the amount of the addition in proportion 
to any alteration of such land- revenue or rates and cesses.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 14]
14 
 (3) The sum or sums determined under the foregoing sub- sections, together with any addition 
previously payable other than the additions referred to in sub- section ( 2), shall be the rent payable in 
respect of the ten ancy until there is again an alteratio ns of the land- revenue thereof or of the rates and 
cesses chargeable thereon or until the rent is enhanced by a suit under this Act.  
(4) An alteration of rent under this section  shall not be deemed an enhancement  or re duction of rent 
within the meaning of this Act.  
Alteration of Rent on Alteration of Area.  
28. Alteration of rent on alteration of area.— (1) Every tenant shall - 
 (a) be liable to pay additional rent for all land proved to be in excess of the area for which rent has 
been preciously paid by  him, unless it is proved that t he excess is due to the addition to his tenancy of 
land which,  having previously belonged to the tenancy , was lost by al luvion or otherwise without any 
reduction of the rent being made; and  
(b) be entitled to and abatement of rent in respect of any deficiency proved to exist in the area of 
his tenancy as compared with the area for which rent has been previously paid by him, unless it is 
proved that the deficiency is due to the loss of land whi ch was added to the area of the tenancy by 
alluvion or otherwise, and that an addition has not been made to the rent in respect of the addition to 
the area.  
(2) In determining the area for which rent has been previously paid, the Court shall have regard to  the 
following , among other matters, namely :— 
(a) the origin and conditions of the tenant ’s occupancy , for instance whether the rent was a rent in 
gross for the entire tenancy;  
(b) whether the tenant has been allowed to hold additional land in considerati on of and addition to 
his total rent or otherwise with the knowledge and consent of the landlord; and  
(c) the length of time during which there has been no dispute as to rent or area.  
(3) In 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 14]
d; and  
(c) the length of time during which there has been no dispute as to rent or area.  
(3) In adding  to or abating rent under this section, the Court shall add to or abate the rent to such an 
amount as it deems to be fair and equitable, and shall specify in its decree the date on and from which the 
addition or abatement is to take effect.  
(4) An addition to or abatement of rent under this section shall not be deemed an enhancement or 
reduction of rent within the meaning of this Act.  
Remission  
29. Remission of rent by Courts decreeing arrears.—Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing 
sections of this Chapter, if it appears to a Court making a decree for and arre ar of rent that the area of a 
tenancy has been so diminished by diluvion or otherwise, or that the produce thereof has been so 
diminished by drought, hail, deposit of sand or other like calamity, that the full amount of rent payable by the tenant cannot be  equitably decreed, the Court may, with the previous sanction of the Collector , allow 
such remission from the rent payable by the tenant as may appear to it to be just.  
 30. Remission and suspension of rent consequent on like treatment of land                              
revenue .—(1) Wherever from any cause the payment of the whole or any part of the land- revenue 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 15]
15 
 payable in respect of any land is remitted or suspended, a Revenue -officer may, by order, remit or 
suspend, as the case may be, the p ayment of the rent of that land to an amount which may bear the same 
proportion to the whole of the rent payable in respect of the land as the land- revenue of which the 
payment has been remitted or suspended bears to the whole of the land- revenue in respect of the land.   
(2) An order passed under sub- section ( 1) shall not be liable to be contested by suit in any Court.  
(3) A suit shall not lie for the recovery of any rent of which the payment has been remitted, or , during 
the period of suspension, of any rent of which the payment has been suspended.  
(4) W here the payment of rent has been suspended , the period during which the suspension has 
continued shall be excluded in the computation of the period of limitation prescribed for a suit  for the 
recovery of the rent.  
(5) If the landlord collects any rent of which the payment has been remitted, or before the expiration of 
the period of suspension collects any rent of which the payment has been suspended, the whole of the 
land- revenue remitted or suspended in his favour shall  become immediately payable by him.  
(6) The provisions of this section relating to the remission and suspension of the payment of rent may 
be applied, so far as they can be made applicable, to land if which the land- revenue has been released, 
compounded for or redeemed, in any case in which, if the land- revenue in respect of the land had not been 
released, compounded for or redeemed, the whole or any part of it might , in the opinion or the Revenue -
officer, be remitted or suspended under the rules for the time being in force for regulating the remission 
and suspension of land- revenue.  
Deposits.  
31. Power to deposit rent in certain cases with Revenue- officer .—In either  of the following cases, 
namely :— 
(a) when a landlord refuses to receive, or grant a receipt for, an
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 15]
 the following cases, 
namely :— 
(a) when a landlord refuses to receive, or grant a receipt for, any rent payable in money when 
tendered to him by a tenant,  
(b) when a tenant is in doubt as to the person entitled t o receive rent payable in money,  the tenant 
may apply to a Revenue -officer f or leave to deposit the rent in his office, and the Revenue -officer shall 
receive the deposit if, after examining the applicant, he is satisfied that there is sufficient ground for 
the application and if the applicant pays the fee, if any, chargeable for t he issue of the notice next 
hereinafter referred to.  
32. Effect of depositing rent .—(1) When a deposit has been so received , it shall be deemed to be a 
payment made by the tenant to his landlord in respect of rent due.  
 (2) The R evenue -officer receiving t he deposit shall give notice of the receipt thereof to every person 
who he has reason to believe claims or is entitled to the deposit, and may pay the amount thereof to any 
person appearing to him to be entitled thereto, or may, if he thinks fit, retain the deposit pending the decision of a competent Court as to the person so entitled.  
(3) No suit or other proceeding s hall be instituted against the Secretary of State of India in C ouncil, or 
against any officer of the Government , in respect of anything done  by a Revenue -officer under this 
section, but noting in this sub- section shall prevent any person entitled to receive the amount of any such 
deposit from recovering it from a person to whom it has been paid by a Revenue -officer.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 16]
16 
 Recovery of R ent form attached Produce.  
33. Recovery of R ent from attached produce.— (1) If an order is made by any Court for the 
attachment of the produce of a tenancy or of any part of a tenancy, the landlord may apply t o the 
Revenue -officer by whom t he attachment is to be or has been made to sell the produce and pay to him out 
of the proceeds of the sale thereof the amount or value of  — 
(a) any rent which has fallen due to him in respect of the tenancy within the year immediately 
preceding the application and  
(b) the rent whi ch will be falling due after the harvesting of the produce and is chargeable                   
against it.  
(2) The Revenue -officer shall give the person at whose instance the attachment was made an 
opportunity of showing cause why the application of the l andlord should not be granted, and, if he finds 
the landlord’s claim to the whole or any part of the rent to be proved, he shall cause the produce or such 
portion thereof as he may deem necessary to be sold, and shall apply the proceeds of the sale in the first 
instance to satisfy the claim.  
(3) The finding of the Revenue -officer under sub- section ( 2) shall have the force of a decree in a suit 
between the landlord and the tenant.  
Leases for period exceeding term of Assessment of Land -revenue.  
34. Treatment of leases for period exceeding or equal to term of assessment of land -revenue.—  
 (1) Where a lease has been granted, or an agreement has been entered into, by a landowner in respect of 
any land assessed to land -revenue , fixing for a period exceeding the te rm for which the land- revenue has been 
assessed the rent or other sum payable in respect of the land under the lease or agreement, and that term has 
expired, the lease or agreement shall be voidable — 
(a) at the option of the landowner if the land- revenue of the land has been enhanced and the person to 
whom the lease has been granted or with whom the agreement has been entered into refu
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 16]
the person to 
whom the lease has been granted or with whom the agreement has been entered into refuses to pay such 
rent or other sum as a Revenue Court, on the suit of the landowner, determines to be fair and        equita ble; 
and  
where the relation of landlord and tenant exists between the grantor and grantee of the lease or between 
the persons who entered into the agreement — 
(b) at the option of the tenant if the land -revenue of the land has been reduced and the landlord refuses 
to accept such rent as a Revenue Court, on the suit of the tenant, dete rmines to be fair and equitable.  
(2) Any agreement relative to the occupation, rent , profits or produce of any land which has been entered 
into for the term of the currency of an assessment shall, unless a contrary intention clearly appears in the 
agreement or the agreement is terminated  by consent of parties or course of law, continue in force until a 
revised assessment takes effect.  
CHAPTER IV  
RELINQUISHMENT , ABANDONMENT  AND EJECTMENT . 
Relinquishment.  
35. Relinquishment by tenant for  a fixed term .—A tenant holding for a fixed term under a contract 
or a decree or order of competent authority may relinquish his tenancy without notice at the end of that 
term.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 17]
17 
 36. Relinquishment by any other tenant .—(1) Any other tenant may relinquish his tenancy by 
giving verbally or in writing to his landlord, or to his landlord’s agent, on or before the fifteenth day of 
January in any year, notice of his intention to relinquish the tenancy at t he end of the agricultural year 
then current.  
(2) The tenant may, instead of, or in addi tion to giving the notice in the manner mentioned in                        
sub-section ( 1), apply to a Revenue -officer on or before the date aforesaid to cause the no tice to be served 
on the landlord, and the Revenue -officer , on receiving the cost of service from the tenant,  shall cause the 
notice to be served as soon as may be.  
(3) If the tenant does not give notice in the manner prescribed in this section, he shall be liable to pay 
the rent of his tenancy for any part of the ensuing agricultural year during which the tenancy is not let by the landlord to some other person or is not cultivated by the landlord himself.  
37. Relinquishment of part only of tenancy.—A tenan t cannot, without the consent of his landlord, 
relinquish a part only of his tenancy. 
Abandonment . 
38. Abandonment of tenancy be occupancy tenant .—If a tenant having a right of occupancy fails 
for more than one year without sufficient cause to cultivate his tenancy , either by himself or some other 
person, and to arrange for payment of the rent thereof as it falls due, the right of occupancy shall  be 
extinguished from the end of that year.  
Ejectment . 
L
IABILITY TO EJECTMENT . 
39. Grounds of ejectment of occu pancy tenant .—A tenant having a right of occupancy shall be 
liable to be ejected from his tenancy on any of the following grounds, namely: —  
(a) that he has used the land comprised in the tenancy in a manner which renders it unfit for the 
purposes for which he held it;  
(b) where rent is payable in kind, that he has without sufficient cause failed to cultivate that land in 
the manner or to th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 17]
 in kind, that he has without sufficient cause failed to cultivate that land in 
the manner or to the extent customary in the locality in which the land is situate;  
(c) that a decree for an arrear of rent in respect of the tenancy has been passed him and remains 
unsatisfied.  
40. Grounds of ejectment of tenant for a fixed term .—A tenant not having a right of occupancy by 
holding for a fixed term under a contract or a decree or order of competent authority, shall be liable to be 
ejected from his tenancy at the expiration of that term, and, on any of the following grounds, before the 
expiration thereof, namel y:— 
(a) that he has used the land comprised in the tenancy in a manner which renders it unfit for the 
purposes for which he held it ;  
(b) where rent is payable in kind, that he has without sufficient cause failed to cultivate that land in 
the manner or to the extent customary in the locality in which the land is situate;  
(c) on any ground which would justify ejectment under the contract, decree or order.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 18]
18 
 41. Ejectment of tenant from year to year .—A tenant who has not a right of occupancy , and does 
not ho ld for a fixed term under a contract or a decree or order of competent authority, may be ejected at 
the end of  any agricultural year.  
PROCEDURE ON EJECTMENT . 
42. Restriction on ejectment .—A tenant shall not be ejected otherwise than in exec ution of a decree 
for ejectment  except in the following cases, namely :—   
(a) when a decree for an arrear of rent in respect of his tenancy has been passed against him and 
remains unsatisfied;  
(b) when  the tenant has not a right of occupancy and does not hold for a fixed term under a contract 
or a decree or order of competent authority. 
43. Application to Revenue -officer for ejectment .—In any such case as is mentioned in clause ( a) or 
clause ( b) of the last foregoing section , the landlord may apply to a Revenue -officer for the ejectrment of 
the tenant in the case mentioned in the former clause or for the service on the tenant of a notice of 
ejectment in the case mentioned in the latter clause.  
44. Ejectment for failure to sati sfy decree for arrear of rent .—(1) On receiving the application in 
any such case as is mentioned in clause ( a) of section 42  the Revenue -officer shall, after such inquiry with 
respect to the existence of the arrear as he deems necessary, cause a notice to be served on the               
tenant , stating the date of the decree and the amount due there under, and informing his that if he does not 
pay that amount to the Revenue -officer within fifteen days from receipt of the notice he will be ejected 
from the la nd. 
 (2) If the amount is not so paid, the Revenue -officer shall, subject to the provisions of this Act with 
respect to the payment of compensation, order the ejectment of the tenant unless good cause is shown to 
the contrary. 
45. Ejectment of tenant from year to year by notice .—(1) On receiving the application of the 
landlord in any such case as is m
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 18]
 year to year by notice .—(1) On receiving the application of the 
landlord in any such case as is mentioned in clause ( b) of section 42, the Revenue -officer shall, if the 
application is in order and not open to objection on the face of it, cause a notice of ejectment to be served 
on the tenant.  
(2) A notice under sub- section ( 1) shall not be served after the fifteenth day of November in any   year.  
(3) The notice shall specify the name of the landlord on whose application it is issued , and describe the 
land to which it relates, and shall inform the tenant that he must vacate the land before the first day of May next following, or that , if he intends to contest his liability to ejectment, be must institute a suit for 
that purpose in a Re venue Court within two months from the date of the service of the notice.  
(4) The notice shall also inform the tenant that if he does not intend to contest his liability to be ejected 
and he has any claim for compensation on ejectment he should, within tw o months from the date of the , 
service of the notice, prefer his claim to the Revenue -officer having authority under the next following 
sub-section to order his ejectment in the circumstances described in that sub -section.  
(5) If within two months from the  date of the service of the notice the tenant does not institute a suit to 
contest his liability to be ejected , a Revenue -officer, on the application of the landlord, shall, subject to 
the provisions of this Act with respect to the payment of compensation,  order the ejectment of the tenant:  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 19]
19 
 Provided that the Revenue -officer shall not make the order until he is satisfied that the notice was duly 
served on the tenant.  
 (6) If within those two months the tenant institutes a suit to contest his liability to be  ejected and fails 
in the suit, the Court by which the suit is determined shall by its decree direct the ejectment of the tenant.  
46. Power to make rules .—The Financial Commissi oner may make rules prescribing — 
(a) the form and language of applications and notices under the two last foregoing sections ; and  
(b) the manner in which those applications and notices are to be signed and attested . 
GENERAL  PROVISIONS  RESPECTING EJECTMENT . 
47. Time for ejectment .—A decree or order for the ejectment of a tenant shall not be executed at any 
other time than between the first day of May and the fifteenth day of June (both days inclusive), unle ss 
the Court making the decree or, where the order is made under section 44, the offi cer making the order 
otherwise directs.  
48. Relief against forfeiture .—(1) If in a suit for the ejectment of a tenant on either of the grounds 
mentioned in clauses ( a) and ( b) of section 39 or of section 40 it appears to the Court that the injury 
caused by  the act or omission on which the suit is based  is capable of being remedied, or  that an award of 
compensation will be sufficient satisfaction to the landlord therefor e, the Court may, instead of making a 
decree for the ejectment of the tenant , order him t o remedy the injury within a period to be fixed in the 
order , or order him to pay into Court, within such a period, such compensation as the Court thinks fit.  
 (2) The Court may from time to time, for special reasons, extend a period fixed by it under                     
sub-section ( 1).  
(3) If within the period, or extended period, as the case may be , fixed by the Court under this section, 
the injury is remedied or the compensation is paid, a decree for the ejectment of the tenant sha
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 19]
n, 
the injury is remedied or the compensation is paid, a decree for the ejectment of the tenant shall not be 
made.  
49. Ri ghts of ejected tenant s in respect of crops and land prepared for sowing .—(1) Where at the 
time of the proposed ejectment of a tenant from any land his uncut or ungathered crops are standing on any part thereof, he shall not be ejected from that part until  the crops have ripened and he has been 
allowed a reasonable time to harvest them.  
(2) The Court or Revenue -officer decreeing or ordering the ejectment of the tenant may , on the 
application of the landlord, determine  any dispute arising in consequence of the provisions of                  
sub-section ( 1) between the landlord and the tenant or between the landlord and any person entitled to 
harvest discretion — 
(a) direct that the tenant pay for the longer occupation of the land secured to him under               
sub-section ( 1) such rent as may be fair and equitable , or  
(b) determine the value of the tenant’s uncut and ungathered crops, and, on payment thereof by the 
landlord to the Court or  Revenue -officer , forthwith e ject the tenant.  
(3) When a tenant for whose ejectment proceeding s have been taken has, comfortably with local 
usage, prepared for sowing any land comprised in his tenancy , but has not sown or planted crops on that 
land, he shall be entitled to receive fr om the landlord before ejectment a  fair equivalent in money for the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 20]
20 
 labour and capital expended by him in so preparing the land, and the Court or Revenue -officer before 
which or whom proceedings, are pending shall, on the application of the tenant, determi ne the sum 
payable to the tenant under this sub- section and stay his ejectment until that sum has been paid to him. 
RELIEF FOR  WRONGFUL  DISPOSSESSION . 
50. Relief for wrongful dispossession or ejectment .—In either of the following cases, namely :— 
(a) if a tenant has been dispossessed without his consent of his tenancy or any part thereof 
otherwise than in execution of a decree or than in pursuance of an order under section 44 or section 45,  
(b) If a tenant who, not having instituted a suit under section 45, has been ejected from his tenancy 
or any part thereof in pursuance of an order under that section deni es his liability to be ejected,  
The tenant may , within one year from the date of his dispossession or ejectment, institute a suit for 
recovery of possession or occupancy , or for compensation, or for both.  
51. Bar of relief by under section 9, Act I , 1877. —Possession of a tenancy or of any land comprise d 
in a tenancy shall not be recoverable under section 9 of the Specific Relief Act, 1877, (I of 1877)  by a 
tenant dispossessed thereof  
Power to vary D ates prescribed by this Chapter.  
52. Power for Local  Government to fix date s for certain purposes.— (1) The Local  Government 
may, for all or any of the territories under its administration, by notification fix for the purposes of 
sections 36, 45 and 47, or of any of those sections, any other dates instead of those specified therein.  
(2) A notification unde r this section shall not take effect till after the expiration of six months from the 
date of the publication thereof.  
CHAPTER V . 
 ALIENATION  OF, AND SUCCESSION TO , RIGHT OF  OCCUPANCY.  
53. Private transfer of right of occupancy under section 5 by tenant .—(1) A tenant having a right 
of occupancy under section 5 may transfer t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 20]
under section 5 by tenant .—(1) A tenant having a right 
of occupancy under section 5 may transfer that right by sale , gift or mortgage, subject to the conditions 
mentioned in this section.  
(2) If he intends to transfer the right by sale, gift, mortgage by conditional sale or usufruct uary 
mortgage, he shall cause notice of his intention to be served on his landlord through a Revenue -officer , 
and shall defer proceeding with the transfer for a period of one month from the date on which the notice is 
served.  
(3) Within that period of one month the landlord may claim to purchase the right at such value as a 
Revenue -officer may, on application made to him in this behalf, fix.  
(4) when the application to the Revenue -officer is to fix the value of a right of occupancy which is 
already mortgag ed, he shall fix the value of the right as if it were not mortgaged.  
(5) The landlord shall be deemed to have purchased the right if he pays the value to the                         
revenue -officer within such time as that officer appoints.  
(6) On the va lue being so paid, the right of occupancy shall be extinct, and the Revenue -officer shall, 
on the application of the landlord, put the landlord in possession of the tenancy.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 21]
21 
 (7) If the right of occupancy was already mortgaged , the tenancy shall pass to the landlord , 
unencumbered by the mortgage , but the mortgage -debt shall be a charge on the purchase -money.  
(8) If there is no such charge as aforesaid , the Revenue -officer shall, subject to any directions which he 
may receive fro m any Court, pay the purchase -money to the tenant.  
(9) If there is such a charge , the Revenue -officer shall , subject as aforesaid , either apply in discharge 
of the purchase -money as the mortgage -debt so much of the purchase -money as is required for that 
purpose and pay the balance, if any , to the tenant, or retain the purchase -money pending the decision of a 
Civil Court as to the person or persons entitled thereto.  
(10) Where there are several landlords of a tenancy , any one of them pay be deemed to be the  landlord 
for the purposes of this section.  
(11) No suit or other preceding shall be instituted against the Secretary of State for India in Council , or 
against any officer of the Government , in respect of anything done by a Revenue -officer under the two 
last foregoing sub -sections, but nothing in this sub- section shall prevent any person entitled to receive the 
whole or any part of the purchase -money from recovering it from a person to whom it has been paid by a 
Revenue -officer.  
54. Procedure on foreclosu re of mortgage of right of occupancy under section 5 .—Where a 
mortgagee of a right of occupancy under section 5 proposes to foreclose his mortgage, or otherwise 
enforce his lien on the land subject to the right, the provisions of the last foregoing section  shall, so far as 
they can be made applicable, apply as if the mortgagee were the tenant.  
55. Sale of right of occupancy under section 5 in execution of decree .—(1) A right of occupancy 
under section 5 may be sold in execution of a decree or order of a Court ;  
(2) But notice of an intended sale of any such right shall be given by the Court to the la
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 21]
Court ;  
(2) But notice of an intended sale of any such right shall be given by the Court to the landlord, and if at 
any time before the close of the day on which the sale takes place the landlord pays to the Court or to the officer conducting the sa le a de posit of twenty -five per centum on the highest bid made at the sale , he 
shall be declared to be the purchaser instead of the person who made that bid.  
56. Transfer of right of occupancy under any other section than section 5 .—A right of occupancy 
under any  other section than section 5 shall not be attached or sold in execution of a decree or order of 
any Court or, without the previous consent in writing of the landlord, be transferred by private contract.  
57. Rights and liabilities of transferee of right of  occupancy .—When a right of occupancy has been 
transferred by sale, gift or usufructuary mortgage to a person other than the landlord, that person shall , in 
respect of the land in which the right subsists, have the same rights, and be subject to the same                 
liabilities, as the tenant to whom before the transfer the right belonged  had and was subject to.  
58. Subletting .—(1) A tenant having a right of occupancy in land may, subject to the provisions of 
this Act and to the conditions of any writte n contract between him and his landlord, sublet the land or any 
part thereof for any term not exceeding seven years.  
(2) A person to whom land is sublet by a tenant having a right of occupancy therein shall, in respect of 
that land,  and so far as regards the landlord , be, jointly with the tenant, subject to all the liabilities of the 
tenant under this Act.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 22]
22 
 Succession . 
59. Succession to right of occupancy.— (1) When a tenant having a right of occupancy in any land 
dies, the right shall devolve .— 
(a) on his male lineal descendants, if any, in the male line of descent,  and,  
(b) failing such descendants, on his widow , if any until she dies or re -marries or abandons the land 
or is under the provisions of this Act ejected therefrom, and,  
(c) failing such descendants and widow, or, if the deceased tenant left a widow , then when her 
interest terminates under clause ( b) of this sub- section, on his male collateral relatives in the male line 
of descent from the common ancestor of the deceased tenan t and those relatives :  
Provided, with respect to clause (c) of this sub- section, that the common ancestor occupied the 
land.   
(2) As among descendants and collateral relatives claiming under sub -section ( 1), the right shall, 
subject to the provisions of that sub- section , devolve as if it were land left by the deceased in the village 
in which the land subject to the right is situate.  
(3) When the widow of a deceased tenant succeeds to a right of occupancy , she shall not transfer the 
right by sale, gift or mortgage , or by sub- lease for a term exceeding one year.  
(4) If the deceased tenant has left no such persons as are mentioned in sub -section ( 1) on whom his  
right of occupancy may devolve under that sub- section, the right shall be extinguished.  
Irregular Transfers.  
60. Irregular transfer of right of occupancy. —Any transfer made of a right of occupancy in 
contravention of the foregoing provisions of this Chapter shall be avoidable at the instance of the 
landlor d. 
________  
CHAPTER VI.  
IMPROVEMENTS  AND COMPENSATION . 
Improvement s  by Landlords. 
61. Improvements by landlords on tenancies of occupancy -tenants .—(1) Without the previ ous 
permission of the Collector  a landlord shall not  make  an improvement on the tenancy of a tenant having a 
right of occupancy.  
(2) If 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 22]
d shall not  make  an improvement on the tenancy of a tenant having a 
right of occupancy.  
(2) If a landlord desires to make such an improvement he may apply to the Collector for permission to 
make it , and the Collector shall , before making an order on the application, hear the objection, if any, of 
the tenant.  
(3) In making an order on an application under sub- section ( 2) the Collector shall, be guided by such 
rules , if any , as the Local  Government may, with the previous sanction of the Governor General in 
Council, make in th is behalf . 
62. Enhancement of rent in consideration of an improvement made by a landlord on the tenancy 
of an occupancy -tenant .—(1) When a landlord has , with the permission mentioned in the last foregoing 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 23]
23 
 section, made an improvement on the tenancy of a tenant having a right of occupancy , he may apply to 
the Collector fir an enhancement of the rent of the tenant.  
(2) If the tenant is a tenant to whom section 20 applies,  the Collector shall enhance his rent to the share 
or rates , or with reference to the rent in gross , as the case may be , paid by tenants , having a similar right 
of occupancy , for land of a similar description and with similar advantages.  
(3) If the tenant is a tenant to whom section 22 applies, the Collector shall enhance his rent to such 
amount as the tenant would be liable to pay under that sectio n if the land -revenue were re- assessed.  
(4) When the improvement ceases to exist, the Collector may, on the application of the ten ant, reduce 
the ten ant’s rent, — 
(a) in the case of a tenant to whom sub -section ( 2) applies , to the share or rates, or with reference to 
the rent in gross , as the case may be , paid by tenants , having a similar right of occupancy , for land of a 
similar descript ion and with si milar advantages,  and  
(b) in the case of a tenant to whom sub- section ( 3) applies, to such an amount as the tenant would 
be liable to pay if the land revenue were re- assessed.  
(5) Section s 25 and 26 shall be construed as applying to an application under this section , and a suit 
shall not lie in any Court for any purpose for which an application might be made under this section.  
Improvements by Tenants.  
63. Title of occupancy- tenant to make improvements .—A tenant having a right of occupancy is 
entitled to make improvements on his tenancy.  
64. Title of tenants not having right of occupancy to make improvements .—(1) A tenant not 
having a right of occupancy may make improvements on his tenancy with the assent of his landlord.  
(2) If at any time the question arises whether or not the landlord assented to the making of an 
improvement by a tenant not having a right of occupancy , the assent may be infe
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 23]
o the making of an 
improvement by a tenant not having a right of occupancy , the assent may be inferred from circumstances.  
65. Improvements made before commen cement of this Act .—Improvement s made by a tenant 
before the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to have been made in accordance with this Act, 
unless in the case of a tenant not having a right of occupancy it is shown that the improvement was made 
in contravention of a written agreement between him and his landlord.  
66. Improvements begun in anticipation of ejectment .—A tenant ejected in execution of a decree,  
or in pursuance of a notice of a notice of ejectment , shall not be entitled to compensation for any 
improvement begun by him  after the institution of the suit,  or service of the notice , which resulted in his 
ejectment.  
67. Tender of lease for twenty years to tenant to be a bar to right to compensation .—If a landlord 
tenders to a tenant a lease of his tenancy for a term of not less than twenty years from the date of the 
tender at the rent then paid by the tenant , or at such other rent as may be agreed on , the tender if , accepted 
by the tenant , shall bar any claim by him to compensation in respect o f improvements previously made on 
the tenancy.  
68. Liability to pay compensation for improvements to tenant  on ejectment or on enhancement 
of his rent .—Subject to the foregoing provisions of this Chapter , a tenant who has made an improvement 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 24]
24 
 on his tenanc y in accordance with this Act shall not be ejected, and the rent payable by him shall not be 
enhanced, until he has received compensation for the improvement. 
Compensation for Disturbance of Clearing Tenants.  
69. Compensation for disturbance of clearing tenants .—(1) A tenant who has cleared and brought 
under cultivation waste -land in which he has not a right of occupancy shall , if ejected from that land, be 
entitled to receive from the landlord as compensation for disturbance , in addition to any compensat ion for 
improvements , a sum to be determined by a Revenue Court or Revenue -officer in accordance with the 
merits of the case, but not exceeding five year s’ rent of the land:  
Provided that a tenant who is a joint owner of land to which this section applies  shall not be entitled to 
compensation for disturbance on ejectment from the land or any part thereof.  
(2) If rent has been paid for the land by division or appraisement of the produce , or by rates fixed with 
reference to the nature of the crops grown, or if not rent, or no rent other than the land revenue of the land 
and the rates and cesses chargeable thereon, has been paid therefor, the compensation may be computed 
as if double the amount of the land- revenue of the land were the annual rent thereof.  
Procedure in determining Compensation.  
70. Determination of compensation by Revenue Courts. —(1) In every suit by a tenant to contest his 
liability to ejectment or by a landlord to eject a tenant or to enhance his rent, the Court shall direct the 
tenant to file a statement of his claim, if any, to compensation for improvements or for disturbance and of the grounds thereof.  
 (2) If the Court decrees the ejectment of the tenant or the enhancement of his rent , it shall dete rmine 
the amount of compensation, if any, due to the tenant , and shall stay execution of the decree until the 
landlord pays into Court that amount less any arrears of rent or costs proved to th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 24]
ecree until the 
landlord pays into Court that amount less any arrears of rent or costs proved to the satisfaction f the Court to be due to him from the tenant.  
 71. Determination of compensation by Revenue -officers.—In either of the following c ases, 
namely — 
 (a) when a notice has been serv ed on a tenant under section 44,  
 (b) when a notice of ejectment has been served on a tenant under section 45 and the tenant h as not 
instituted a suit to contest his liability to be ejected, the tenant may apply to the Revenue -officer 
having authority to order his ejectment under section 44 or section 45, as the case may be, to determine the amount of compensation due to him for improvements or for disturbance , or for both,  
and the Revenue -officer shall determine the amount , if any, accordingly and stay the ejectment of the 
tenant until the landlord pays to the Revenue -officer the  amount so determined less any arrears of rent 
or costs proved to the satisfaction of the Revenue -officer to be due to the landlord from the tenant.  
72. Matters to be regarded in assessment of compensation for improvements .—In estimating the 
compensation t o be awarded under this Chapter to a tenant for an improvement, the Court or Revenue -
officer shall have regard to — 
 (a) the amount by which the value or the produce of the tenancy, or the value of that produce , is 
increased by the improvement;  
(b) the condition of the improvement and the probable duration of its effects;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 25]
25 
 (c) the labour and capital required for the making of such an improvement;  
(d) any reduction or remission of rent or other advantage allowed to the tenant by the landlord in 
consideration of the improvement; and  
 (e) in the case of a reclamation , or of the conversion of unirrigated into irrigated land the length of 
time during which the tenant has had the benefit of the improvement. 
73. Form of compensation .—(1) the compensation shall be m ade by payment in money, unless the 
parties agree that it be made in whole or in part by the grant of a beneficial lease of land or in some other 
way.  
(2) If the parties so agree, the Court or Revenue -officer shall, make an order accordingly.  
Relief  in cas e of ejectment before  Determination of Compensation.  
74. Relief in case of ejectment before determination of compensation .—(1) If from any cause the 
amount of c ompensation payable to a tenant — 
(a) under this Chapter for improvements or disturbance, or  
(b) under section 49 for the value of uncut or ungathered crops or the preparation of land for 
sowing, has not been determined before the tenant is ejected, the ejectment shall not be invalidated by 
reason of the omission, but the Court or Revenue -officer whi ch decreed or who ordered the ejectment 
may, on application made by the tenant within one year from the date of the ejectment, correct the omission by making in favour of the tenant an order for the payment to him by the landlord of such 
compensation as th e Court or officer may determine the tenant to be entitled to.  
(2) An order made under sub- section ( 1) may be executed in the same manner as a decree for money 
may be executed by a Revenue Court.  
CHAPTER VII  
 J
URISDICTION AND PROCEDURE . 
Jurisdiction . 
75. Revenue -officer s.—(1) There shall be the same classes of Revenue -office rs under this Act as 
under the  Punjab Land- revenue Act, 1887 (XVII of 1887)  and, in the absence of any order of  the Local  
Government to the co
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 25]
enue Act, 1887 (XVII of 1887)  and, in the absence of any order of  the Local  
Government to the contrary, a Revenue -officer of any class havi ng jurisdiction within any local limits 
under that Act shall be a Revenue -officer of the same class having jurisdiction within the same local 
limits under this Act.  
(2) the expressions “Collector” and “Financial Commissioner” have the same meaning in this Act as in 
the Punjab Land- Revenue Act, 1887.  
76. Applications and proceedings cognizable by Revenue -officer s.—(1) the following applications 
and proceedings shall be disposed of by Revenue -officers as such , and no Court shall take cognizance of 
any dispute or matter with respect to which any such application or proceeding might be made or had: — 
FIRST GROUP  
(a) proceedings under section 27 for the adjustment of rents ex pressed in terms of the land -revenue;  
(b) proceedings relating to the remission and suspension of rent under section 30;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 26]
26 
 (c) applications under section 43 for the ejectment of a tenant against whom a decree for an arrear 
of rent in respect of his tenancy has been passed and remains unsatisfied;  
(d) applications under section 45, sub- section ( 5) for the ejectment of a tenant o n whom a notice of 
ejectment has been served and who has not instituted a suit to contest his liability to be ejected but has 
claimed compensation under section 71;  
(e) applications under section 53 or section 54 for the fixing of the value of a right of occupancy;  
(f) applications under section 53 or section 54 by landlords for possession of land, the right  of 
occupancy in which has become extinct;  
 (g) proceedings under Chapter VI with respect to the award of compensation for improvements or 
disturbance;   
SECOND  GROUP  
(h) application under section 17 with respect to the division or appraisement of produce;  
(i) applications under section 45, sub- section ( 5), for the ejectment of a tenant on whom a notice of 
ejectment has been served and notice of ejetment  has been served and who has not instituted a suit to 
contest his liability to be ejected and has not claimed compensation under section 71;  
(j) applications for the determination.—  
(i) under section 49 of the rent payable for land occupied by crops uncut  or ungathered at the 
time of an order being made for the ejectment of a tenant; or  
(ii) under section 49 or section 74 of then value of such crops or of the sum payable to the tenant 
for labour and capital expended by him in preparing land for sowing.  
THIRD  GROUP  
(k) applications under section 31 by tenants to deposit rent;  
(l) applications under section 36 for service of notice of relinquishment;  
(m) applications under section 43 for service of notice of ejectment;  
(n) applications under section 53 or section 54 for service of notice of intended transfer or of 
intended foreclosure or other enforcement of lien;  
(2) Except as otherwise provided by any rule 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 26]
 
intended foreclosure or other enforcement of lien;  
(2) Except as otherwise provided by any rule made by the Financi al Commissioner in this behalf,—  
 (a) a Collector or an Assistant Collector of the first grade may dispose of any of the applications 
and proceedings mentioned in sub- section ( 1);  
(b) an Assistant Collector of the second grade, not being a Naib- Tehsildar, may dispose of any of 
the applications mentioned in the second and third gr oups of that sub- section; and  
(c) a Naib -Tehsildar, when invested with the powers of an Assistant Collector of the second grade, 
may dispose of any of the applications mentioned in the third group of that sub- section.  
77. Revenue Court an suit cognizable by the m.—(1) When a Revenue- officer is exercising 
jurisdiction with respect to any such suit as is described in sub- section (3), or with respect to an appeal or 
other proceeding arising out of any such suit, he shall be called a Revenue Court.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 27]
27 
 (2) There s hall be the same classes of Revenue Courts as of Revenue -officers under this Act, and, in 
the absence of any order of the Local Government to the contrary, a Revenue -officer of any class having 
jurisdiction within any local limits under this Act shall be a  Revenue Court of the same class having 
jurisdiction within the same local limits.  
(3) The following suits shall be Instituted in and heard and determined by Revenue Courts, and no 
other Court shall take cognizance of any dispute or matter with respect to which any such suit might be 
instituted: — 
FIRST GROUP . 
(a) Suits between landlord and tenant for enhancement or reduction of rent under section 24;  
(b) Suits between landlord and tenant for addition to or abatement of rent under section 28 or for 
commutation of rent;  
(c) Suits under section 34 for the determination of rent or other sum on the expiration of the term of an 
assessment of land -revenue;  
SECOND  GROUP . 
(d) suits by a tenant to establish a claim to a right  of occupa ncy, or by a landlord to  prove  that a tenant 
has not such a r ight; 
(e) suits by a landlord to eject a tenant;  
(f) suits by a tenant under section 45 to contest liability to ejectment, when notice of ejectment has 
been served ;  
(g) suits by a tenant under section 50 for recovery of possession or occupancy,  or for compensation, or 
for both;  
(h) suits by a landlord to set aside a transfer made of a right of occupancy, or to dispossess a person to 
whom such a transfer has been made, or for both purposes;  
(i) any other suit between la ndlord and tenant arising out of a lease or conditions on which a tenancy is 
held;  
(j) suits for sums payable on account of village cesses or village- expenses;  
(k) suits by a co -sharer in an estate or holding for a share of the profits thereof or for a settlement of 
accounts;  
(l) suits for the recovery of over -payments of rent or land- revenue or of any other demand for which a 
suit lies in a Rev
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 27]
ry of over -payments of rent or land- revenue or of any other demand for which a 
suit lies in a Revenue Court under this sub- section:  
(m) Suits relating to the emoluments of kanungos, zaildars, inamdars or vill age-officers;  
THIRD  GROUP . 
(n) Suits by a landlord for arrears of rent or the money- equivalent of rent, or for sums recoverable 
under section 14;  
(o) Suits by a landowner to recover moneys claimed as due for the enjoyment of rights in or over land 
or in w ater, including rights of irrigation, rights over fisheries, rights of pasturage and forest -rights;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 28]
28 
 (p) Suits for sums payable on account of land- revenue or of any other demand recoverable as an arrear 
of land -revenue under any enactment for the time being in force, and by a superior landowner for other 
sums due to him as such.  
(4) Except as otherwise provided by any rule made by the Financial Commissioner in this behalf,—  
(a) a Collector may near and determine any or the suits mentioned in sub- section ( 3) ; 
(b) an Assistant Collector of the first grade may hear and determine any of the suits mentioned in the 
second and third groups of that sub- section, and, if he has by name been specially empowered in this 
behalf by the Local Government, any of the suits  mentioned in the first group; and  
(c) an Assistant Collector of the second grade may hear determine any of the suits mentioned in the 
third group.  
Administrative Control.  
78. Superintendence and control of Revenue -officers and Revenue Courts.—( 1) The gen eral 
superintendence and control over all other Revenue -officers and Revenue Courts shall be vested in, and 
all such officers and Courts shall be subordinate to, the Financial Commissioner.  
(2) Subject to the general superintendence and control of the Fina ncial Commissioner, a 
Commissioner shall control all other Revenue- officers and Revenue Courts in his division.  
(3) Subject as aforesaid and to the control of the Commissioner a Collector shall control all other 
Revenue -officers and Revenue Courts in his district.  
79. Power to distribute business and withdraw and transfer cases .—(1) The Financial 
Commissioner or a Commissioner or Collector may by written order distribute , in such manner as he 
thinksfit, any business cognizable by any Revenue -officer or Revenue Court under his control.  
(2) the Financial Commissioner or a Commissioner or Collector may withdraw any case pending 
before any Revenue -officer or Revenue Court under his control, and either dispose of it himself or by 
written order refer it for disposa
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 28]
 Court under his control, and either dispose of it himself or by 
written order refer it for disposal to any other Revenue -officer or Revenue Court under his control.  
 (3) An order under sub- section  (1) or sub- section ( 2) shall n ot empower any Revenue -officer or 
Revenue Court to exercise any powers or deal with any business which he or it would not be competent to 
exercise or deal with within the local limits of his or its own jurisdiction.  
Appeal, Review and Revi sion. 
80. Appeals .—Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules thereunder , an appeal shall lie from 
an original or appellate order or decree made under this Act by a Revenue -officer or Revenue Court ; as 
follows, namely : —  
(a) to the Collector when  the order or decree is made by an Assistant Collector of either grade;  
(b) to the Commissioner when the order or decree is made by a Collector;  
 (c) to the Financial Commissioner when the order or de cree is made by a Commissioner:  
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 29]
29 
 Provide d that —  
(i) an appeal from an order or decree made by an Assistant Collector of the first grade specially 
empowered by name in that behalf by the Local  Government in a suit mentioned in the  first group 
of sub- section ( 3) of section 77 shall lie to the Commissioner and not to the Collector;  
(ii) when an original order or decree is confirmed on first appeal, a further appeal shall not lie;  
(iii) when any such order or decree is modified or reversed on appeal by the Collector , the order 
or decree made by the Commissioner on further appeal, if any, to him shall be final.  
81. Limitation for appeals .—the period of limitation for an appeal under the last foregoing section 
shall run from the date of the order o r decree appealed agai nst, and shall be as follows, that is to say: — 
(a) when the appeal lies to the Collector —thirty days;  
(b) when the appeal lies to the Commissioner —sixty days;  
(c) when the appeal lies to the Financial Commissioner —ninety days;  
 82. Review by Revenue -officers.— (1) A Revenue -officer, as such , may either of his own motion or 
on the application of any party interested , review , and on so reviewing modify , reverse or confirm any 
order passed by himself or by any  of his predecessors in office :  
Provided as f ollows:  — 
(a) when a Commissioner or Collector thinks it necessary to review any order which he has not 
himself passed and when a Revenue -officer of a class below that of Collector proposes to review any 
order whether passed by himself or by any of his predecessors in officer he shall first obtain the 
sanction of the Revenue -officer to whose control he is immediately subject;  
(b) an application for review of an order shall not be entertained unless it is made wi thin ninety 
days from the passing of the order or unless the applicant satisfies the Revenue- officer that he had 
sufficient cause for not making the application within that period;  
(c) an order shall not be modified or re
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 29]
 cause for not making the application within that period;  
(c) an order shall not be modified or reversed unless reasonable notice ha s been given to the parties 
affected there by to appear and be heard in support of the order;  
(d) an order against which an appeal has been preferred shall not be reviewed.  
(2) For the purposes of this section the Collector shall be deemed to be the succe ssor in office of any 
Revenue -officer of a lower class who has left the district or has ceased to exercise powers as a                     
Revenue -officer and to whom there is no successor in office.  
(3) An appeal shall not lie from an order refusing to r eview, or confirming on review, a  previous order.  
83. Computation of periods limited for appeals and applications for review .—In the computation 
of the period for an appeal from , or an application for the review of , an order under this Act, the limitation 
therefor e shall be governed by the Indian Limitation Act, 1877, (XV of 1877) . 
84. Power to call for examine and revise pr oceedings of Revenue -officers and  Revenue                
Courts .—(1) The Financial Commissione r may at any time call for the record of any case pending before 
or disposed of by , any Revenue -officer or Revenue Courts subordinate to him. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 30]
30 
 (2) A Commissioner or Collector may call for the record of any case pending before or disposed of by , 
any Revenue -officer or Revenue Court under his control.  
(3) If in any case in which a Commissioner or Collector has called for a record he is of opinion that the 
proceedings taken or the order or decree made should be modified or reversed he shall submit the record 
with his opinion on the case for the orders of the Financial Commissioner.  
(4) If, after examining a record called for by himself under sub- section ( 1) or submitted to him under 
sub-section (3), the Financial Commissioner is of opinion that it is inexpedie nt to interfere with the 
proceedings or the order or decree , he shall pass an order accordingly.  
(5) If , after examining the record the Financial Commissioner is of opinion that it is expedient to 
interfere with the proceedings or the order or decree on a ny ground on which the  Chief Court  in the 
exercise of its revisional jurisdiction may under the law fir the time being in force interfere with the 
proceedings or an order or decree of a Civil Court , he shall fix a day for hearing the case, and may , on 
that or any subsequent day to which he may adjourn the hearing on which he may appoint in this                    
behalf , pass such order as he thinks fit in the case.  
(6) Except when the Financial Commissioner fixes under sub -section ( 5) a day for hearing the case , no 
party has any right to be heard before the Financial Commissioner when exercising his powers under this 
section.  
Procedure.  
85. Procedure of Revenue -officers. —(1) The Local Government may make rules  consistent with this 
Act for regulating  the procedure of Revenue -officers under this Act in cases in which a procedure is not 
prescribed by this Act.  
 (2) The rules may provide , among other matters , for the mode of enforcing orders of ejectment from , 
and delivery of possession of , immoveable pr operty, and rules providing for those matters
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 30]
 from , 
and delivery of possession of , immoveable pr operty, and rules providing for those matters may confer on 
a Revenue -officer all or any of the powers in regard to contempts , resistance and the like which a Civil 
Court may exercise in the execution of a decree whereby it has adjudged ejectment from , or delivery of 
possession of , such property.  
 (3) The rules may also provide for the mode of executing orders as to costs and may adapt to 
proceedings under this Act all or any of the provisions of the Punjab Land- Revenue Act, 1887, (XVII of 
1887)  with respect to arbitration.  
(4) Subject to the rules under this section, a Revenue -officer may refer any case which he is 
empowered to dispose of under this Act to another Revenue -officer for investigation and report , and may 
decide the case upon the re port.  
86. Persons by whom appearance , may be made before Revenue- officers as such and not as 
Revenue Courts .—(1) Appearances before a Revenue- officer as such , and application to and acts to be 
done before him , under this Act may be made or done.  
 (a) by the parties themselves, or  
 (b) by their recognized agents or a legal practitioner :  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 31]
31 
 Provided that the employment of a recognized agent or legal practitioner shall not excuse the personal 
attendance of a party to any proceeding in any case in which persona l attendance is specially required by 
an order of the officer.  
(2) For the purposes of sub- section ( 1), recognized agents shall be such persons as the  Local  
Government may by notification declare in this behalf.  
(3) The fees of a legal practitioner shall  not be allowed as cost in any proceeding before a Revenue -
officer under this Act , unless that officer considers , for reasons to be recorded by him in writing , that the 
fees should be allowed.  
87. Costs .—(1) A Revenue -officer may give and apportion the costs of any proceeding under this Act 
in any manner he t hinks fit ;   
(2) But if he orders that the costs of any such proceeding shall not follow the event , he shall record his 
reasons for the order.  
88. Procedure of Revenue- Courts .—(1) The Local Government may, with the previous sanction of 
the Governor General in Council , make rules consistent with this Act for regulating the procedure of 
Revenue Courts in matters under this Act for which a procedure is not prescribed thereby , and may by 
any such rule dir ect that any provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure shall apply with or without 
modification to all or any classes of cases before those Courts.  
(2) Until rules are made under sub- section ( 1), and subject to those rules when made and  to the 
provisions o f this Act ,— 
(a) the Code of Civil Procedure shall , so far as it is applicable, apply to all proceedings in Revenue 
Courts whether before or after decree; and  
(b) the Financial Commissioner shall , in respect o f those proceedings be deemed to be the High 
Court within the meaning of that Code , and shall , subject to the provisions of this Act , exercise, as 
regards the Courts under his control , all the powers of a High Court under the Code. 
89. Power of Revenue , officer or Revenue Cour
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 31]
rol , all the powers of a High Court under the Code. 
89. Power of Revenue , officer or Revenue Court to summon persons.— (1) A Revenue -officer or 
Revenue Court may summon any person whose attendance he or it considers necessary for the purpose of 
any application , suit or other business before him or it as a Revenue -officer or Revenue Court.  
(2) A person so summoned shall be bound to appear at the time and place mentioned in the summons 
in person or , if the summons so allows , by his recognized agent or a legal practitioner.  
(3) The person attending in obedience to the summons shall be bound to state the truth upon any 
matter respe cting which he is examined or makes statements and to produce such documents and other 
things relating to any such matter as the Revenue -officer or Revenue Court may require.  
90. Mode of service of summons .—(1) A summons issued by a Revenue -officer or Reve nue Court 
shall , if practicable, be served ( a) personally on the person to whom it is addressed, or failing him on (b) 
his recognized agent or ( c) an adult male member of his family who is residing with him.  
(2) If service cannot be made , or if acceptance  of service so made is refused , the summons may be 
served by posting a copy thereof at the usual or last known place of residence of the person to whom it is 
addressed , or, if that person does not reside in the district in which the Revenue -officer is empl oyed or the 
Revenue Court is held, and the case to which the summons relates has reference to land in that district , 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 32]
32 
 then by posting a copy of the summons on some conspicuous place in or near the estate wherein the land 
is situate.  
(3) If the summons rela tes to a case in which persons having the same interest are so numerous that 
personal service on all of them is not reasonably practicable, it may , if the Revenue -officer or Revenue 
Court so directs , be served by delivery of a copy thereof to such of those persons as the officer or Court 
nominates in this behalf and by proclamation of the contents thereof for the information of the other persons interested.  
(4) A summons may if , the Revenue -officer o r Revenue Court so directs,  be served on the person 
named therein , either in addition to , or in substitution for , any other mode of service , by forwarding the 
summons by post in a letter addressed to the person and registered under Part III of the Indian P ost Office 
Act 1866 (XIV of 1866) .  
(5) When a summons is  so forwarded in a letter and it is proved that the letter was properly addressed 
and duly posted and registered, the officer o r Court may presume that the summons was served at the time 
when the let ter would be delivered in the ordinary course of post.  
91. Mode of service of notice , order or  proclamation or copy thereof .—A notice , order or 
proclamation,  or copy of any such document , issued by a Revenue -officer or Revenue Court for service 
on any pers on shall be Served in the manner provided in the last foregoing section for the service of a 
summons. 
92. mode of makin g proclamation .—When a proclamation relating to any land is issued by a 
Revenue -officer or Revenue Court , it shall in addition to any oth er mode of publication which may be 
prescribed by any enactment for the time being in force,  be made by beat of drum or  other customary 
method, and by the posting of a copy thereof on a conspicuous place in or near the land to which it 
relates.  
93. Joinder  of tenants as parties to proceedings relating to rent .—(1) Any
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 32]
to which it 
relates.  
93. Joinder  of tenants as parties to proceedings relating to rent .—(1) Any number of tenants 
cultivating in the same estate may , in the discretion of the Revenue -officer or Revenue Court and subject 
to any rules which the Local Government may make in this behalf , be made parties to an y proceeding 
under Chapter III ;  
(2) But a decree or order shall not be made in any such proceeding unless the Revenue -officer or 
Revenue Courts is satisfied that all the parties thereto have had an opportunity of appearing and being 
heard.  
(3) A decree or order made in any such proceeding shall specify the extent to which each of the tenants 
is affected thereby.  
94. Exception of suits under this Act from operation of certain enactments. —Nothing in section 
424 of the Code of Civil Procedure  (XIV OF 1882)  or in section 36 of the Punjab Municipal Act 1884,  
(XIII of 1884)  shall be construed to apply to a suit of a class mentioned in section 77 of this Act.  
95. Payment into Court of money admitted to be due to t hird per son.—(1) When a defendant 
admits that money is due from him on account of rent , but pleads that it is due not to the plaintiff but to a 
third person, the Court shall , except for special reasons to be recorded by it , refuse to take cognizance of 
the plea unless the defenda nt pays into Court the amount so admitted to be due.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 33]
33 
  (2) Where such a payment is made the Court shall forthwith cause notice of the payment to be served 
on the third person.  
(3) Unless the third person within three months from the receipt of the notice institutes a suit against 
the plaintiff and therein obtains and order restraining payment of the money it shall be paid to the plaintiff 
on his application to the Court there for. 
(4) Nothing in this section shall affect the right of any person to recover fr om the plaintiff money paid 
to him under sub- section ( 3). 
(5) When a defendant pays money into Court under this section, the Court shall give the defendant a 
receipt , and the receipt so given shall operate as, an acquittance in the same manner and to the same 
extent as if it had been given by the plaintiff or the third person, as the case may be.  
96. Execution of decrees for arrears of rent .—A Court passing a decree for an arrear of rent may , on 
the oral application of the decree- holder , order execution th ereof against the  moveable property of the 
tenan t, and against any uncut or ungathered crops on the tenancy in respect of which the arrear is decreed.  
97. Prohibition of imprisonment of tenants in execution of decrees for  arrear of rent.—A tenant 
shall not during the continuance of his occupancy be liable to imprisonment on the application of his 
landlord in execution of a decree for an arrear of rent.  
98. Power to refer party to Civil Court .—(1) If, in any proceeding pending before a Rev enue Court 
exercising original , appellate or revisional jurisdiction , it appears to the Court that any question in issue is 
more proper for decision by a Civil Court , the Revenue Court may , with the previous sanction of the 
Court , if any , to the control of  which it is immediately subject , require , by order in writing , any party to 
the proceeding to institute , within such time as it may fix in this behalf , a suit in the Civil Court for the 
purpose of obtaining a decision on the
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 33]
t may fix in this behalf , a suit in the Civil Court for the 
purpose of obtaining a decision on the question, and, if he fails to comply with the requisition, may decide 
the question as it thinks fit.  
(2) If the party institutes the suit in compliance with the requisition, the Revenue Court shall dispose 
of the proceeding pending before it in accordance with the final decision of th e Civil Court of first 
instance or appeal , as the case may be.  
99. Power to refer to Chief  Court questions as to jurisdiction.—( 1) If the presiding officer of a 
Civil or Revenue Court in which a suit has been instituted doubts whether he is precluded from  taking 
cognizance of the suit , he may refer the matter through the Divisional Judge  or Commissioner , or, if he is 
a Divisional  Judge or Commissioner , directly to the Chief Court .  
(2) On any such reference being made the Chief  Court may order the presiding officer either to 
proceed with the suit or to return the plaint for presentation in such other Court as it may in its order 
declare to be competent to take cognizance of the suit.  
(3) The order of the Chief Court  on any such reference shall be conclusiv e as against persons who are 
not parties to the suit as well as against persons who are parties thereto.  
100. Power of Chief  Court to validate proceedings held under mistake as to jurisdiction .—(1 ) In 
either of the following cases , namely :  — 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 34]
34 
 (a) if it appears to a Civil Court that a Court under its control has determined a suit of a class 
mentioned in section 77 which under the provisions of that section should have been heard and  
determined by a Revenue Court, or  
(b) if it appears to a Revenue Court t hat a Court under its control has determined a suit which 
should ha ve been heard by a Civil Court  the Civil Court or Revenue Court , as the case may be , shall 
submit  the record of the suit to the Chief  Court. 
(2) If on perusal of the record it appears to the Chief Court that the suit was so determined in god faith,  
and that the parties have not been prejudiced by the mistake as to jurisdiction, the Chief  Court may order 
that the decree be registered in the Court which had jurisdiction.  
 (3) If it appears to the Chief Court , otherwise than on submission of a record under subsection ( 1), 
that a Civil Court under its control has determined a suit of a class mentioned in section 77 which under 
the provisions of that section should have been heard and determined by a Revenue Court , the Chief 
Court may pass any order which it might have passed if the record had been submitted to it under that 
sub-section.  
(4) With respect  to any proceeding subsequent to decree , the Chief  Court  may make such order for its 
registratio n in a Revenue court or Civil Court as in the circumstances appears to be just and proper.  
(5) An order of the Chief  Court  under this section shall be conclusive as against persons who were not 
parties to the suit or proceeding as well as against persons who were parties thereto , and the decree or 
proceeding to which the order relates shall have effect as if it had been made or had by the Court in which the order has required it to be registered.  
(6) The provisions of this section shall apply to any suit i nstituted on or after the first day of 
November, 1884 and to proceedings arising out or any such suit.  
Miscellaneous . 
101. Place of sitting .—(1
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 34]
 1884 and to proceedings arising out or any such suit.  
Miscellaneous . 
101. Place of sitting .—(1) An Assistant Collector may exercise his powers under this Act at any place 
within the limits of the district in which he is employed.  
(2) Any other Revenue -officer or Revenue court may only exercise his or its powers under this Act 
within the local limits of his or its jurisdiction.  
102. Holidays .—(1) The Financial Commissioner , with the approval of the Local  Government , shall 
publish in the local Official Gazette before the commencement of each calendar year a list of days to be 
observed in that year as holidays by all or any Revenue -officers and Revenue Courts.  
(2) A Proceeding had before a Revenue -officer or Revenue court on a day specified in the list as a day 
to be observed by the officer or Court as a holiday shall not be invalid by reason only of i ts having been 
had on that day. 
103. Discharge of duties of Collector dying or being disabled .—When a Collector dies or is 
disabled from performing his duties , the officer who succeeds temporarily to the chief executive 
administration of the district under  any orders which may be generally or specially issued by the Local 
Government i n this behalf shall be deemed to be a Collector under this Act.  
104. Retention of powers by Revenue -officer on transfer .—When a Revenue -officer of any class 
who, either as such or as a Revenue Court , has under the foregoing provisions of this Act any powers to 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 35]
35 
 be exercised in any local area is transferred from that local area to another as a Revenue -officer or 
Revenue Court of the same or a higher , class, he shall  continue to exercise those powers in that other local 
area,  unless the Local  Government otherwise directs or has otherwise directed.  
105. Conferment of power of Revenue -officer or Revenue Court .—(1) The Local Government may 
by notification confer on any person.—  
(a) all or any of the powers of a Financial Commissioner, Commissioner or Collector under this 
Act, or  
(b) all or any of the powers with which an Assistant Collector of either grade is, or may be , 
invested thereunder,  
and may by notification wit hdraw any powers as conferred.  
(2) A person on whom powers are conferred under sub- section ( 1) shall exercise those powers within 
such local limits and in such classes of cases as the Local  Government may direct , and, except as 
otherwise directed by the L ocal Government , shall for all purposes connected with the exercise thereof be 
deemed a Financial Commissioner, Commissioner , Collector or Assistant Collector , as the case may be.  
(3) Before conferring powers on the Judge of a Civil Court under sub- section  (1), the Local  
Government shall consult the Chief Court.  
(4) If any of the powers of a Collector under section 78, section 79, section 80 or section 82 are 
conferred on an Assistant Collector , they shall , unless the Local  Government by special order othe rwise 
directs , be exercised by him subject to the control of the Collector.  
106. Power for Financial Commissioner to make rules. —(1) The Financial Commissioner may , in 
addition to the other rules which may be made by him under this Act, make rules  consist ent with this Act 
and any other enactment for the time being in force —  
(a) determining , notwithstanding anything in any record- or-rights , the number and amount of the 
instalments and the times by and at which rent is to be paid;  
(b) for the g
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 35]
ber and amount of the 
instalments and the times by and at which rent is to be paid;  
(b) for the guidance of Re venue -officers in determining , for the purposes of this Act , the amount of 
the land- revenue of any land;  
(c) prescribing , for all or any of the territories to which this Act extends the periods during which in 
proceedings held under this Act , a Revenue -officer or Revenue Court is not , except for reasons of 
urgency to be recorded , to issue any process of arrest against , tenant or against a landowner who 
cultivates his own land;  
(d) regulating the procedure in cases where persons are entitled to inspect rec ords of Revenue -
officer or Revenue Courts , or to obtain copies of the same , and prescribing the fees payable for 
searches and copies ;  
(e) prescribing forms for such books , entries,  statistics and accounts as the Financial Commissioner 
thinks necessary to be kept , made or compiled in Revenue -officers or Revenue Courts or submitted to 
any authority;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 36]
36 
 (f) declaring what shall be the language of any of those offices and Courts , and determining in what 
cases persons practising in  those officers and Courts shall be permitted  to address the presiding 
officers thereof in English; and  
(g) generally for the guidance of Revenue -officers and other persons in matters connected with the 
enforcement of this Act.  
(2) Until rules are made under clause (a) of sub -section ( 1), rent shall be payable by the instal ments  
and at the times by and at which it is now payable.  
(3) Rules made by the Financial Commissioner under this or any other section of this Act shall not 
take effect until they have been sanctioned by the Local Government . 
107. Rules to be made after previous publication .—The power to make any rules under this Act is 
subject to the control  of the  Governor General in council, and to t he condition of the rules being made 
after precious publication.  
108. Powers exercisable by Financial Commissioner  from time to time .—all powers conferred by 
this Act on the Financial Commissioner may be exercised from time to time as occasion requires.  
CHAPTER VIII . 
EFFECT OF  THIS ACT ON RECORD -OF-RIGHTS  AND AGREEMENTS . 
109. Nullity of certain entries in records- of-rights .—An entry in any record- of-rights providing .— 
(a) that a landlord may prevent a tenant from making , or eject him for making , such improvements 
on his tenancy as he is entitled to make under this Act,  or 
(b) that a tenant ejected form his tenancy shall not be entitled to compensation for improvements                 
or for disturbance in any case in which he would under this Act  be entitled to compensation                   
therefor, or  
(c) that a landlord may eject a tenant otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of this Act,  
shall be void to that extent.  
110. Nullity of certain agreements contrary to the Act .—(1) Nothing in any agreement made 
between a landlord and a tenant afte r the passing of 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 36]
 the Act .—(1) Nothing in any agreement made 
between a landlord and a tenant afte r the passing of this Act shall.—  
(a) override any of the provisions of this Act with respect to the acquisition of a right of occupancy, 
or the reduction,  remission or suspension of rent , or the enhancement of the rent of a tenant having a 
right of occupancy under  section 5 or section 6, or 
(b) take away or limit the right of a tenant as determined by this Act to make improvements and 
claim compensation therefor, or , where compensation for disturbance can be claimed under this Act , to 
claim such compensation , or 
 (c) entitle a landlord to eject a tenant otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of                     
this Act.  
(2) Nothing in clause (a ) of sub- section ( 1) shall apply to an agreement by which a tenant binds 
himself to pay an enhanced rent in consideration of an improvement which has been, or is to be , made in 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 37]
37 
 respect of his tenancy by , or at expense of , his landlord , and to the benefit of which the tenant is not 
otherwise entitled.  
111. Saving of other agreements when in writing. —Save as expressly provided in this Act , nothing 
in this Act shall affect the operation of any agreement between a landlord and a tenant , when the 
agreement either is in writing or has been recorded in a record -of-rights before the passing of the Punjab 
Land -Revenue Act, 1887, (XVII of  1887) or been entered by order of a Revenue -officer in a record -of- 
rights or annual record under the provisi ons of that Act. 
112. Effect of certain entries made in records -of-rights before November 1871 .—An entry made 
with respect to any of the following matters before the eighteenth day of November, 1871 and attested by 
the proper officer , in the record of a re gular settlement sanctioned by the local Government , namely  : 
(a) the enhancement or abatement of the rent of a tenant having a right of occupancy , or the 
commutation of rent in kind into rent in money or of rent in money into rent in kind, or the taking of 
rent in kind by division or appraisement of the produce or other procedure of a like nature, or  
(b) the letting or under -letting of land in which there is a right of occupancy by the tenant having 
that right , or the alienation of or succession to land i n which such a right subsists;  
shall be deemed to be an agreement within the meaning of the last foregoing section.  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
  
 
   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE PUNJAB TENANCY ACT, 1887..pdf - page 38]
38 
 THE SCHEDULE . 
See Section 2.  
ENACTMENTS  REPEALED . 
Number and year.  Title . Extent of repeal . 
1 2 3 
Act of the Governor General in Council . 
XXVIII of 1868 . Punjab Tenancy Act.  The whole.  
VIII of 1873 . Northern India Ca nal and Drainage Act .  Section 40 to 43, both inclusive  
XIV of 1875 . Punjab Judicial Administration  Act. So much as has not been 
repealed.  
XVIII of 1884 . Punjab Courts Act.  Section 3, clauses (1), (2), (4), 
(5), (6) and (7); the whole of 
Chapter V; the last seventeen 
words of sub- section (1) of 
section 67; section 70 so far as 
regards Revenue Courts; and 
section 75.  
 
 
___________  
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
    
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RELIGIOUS ENDOWMENTS ACT, 1863.pdf - page 1]
1 THE RELIGIOUS ENDOWMENTS ACT, 1863  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
PREAMBLE . 
SECTIONS  
1. [Repealed. ]. 
2. Interpretation -clause.  
“Civil Court” and “Court”.  
3. Government to make special provision respecting mosques, etc.  
4. Transfer to trustees,  etc., of trust -property in charge of Revenue Board.  
Cessation of Board’s powers as to such property . 
5. Procedure in case of dispute as to right of succession to vacated trustee ship.  
Powers of managers appointed by Court.  
6. Rights, etc., of trustees to whom property is transferred under section 4.  
7. Appointment of committees.  
Constitution and duties of committees.  
8. Qualifications of member of committee.  
Ascertaining wishes of persons interested.  
9. Tenure of office.  
Removal.  
10. Vacancies to be filled.  
Procedure.  
When Court may fill vacancy.  
11. No member of Committee to be also trustee, etc. , of mosque, etc.  
12. On appointment of Committee, Board and local agents to transfer property.  
Termination of powers and responsibilities of Board and Agents.  
Commencement of powers of committee.  
13. Duty of trustee, etc., as to accounts . 
and of committee.  
14. Persons interested may singly sue in case of breach of trust, etc.  
Powers of Civil Court.  
15. Nature of interest entitling person to  sue. 
16. Refe rence to arbitrators.  
Act 10 of 1940 applied.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RELIGIOUS ENDOWMENTS ACT, 1863.pdf - page 2]
2 SECTIONS  
17. Reference under Act 10 of 1940.  
18. Application for leave to institute suits.  
Costs.  
19. Court may require accounts of trust to be filed.  
20. Proceedings for criminal breach of trust.  
21. Cases in which endowments are partly for religious and partly for secular purposes.  
22. Government not to hold charge henceforth of property for support of any mosque, temple, etc.  
23. Effect of Act in respect of Regulations therein mentioned, and of buildings of a ntiquity, etc.  
24. [Repealed. ]. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RELIGIOUS ENDOWMENTS ACT, 1863.pdf - page 3]
3 THE RELIGIOUS ENDOWMENTS  ACT, 186 31 
ACT NO. 20 OF 1863 
[10th March , 186 3.] 
 An Act to enable the Government to divest itself of the management of Religious Endowments.  
Preamble. —Whereas it is expedient to relieve the Boards of Revenue, and the local Agents, in the 
Presidency of Fort William in Bengal, and the Presidency of Fort Saint George, from the duties imposed  on 
them by Regulation XIX, 1810  (Ben. Reg. 19 of 1810) , of the Bengal Code (for the due appropriation of the 
rents and produce of lands granted for the support of M osques, Hindu Temples, Colleges  and other purposes; 
for the maintenance and repair of Bridg es, Sarais, Kattras, and other public buildings; and for the custody and 
disposal of Nazul Property or Escheats), and Regulation VII, 1817  (Mad. Reg. 7 of 1817) , of the Madras 
Code (for the due appropriation of the rents and produce of lands granted for th e support of Mosques, Hindu 
Temples and Colleges or other public purposes; for the maintenance and repair of Bridges, Choultries, or 
Chattrams, and other public buildings; and for the custody and disposal of Escheats), so far as those duties 
embrace the su perintendence of lands granted for the support of Mosques or Hindu Temples and for other 
religious uses; the appropriation of endowments made for the maintenance of such religious establishments; 
the repair and preservation of buildings connected therewith , and the appointment of trustees or managers 
thereof; or involve any conne xion with the management of such religious establishments;  2*** It is enacted as 
follows: — 
1. [Repeal of parts of Bengal Regulation 19 of 1810 and Madras Regulation  7 of 1817]. —[Rep. by the 
Repealing Act , 1870 (14 of 1870), s. 1 and the Schedule . 
2. Interpretation -clause.—In this Act ,— 
                                                      
1. Short title given by the Indian Short Titles Act, 1897 (14 of 1897).  
The Act has been extended to Kanara by the Religious Endowments (Exte
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RELIGIOUS ENDOWMENTS ACT, 1863.pdf - page 3]
tles Act, 1897 (14 of 1897).  
The Act has been extended to Kanara by the Religious Endowments (Extension to Kanara) Act, 1865 (Bom. Act 7 of 1865), 
which was specially passed for that purpose.  
It has been decla red, by notification under s. 3 (a) of the Scheduled Districts Act, 1874 ( Act 14 of 1874), to be in force in the 
following Scheduled Districts, namely: — 
The Districts of Hazaribagh, L ohardaga (now the Ranc hi 
District, see Cal 
cutta Gazette, 1899, Pt. I, p. 44), and  
Manbhum and Pargana Dhalbhum and the Kolhan in the  
District of Singhbhum  . . . . See Gazette of India,                1881, Pt. I, p. 504.  
The Scheduled portion of  the Mirzapur Distri ct  Ditto  1879, Pt. I, p. 383.  
Jaunsar Bawar .  . . . .  Ditto                 1879, Pt. I, p. 382.  
The Scheduled Districts in Ganjam and Vi zagapatam .  Ditto                 1898, Pt. I, p. 870 . 
Assam (except the North Lushai Hills).   Ditto                 1897, Pt. I,  p. 299.  
It has been extended, by notifications under s. 5 of the last -mentioned Act to the following Scheduled Districts, namely: — 
Kumaon and Garhwal .  . .   See Gazette of India,   1876, Pt, I, p, 606.  
The Tara i of the Province of Agra      . .    Ditto     1876, Pt. I, p. 505.  
Ajmer and Merwara .        . .    Ditto     1877, Pt. I, p. 605.  
The Act has been extended to and brought into force in Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and the First 
Schedule (w.e.f. 1 -7-1965).  
Section 22 applies to the  whole of India except Part B States.  
It has been repealed in Madras as to Hindu religious endowments by the Madras Hindu Religious Endowment            
Act, 1926 (Mad. Act 2 of 1927), and in Orissa by the Orissa Hindu Religious Endowments Act, 1939 (Oriss a Act 4 of 1939) 
and has been amended in Bengal by the Bengal Wakf Act, 1934 (Ben. Act 13 of 1934).  
The Act shall not apply to any religious trust in the State of Bihar (Bihar Act 1 of 1951).  
The Act shall not apply to any wakf to which the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RELIGIOUS ENDOWMENTS ACT, 1863.pdf - page 3]
ust in the State of Bihar (Bihar Act 1 of 1951).  
The Act shall not apply to any wakf to which the Wakf  Act, 1954 ( Act 29 of 1954) applies vide Act 34 of 1964.  
The Act ceased to be in for ce in the State of Madras by Madras Act 22 of 1959.  
2. The words and figures “and wh ereas it is expedient for that purpose to repeal so much of Regulation 19, 1810 of the B engal Code, 
and Regulation 7, 1817, of the Madras Code, as relate to endowments for the support of mosques, Hindu temples or other 
religious purposes”, rep. by Act 16 of 1874, s. 1 and the Schedule  (w.e.f. 16 -12-1874).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RELIGIOUS ENDOWMENTS ACT, 1863.pdf - page 4]
4 1*   *   *   *   * 
“Civil Court ” and “Court”.—The words “Civil Court ” and “Court ” shall 2[save as provided in section 
10] mean the principal Court of original civil jurisdiction in the district in which 1[or any other Court 
empowered in that behalf by the State Government within the local limits of the jurisdiction of which ] the 
mosque, temple or religious establishment is s ituate, relating to which, or to the endowment whereof, any suit 
shall be instituted or application made under the provisions of this Act.  
3. Government to make special provision respecting mosques, etc. —In the case of every mosque, 
temple or other religio us establishment to which the provisions of either of the Regulations specified                              
in 3[the preamble to this Act ] are applicable, and nomination of the trustee, manager or superintendent 
thereof, at the time of the passing of this  Act, is vested in, or may be exercised by, the Government, or any 
public officer, or in which the nomination of such trustee, manager or superintendent shall be subject to the 
confirmation of the Government or any public officer, the State Government shal l, as soon as possible after 
the passing of this Act, make special provision as hereinafter provided.  
4. Transfer to trustees, etc., of trust -property in charge of Revenue Board. —In the case of every 
such mosque, temple or other religious establishment which, at the time of the passing of this Act, shall be 
under the management of any trustee, manager or superintendent, whose nomination shall not vest in, nor be 
exercised by, nor be subject to the confirmation of, the Government, or any public officer, t he State Govern -
ment shall, as soon as possible after the passing of this Act, transfer to such trustee, manager or 
superintendent, all the landed or other property which, a t the time of the passing of this Act, shall be under 
the superintendence or in the  possession of the Board of Revenue, or any local a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RELIGIOUS ENDOWMENTS ACT, 1863.pdf - page 4]
t, shall be under 
the superintendence or in the  possession of the Board of Revenue, or any local agent, and belonging to such 
mosque, temple of other religious establishment, except such property as is hereinafter provided ; 
Cessation of Board ’s powers as to such property .—and the powers and respon sibilities of the Board of 
Revenue, and the local agents, in respect to such mosque, temple or other religious establishment, and to all 
land and other property so transferred, except as regards acts done and liabilities incurred by the said Board 
of Reven ue or any local agent, previous to such transfer, shall cease and determine.  
45. Procedure in case of dispute as to right of succession to vacated trustee ship.—Whenever from 
any cause a vacancy shall occur in the office of any trustee, manager, or superin tendent, to whom any 
property shall have been transferred under the last preceding section, and any dispute shall arise respecting 
the right of succession to such office, it shall be lawful for any person interested in the mosque, temple or re -
ligious esta blishment, to which such property shall belong, or in the performance of the worship or of the 
service thereof, or the trusts relating thereto, to apply to the Civil Court to appoint a manager of such mosque, 
temple or other religious establishment, and th ereupon such Court may appoint such manager, to act until 
some other person shall by suit have established his right of succession to such office.  
Powers of managers appointed by Court. —The manager so appointed by the Civil Court shall have, 
and shall exer cise, all the powers which, under this or any other Act, the former trustee, manager, or 
superintendent, in whose place such manager is appointed, by the Court, had or could exercise, in relation to 
such mosque, temple or religious establishment, or the pr operty belonging thereto.  
6. Rights, etc., of trustees to whom property is transferred under section 4. —The rights, powers, and 
r
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RELIGIOUS ENDOWMENTS ACT, 1863.pdf - page 4]
ghts, etc., of trustees to whom property is transferred under section 4. —The rights, powers, and 
responsibilities of every trustee, manager or superintendent, to whom the land and other property of any 
mosque, temple or other  religious establish ment is transferred in the manner prescribed in section 4 of this 
Act, as well as the conditions of their appointment, election and removal, shall be the same as if this Act had 
not been passed, except in respect of the liability to be  sued under this Act, and except in respect of the 
authority of the Board of Revenue, and local agents, given by the Regulations hereby repealed, over such 
                                                      
1. The clauses relating to “number” a nd “gender” rep. by Act 10 of 1914, s. 3 and the Second Schedule  (w.e.f. 17 -3-1914) . 
2. Ins. by Act 21 of 1925, s. 2  (w.e.f. 11 -9-1925) . 
3. Subs. by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and the Second Schedule, for “section 1”  (w.e.f. 21 -3-1891) . 
4. Section 5 shall not apply to any wakf to which the Wakf Act, 1954 (29 of 1954) applies  (w.e.f. 1 -10-1962) . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RELIGIOUS ENDOWMENTS ACT, 1863.pdf - page 5]
5 mosque, temple or religious establishment, and over such trustee, manager, or super intendent, which 
authority is hereby determined and repealed.  
All the powers which might be exercised by any Board or local agent, for the recovery of the rent of land 
or other property transferred under the said section 4  of this Act, may, from the date of such transfer, be 
exercised by any trustee, manager or super intendent to whom such transfer is made.  
7. Appointment of committees. —In all cases described in section 3 of this Act the State Government 
shall once for all appoint one or more committees  in every di vision o r district  to take the place, and to 
exercise the powers, of the Board of Revenue and the local agents under the Regulations hereby repealed.  
Constitution and duties of committees. —Such committee shall consist of three or more persons, and 
shall perform al l the duties imposed on such Board and local agents, except in respect of any property which 
is specially provided for under section 21 of this Act.  
8. Qualifications of member of committee. —The members of the said committee shall be appointed 
from among p ersons professing the religion for the purposes of which the mosque, temple or other religious 
establishment was founded or is now maintained, and in accordance, so far as can be ascertained, with the 
general wishes of those who are interested in the maint enance of such mosque, temple or other religious 
establish ment.  
The appointment of the committee shall be notified in the Official Gazette.  
Ascertaining wishes of persons interested. —In order to ascertain the general wishes of such persons in 
respect of s uch appointment, the State Government may cause an election to be held, under such rules  1[, by 
notification in the Official Gazette ,] (not incon sistent with the provisions of this Act ) as shall be framed by 
such State Government.  
1[Every rule framed unde r this section shall be laid, as soon as it is framed, before
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RELIGIOUS ENDOWMENTS ACT, 1863.pdf - page 5]
Government.  
1[Every rule framed unde r this section shall be laid, as soon as it is framed, before the State Legislature.]  
9. Tenure of office. —Every member of a committee appointed as above shall hold his office for life, 
unless removed for misconduct or unfitness;  
Removal. —and no such member shall be removed except by an order of the Civil Court as hereinafter 
provided.  
10. Vacancies to be filled. —Whenever any vacancy shall occur among the members of a committee 
appointed as above, a new member shall be elected to fill the vacancy by th e persons interested as above 
provided.  
Procedure. —The remaining members of the committee shall, as soon as possible, give public notice of 
such vacancy, and shall fix a day, which shall not be later than three months from the date of such vacancy, 
for an election of a new member by the persons interested as above provided, under rules for elections which 
shall be framed by the State Government;  
and whoever shall be then elected, under the said rules, shall be a member of the committee to fill such 
vacancy.  
When Court may fill vacancy. —If any vacancy as aforesaid shall not be filled up by such election as 
aforesaid within three months after i t has occurred, the Civil Court, on the application of any person 
whatever, may appoint a person to fill the vacancy or may order that the vacancy be forthwith filled up by the 
remaining members of the committee, with which order it shall then be the duty o f such remaining members 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 20 of 19 83, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 15 -3-1984).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RELIGIOUS ENDOWMENTS ACT, 1863.pdf - page 6]
6 to comply; and if this order be not complied with, the Civil Court may appoint a member to fill the said 
vacancy.  
1[Explanation .—In this section “Civil Court ” means the principal Court of original civil jurisdiction in 
the district  in which the mosques, temples or religious establishments for which the committee has been 
appointed or any of them are situate. ] 
11. No member of Committee to be also trustee, etc. , of mosque, etc. —No member of a committee 
appointed under this Act shall be capable of being, or shall act, also as a trustee, manager or superintendent of 
the mosque, temple or other religious establish ment for the management of which such committee shall have 
been appointed.  
12. On appointment of Committee, Board and local a gents to transfer property. —Immediately on 
the appointment of a committee as above provided for the superintendence of any such mosque, temple or 
religious establishment, and for the management of its affairs, the Board of Revenue, or the local agents 
acting under the authority of the said Board, shall transfer to such committee all landed or other property 
which at the time of appointment shall be under the superintendence, or in the posses sion of the said Board or 
local agents, and belonging to the said religious establishment, except as is hereinafter provided for,  
Termination of powers and responsibili ties of Board and agents. —and there upon the powers and 
responsibilities of the Board and the local agents, in respect to such mosque, temple or religious  
establishment, and to all land and other property so trans ferred except as above, and except as regards acts 
done and liabilities incurred by the said Board or agents previous to such transfer, shall cease and determine.  
Comme ncement of powers of committ ee.—All the powers which might be exer cised by any Board or 
local agent for the recovery of the rent of land or other property transferred under this section may from the 
date of such transfer
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RELIGIOUS ENDOWMENTS ACT, 1863.pdf - page 6]
he rent of land or other property transferred under this section may from the 
date of such transfer be exercised by such committee to whom such transfer is made.  
13. Duty of trustee, etc., as to accounts. —It shall be the duty of every trustee, manager and 
superintendent of a mosque, temple or religious establishment o f which the provisions of this Act shall apply 
to keep regular accounts of his receipts and dis bursements in respect of the endowments and expenses of such 
mosque, temple or other religious establishment;  
and of committee. —and it shall be the duty of every committee of management, appointed or acting 
under the authority of this Act, to require from eve ry trustee, manager and superintendent of such mosque, 
temple or other religious establishment, the pro duction of such regular accounts of such receipts and 
disbursements at least once in every year; and every such committee of management shall themselves  keep 
such accounts thereof.  
14. Persons interested may singly sue in case of breach of trust, etc. —Any person or persons 
interested in any mosque, temple or religious establishment, or in the per formance of the worship or of the 
service thereof, or the t rusts relating thereto, may, without joining as plaintiff any of the other persons 
interested therein, sue before the Civil Court the trustee, manager or superintendent of such mosque, temple 
or religious establishment or the member of any committee appoin ted under this Act, for any misfeasance, 
breach of trust or neglect of duty, committed by such trustee, manager, superintendent or member of such 
committee, in respect of the trusts vested in, or confided to, them respectively;  
Powers of Civil Court. —and t he Civil Court may direct the specific performance of any act by such 
trustee, manager, superintendent or member of a committee,  
and may decree damages and costs against such trustee, manager, superintendent or member of a 
committee,  
and may also direct th e remov
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RELIGIOUS ENDOWMENTS ACT, 1863.pdf - page 6]
st such trustee, manager, superintendent or member of a 
committee,  
and may also direct th e removal of such trustee, manager, superintendent or member of a committee.  
                                                      
1. Added by Act 21 of 1925, s. 3  (w.e.f. 11 -9-1925) .  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RELIGIOUS ENDOWMENTS ACT, 1863.pdf - page 7]
7 15. Nature of interest entitling person to sue .—The interest required in order to entitle a person to sue 
under the last preceding section need not be a pecuniary, or a direct or immediate, interest or such an interest 
as would entitle the person suing to take any part in the management or superintendence of the trusts.  
Any person having a right of attendance, or having been in the habit of attending, at the performance of 
the wors hip or service of any mosque, temple or religious estab lishment, or of partaking in the benefit of any 
distribution of alms, shall be deemed to be a person interested within the meaning of the last preceding 
section.  
 16. Reference to arbitrators .—In any suit or proceeding instituted under this Act it shall be lawful for 
the Court before which such suit or proceeding is pending to order any matter in difference in such suit to be 
referred for decision to one or more arbitrators.  
Act 10 of 1940 applied. —Whe never any such order shall be made, the provisions of 1[Chapter IV of the 
Arbitration Act, 1940 (10 of 1940)] shall in all respects apply to such order and arbitration, in the same 
manner as if such order had been made on the application of the parties under 2[section 21  of the said Act ]. 
 17. Reference under Act 10 of 1940 .—Nothing in the last preceding section s hall prevent the parties 
from applying to the Court, or the Court from making the order of reference, under the said  3[section 21  of the 
Arbitration Act, 1940 ]. 
18. Application for leave to institute suits .—No suit shall be entertained under this Act witho ut a 
preliminary application being first made to the Court for leave to institute such suit  4***. 
The Court, on the perusal of the application, shall determine whether there are sufficient prima facie  
grounds for the institution of a suit, and, if in the judgment of the Court there are such grounds, leave shall be 
given for its institution.  
Costs.—5*** If the Court shall be of opinion 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RELIGIOUS ENDOWMENTS ACT, 1863.pdf - page 7]
 grounds, leave shall be 
given for its institution.  
Costs.—5*** If the Court shall be of opinion that the suit has been for the benefit of the trust, and that no 
party to the suit is in fault, the Court may order the costs or such portion as it may consider just to be paid out 
of the estate.  
19. Court may require accounts of trust to be filed .—Before giving leave for institution of a suit, or, 
after leave has been giv en, before any proceeding is taken, or at any time when the suit is pending, the Court 
may order the trustee, manager or superintendent, or any member of a committee, as the case may be, to file 
in Court the accounts of the trust, or such part thereof as t o the Court may seem necessary.  
 20. Proceedings for criminal breach of trust .—No suit or proceeding before any Civil Court under the 
preceding sections shall in any way affect or interfere with any proceeding in a Criminal Court for criminal 
breach of tru st. 
21. Cases in which endowments are partly for religious and partly for secular purposes .—In any 
case in which any land or other property has been granted for the support of an establishment partly of a 
religious and partly of a secular character,  
or in which the endowment made for the support of an establishment is appropriated partly to religious 
and partly to secular uses,  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 1940, s. 49 and the Fourth Schedule, for “Chapter VI of the Code of Civil Procedure”  (w.e.f. 1 -7-1940) . 
2. Subs. by s. 49 and the Fourth Schedule, ibid., for “section 312 of the said Code”  (w.e.f. 1 -7-1940) . 
3. Subs. by s. 49 and the Fourth Schedule, ibid., for “section 312 of the said Code of Civil Procedure”  (w.e.f. 1 -7-1940) . 
4. The words “ The application may be made upon unstamped paper.” rep. by Act 7 of 1870, s. 2 and the Third Schedule                       
(w.e.f. 1 -4-1870) . 
5. The words “In calculat ing the costs at the termination of the suit, the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RELIGIOUS ENDOWMENTS ACT, 1863.pdf - page 7]
 
(w.e.f. 1 -4-1870) . 
5. The words “In calculat ing the costs at the termination of the suit, the stamp duty on the preliminary application shall be estimated, 
and shall be added to the costs of the suit.” , rep. by s. 2 and the Third Schedule, ibid. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RELIGIOUS ENDOWMENTS ACT, 1863.pdf - page 8]
8 the Board of Revenue, before transferring to any trustee, manager or superintendent, or to any committee 
of management appointed un der this Act, shall determine what portion, if any, of the said land or other 
property shall remain under the superintendence of the said Board for application to secular uses,  
and what portion shall be transferred to the superintendence of the trustee, ma nager or superintendent, or 
of the committee,  
and also what annual amount, if any, shall be charged on the land or other property which may be so 
transferred to the superintendence of the said trustee, manager or superintendent, or of the committee, and 
made payable to the said Board or to the local agents, for secular uses as aforesaid.  
In every such case the provisions of this Act shall take effect only in respect to such land and other 
property as may be so transferred.  
22. Government not to hold charge henceforth of property for support of any mosque, temple, 
etc.—Except as provided in this Act, it shall not be lawful  1*** for 2[the Central Government or any State 
Government ], or for any officer of any Government in his official character,  
to undertake o r resume the superintendence of any land or other property granted for the support of, or 
otherwise belonging to, any mosque, temple or other religious establishment, or  
to take any part in the management or, appropriation of any endowment made for the mai ntenance of any 
such mosque, temple or other establishment, or  
to nominate or appoint any trustee, manager or superintendent thereof, or to be in any way concerned 
therewith3. 
23. Effect of Act in respect of Regulations therein mentioned, and of buildings of antiquity, etc. —
Nothing in this Act shall be held to affect the provisions the 4Regulations mentioned in this Act, except in so 
far as they relate to mosques, Hindu temples and other religious establishments; or to prevent the Government 
from taking suc h steps as it may deem necessary, unde
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RELIGIOUS ENDOWMENTS ACT, 1863.pdf - page 8]
establishments; or to prevent the Government 
from taking suc h steps as it may deem necessary, under the provisions of the said Regulations, to prevent 
injury to and preserve buildings5 remarkable for their antiquity, or for their historical or architectural value, or 
required fo r the convenience of the public.6 
24. [“India ”].—Rep. by the A.O. 1948 . 
 
____________  
                                                      
1. The words “after the passing of this Act” rep. by Act 16 of 1874, s. 1 and the Schedule  (w.e.f. 16 -12-1874) . 
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1948, for “any Govt. in India”.  
3. A proviso to s. 22 has been added to apply only to Bengal by the Bengal Waqf Act, 1934 (Ben. Act 13 of 1934).  
4. Namely the Bengal Charitable  Endowments, Public Buildings and Escheats Regulation, 1810 (Ben. Reg. 19 of 1810), and Madras 
Endowments and Escheats Regulation, 1817 (Mad. Reg. 7 of 1817).  
5. See now also the Ancient Monuments Preservation Act, 1904 (7 of 1904)  (w.e.f. 18 -3-1904) . 
6. A new section 23A has been added to apply only to Bengal by the Bengal Waqf Act, 1934 (Ben. Act 13 of 1934).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RELIGIOUS SOCIETIES ACT, 1880.pdf - page 1]
1 THE RELIGIOUS SOCIETIES ACT, 1880  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
Local extent.  
2. Appointment of new trustee in cases not otherwise provided for.  
3. Appointment under section 2 to be recorded in a memorandum under the hand of the chairman of 
the meeting.  
4. Property to vest in new trustees without conveyance . 
5. Saving of existing modes of appointment and conveyance.  
6. Provision for dissolution of societies and adjustment of their affairs.  
7. Upon a dissolution no memb er to receive profit.  
8. Saving of certain provisions of instruments.  
9. Questions may be submitted to High Court.  
 The Schedule.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RELIGIOUS SOCIETIES ACT, 1880.pdf - page 2]
2 THE RELIGIOUS SOCIETIES ACT, 1880  
ACT NO. 1 OF 18801 
[9th January , 1880 .] 
An Act to confer certain powers on Religious Societies.  
WHEREAS  it is expedient to simplify the manner in which  certain bodies of persons associated for the 
purpose of maintaining religious worship may hold property acquired for such purpose, and to provide for 
the dissolution of such bodies and the adjustment of their affairs and for the decision of certain questi ons 
relating to such bodies; It is hereby enacted as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Religious Societies Act, 1880.  
Local extent. —It 2*** shall extend to the whole of India except 3[the territories which, immediately 
before the 1st November, 1956, were comprised in Part B States],  
but nothing herein contained shall apply to any Hindus, Muhammadans or Buddhists, or to any 
persons whom the State Government may from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
exclude from the  operation of this Act.  
2. Appointment of new trustee in cases not otherwise provided for .—When any body of persons 
associated for the purpose of maintaining  religious worship has acquired,  or hereafter shall acquire, any 
property,  
and such property has be en or hereafter shall be vested in t rustees in trust for such body,  
and it becomes necessary to appoint a new trustee in the place of or in addition to any such trustee or 
any trustee appointed in the manner hereinafter prescribed,  
and no manner of appoint ing such new trustee is prescribed by any instrument by which such property 
was so vested or by which the trusts on which it is held have been declared, or such new trustee cannot 
for any reason be appointed in the manner so prescribed,  
such new trustee ma y be appointed in such manner as may be agreed upon by such body, or by a 
majority of not less than two -thirds of the members of such body actually present at the meeting at which 
the appointment is made.  
3. Appointment under s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RELIGIOUS SOCIETIES ACT, 1880.pdf - page 2]
uch body actually present at the meeting at which 
the appointment is made.  
3. Appointment under section 2 to be recorded in a memorandum under the hand of the 
chairman of the meeting .—Every appointment of new trustees under section 2 shall be made to appear 
by some memorandum under the hand of the chairman for the time being of the meeting at which such 
appointment is made.  
Such memorandum shall be in the form set forth in the Schedule hereto annexed, or as near thereto as 
circumstances allow, shall be executed and attested by two or more credible witnesses in the presence of 
such meeting, and shall be deemed to be a document of w hich the registration is required by the Indian 
Registration Act, 18774 (3 of 1877) , section 17.  
                                                           
1. The Act has been extended to and brought into force in Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and the First Schedule 
(w.e.f. 1 -7-1965) and to the Union territory of Pondicherry by Act 26 of 1968, s. 3 and the Schedule.  
2. The words “shall come into force at once, and” omitted by Act 10 of 1914, s. 3 and the Second Schedule.  
3. Subs. by t he Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956, for “Part B States”.  
4. See now the Indian Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RELIGIOUS SOCIETIES ACT, 1880.pdf - page 3]
3 4. Property to vest in new trustees without conveyance .—When any new trustees have been 
appointed, whether in the manner prescribed by any such instrument as a foresaid or in t he manner 
hereinbefore provided , the property subject to the trust shall forthwith, notwithstanding anything 
contained in any such instrument , become vested, without any conveyance or other assurance, in such 
new trustees and the old contin uing trustees jointly, or, if there are no old continuing trustees, in such new 
trustees wholly, upon the same trusts, and with and subject to the same powers and provisions, as it was 
vested in the old trustees.  
5. Saving of existing modes of appointment and conveyance .—Nothing herein contained shall be 
deemed to invalidate any appointment of new trustees, or any conveyance of any property, which may 
hereafter be made as heretofore was by law required.  
6. Provision for dissolution of societies and adjustment of their affairs .—Any number not less 
than three -fifths of the members of any such body as aforesaid may at a meeting convened for the purpose 
determine that such body shall be dissolved; and thereupon it shall b e dissolved forthwith, or at the time 
then agreed upon; and all necessary steps shall be taken for the disposal and settlement of the property of 
such body, its claims and liabilities, according to the rules of such body applicable thereto, if any, and, if  
not, then as such body at such meeting may determine:  
Provided that, in the event of any dispute arising among the members of such body, the adjustment of 
its affairs shall be referred to the principal Court of original civil jurisdiction of the district in which the 
chief building of such body is situate; and the Court shall make such order in the matter as it deems fit.  
 7. Upon a dissolution no member to receive profit .—If upon the dissolution of any such body 
there remains, after the satisfaction of al l its debts and liabilities, any property whatsoeve
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RELIGIOUS SOCIETIES ACT, 1880.pdf - page 3]
ody 
there remains, after the satisfaction of al l its debts and liabilities, any property whatsoever, the same shall 
not be paid to or distributed among the members of such body or any of them, but shall be given to some 
other body of persons associated for the purpose of maintaining religious worship o r some other religious 
or charitable purpose to be determined by the votes of not less than three -fifths of the members present at 
a meeting convened in this behalf, or in default thereof by such Court as last aforesaid.  
8. Saving of certain provisions of instruments .—Nothing in s ections 6 and 7 shall be deemed to 
affect any provision contained in any instrument for the dissolution of such body, or for the payment or 
distribution of such property.  
9. Questions may be submitted to High Court .—When any questi on arises, either in connection 
with the matters hereinbefore referred to, or otherwise, as to whether any person is a member of any such 
body as aforesaid, or as to the validity of any appointment under this Act, any person interested in such 
question may  apply by petition to the High Court for its opinion on such question.  A copy of such petition 
shall be served upon, and the hearing thereof may be attended by, such other persons interested in the 
question as the Court thinks fit.  
Any opinion given by the  Court on an application under this section shall be deemed to have the force 
of a declaratory decree1. 
The costs of every application under this section shall be in the discretion of the Court. 
                                                           
1. As to effect of a declaratory decree, see the Specific Relief Ac t 1963 , s. 35. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RELIGIOUS SOCIETIES ACT, 1880.pdf - page 4]
4 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 3)  
Memorandum of the appointment of the new trustees of the ( describe the church, chapel, or other 
buildings and property ) situate  
at a meeting duly convened and held for that purpose ( in the vestry of the said                          ) on the                                      
day of                         18                     , A.B.                    of                                    Chairman.  
Names and descriptions of all the trustees on the constitution or last appointment of trustees, made  the 
day of   
(here i nsert the same ) 
Names and descriptions of all the trustees in whom the said ( chapel and property ) now become 
legally vested,  
First—Old continuing trustees: — 
(here insert the same ) 
Second s.—New trustees now chosen and appointed: — 
(here insert the same ) 
Dated this                                                                day of                                                                    18 
Signed by the said A.B. as Chairman of the said Meeting,       A.B.,                  
at and in the presenc e of the said Meeting on the day and year             Chairman  of the  
aforesaid in the presence of —                       said Meeting . 
C.D.  
E.F. 
 
__________  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RENT RECOVERY ACT, 1853.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE RENT RECOVERY ACT, 1853  
ACT NO. VI OF 1853 
[Passed on the  15th April ,1853.] 
Recites transfer of Summary Suit from Judge to Collector, &c. and doubts in certain cases. Enacts:  
1,2. If lands the subject of sale and under one tenure are situate in 2 Collectorates, the sale to be by 
Collector in whose jurisdiction the greater part lies; and (2) doubt as to the collectorate in whic h the 
lands or greater part lie , to be decided by Board of Revenue.  
3, 4, 5, 6. Defines the meaning of the word  “Collectorat e.” And (4) defines in dependent d eputy to be 
a Collector; and (5) who is to be deemed an independent deputy; and (6) authorizes notice of sale to be 
stuck up at cutcherry of independent deputy.  
7. What powers an independent deputy may exercise, and within what parts.  
8. Notices to be stuck up at the Adawlut of the Zillah in which sale is to be made.  
9. Gives validity to orders, sales, & c. made by improper Collector, and to insufficient notices before 
this Act, unless proceedings to invalidate have been com menced.  
10. Extends Act 25, 1850, and B.R. 8, 1819, s. 9, subject to modification under B.R. 7. 1832, s. 16.c.1, 
and Act 25, 1850, to all sales under Act 8, 1835.  
An Act relating to summary suits fo r arrears of rent, to sales of P utnee T alooks and other 
saleable tenures, and to sales of land in satisfaction of Summary Decrees for rent.  
Whereas , by Regulation VIII . 1831 of the Bengal Code, the hearing and decision of Summary 
Suits or claims relating to arrears or exactions of rents were transferred from the Judges of the 
Zilah or City Courts to the Collectors of Land Revenue of the several districts;  and whereas by 
Regulation VII . 1832 of the Bengal Code, the conduct of sales of Putnee Talooks and other 
saleable tenures under Regulations VIII .1819 and I . 1820  of the same Code, and the performance 
of other acts preparatory to, or connected with, such sales were transferred of the Collecto r or 
Deputy Collector, of
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RENT RECOVERY ACT, 1853.pdf - page 1]
ratory to, or connected with, such sales were transferred of the Collecto r or 
Deputy Collector, of Land  Revenue , or Head Assistant to the Collector or Deputy Collector 
subject to an appeal as therein provided;  and whereas by Act VIII . 1835, the power there tofore 
vested in the Judge of the  Dewanny Adawlut of selling land satisfaction of Summary Decrees for 
rent was transferred to the Collectors of Land -Revenue, and it was enacted that all sales for the 
recovery of arrears of rent held under clause 7, section 15, Regulation VII . 1799, should be 
conducted by  the Collector, his Deputy or duty authorized Assistant, and that ten days' notice 
should be given of such sales by advertisement to be stuck up at the  Cutcherry  of 
the Zillah Court or local  Adawlut, and that of the Collector  ; and whereas it is expedient that Act 
XXV. 1850, and Section IX. Regulation VIII. 1819, of the Bengal Code, as modified by               
Clause I, Section XVI. Regulation VII. 1832 of the same Code, and as altered by the said Act 
XXV. 1850, should be extend ed to sales under Act VIII. 1835; and whereas doubts may be 
entertained as to who ought to exercise the jurisdiction transferred by the abovementioned 
Regulations and Acts, where lands situate within the  zillah or other district of one Collector , 
form part  of an entire estate, paying revenue to the Collector of an another  Zillah  or district; In 
order therefore to avoid such doubts, and also to define who are the proper Officers to exercise 
such jurisdictions in cases where lands are situate in a district ass igned to an independent Deputy 
Collector, and also in cases where lands held in p utnee, or other tenure , at one entire rent are 
situate in two or more Collectorates , and to prevent any such decision or sale already made from 
being held invalid, upon the gr ound of its having been made by an Officer of a wrong district; It 
is enacted as follows:  
I.   If the lands which may be the subject of any
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RENT RECOVERY ACT, 1853.pdf - page 1]
 of a wrong district; It 
is enacted as follows:  
I.   If the lands which may be the subject of any such sale, or to the rent of which any such suit may 
relate, be all situate in one Collectorate, the Collector of such Collectorate is the Collector to conduct the 
sale, or to hear and decide the suit.  If one  Talook or tenure shall comprise lands situate in two or more 
Collectorates, or if any lands situate in two or more Collectorates be held under one lease or engagement 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RENT RECOVERY ACT, 1853.pdf - page 2]
2 
 or at one entire rent, the Collector , in whose Collectorate the greater part of such lands shall be situate , is 
the Collector to conduct the sale of such  Talook,  or tenure or of such lands, and to hear and  decide any 
summary suit relating to arrears or exactions of rent in respect thereof.  
II.  If a Collector to whom application shall be made to exercise any of the powers above  mentioned 
shall entertain any doubt as to whether the lands or the greater part of them are situate within his 
collectorate, he shall report the case for the order of the Board to which he is subordinate, and, if ordered 
by such Board to proceed in the matter, such order shall be conclusive upon the question of his 
jurisdiction.  
III. The word “Collectorate ” in this Act means the  zillah or other district to which a Collector is 
appointed, and no lands situate beyond the limits of such  zillah or district shall be deemed to be situate 
within the Collectorate , by reason of their forming part of an estate paying revenue to the Collector 
thereof.  
IV. An independent Deputy Collector may, within his Deputy Collectorate, exercise all the powers 
and jurisdictions of a Collector with which he may be entrusted, in the same manner and to the same 
extent as a Collector may do within his Collectorate , and with reference to the exercise of such powers 
and jurisdictions, his Deputy Collectorate shall be deemed a Collectorate, and he shall be deemed to be a 
Collector within t he meaning of this Act.  
V. An independent Deputy Collector is an Officer appointed by  Government to act as Deputy 
Collector , independently of a Collector, whether his office is one for the receipt of revenue or not.A 
Deputy Collectorate is the district within which an independent Deputy Collector is directed 
by Government  to act.  
VI. In cases of sales by an independent Deputy C ollector , under the abovementioned Regulations or 
Act, any notice thereby required to be stuck up at the  Cutcherry  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RENT RECOVERY ACT, 1853.pdf - page 2]
e abovementioned Regulations or 
Act, any notice thereby required to be stuck up at the  Cutcherry  of the Collector , may be stuck up at 
the Cutcherry  of the Deputy Collector.  
VII. An independent Deputy Collector may exercise the powers assigned to him over any part of his 
Deputy Collectorate in public  Cutcherry , in whatever part of his Deputy Collectorate the same may be 
situate or held.  
VIII . Any notice required by the abovementioned Regulations or Act to be given by advertisement to 
be stuck up at the cutcherry of the  Zillah Court or local  Adawlut shall be stuck up at the  Zillah Court or 
local  Adawlut within the jurisdiction of which the lands to be sold, or the greater portion of them, as the 
case may be, shall be situate.  
IX. No order, decision, or sale, made in the discharge of any of the duties aforesaid, under any of the 
aforesaid Regulations, or under the aforesaid Act, before the pa ssing of this Act, shall be disputed, or 
deemed invalid, upon the ground that the Collector, Deputy Collector, or other Officer making the same, 
was not the Collector, Deputy Collector or Officer of the proper district; or upon the ground that the 
Cutcherr y, at which notice of such sale was given, was not the Cutcherry of the proper district, unless 
proceedings shall, previously to the passing of this Act, have been, commenced, for the purpose of 
disputing the validity of such order, decision, or sale upon such ground.  
X. Act XXV. 1850, and Section IX. Regulation VIII, 1819 of the Bengal Code, as modified by    
Clause I, Section XVI. Regulation VII. 1832 of the same Code, except so far as the same has been altered 
by the said Act XXV. 1850, are hereby extended to all sales under Act VIII. 1835.  
 
 
________  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE REVENUE COMMISSIONERS, BOMBAY ACT, 1842.pdf - page 1]
THE REVENUE COMMISSIONERS,  BOMBAY ACT , 1842  
ACT NO.  17 OF 1842.  
      ----------------------------  
Passed by the Hon’ble the President of the Council of India in Council, on the 16 th of December , 1842, 
with the assent of the Right hon’ble the Governor General of India . 
An Act  relative to the number and powers of the Revenue Commissioner under the Presidency of             
Bombay.  
I. It is hereby enacted, that so much of Regulation V, of 180, of the Bombay Code, as provides that one 
Revenue Commissioner shall be appointed  for the Territory subordinate to Bombay , and that the Southern 
Maharatta Country shall be excluded from his jurisdi ction, is repealed.  
II. And it is hereby enacted, that one or more Revenue Commissioners  shall be appointed for the whole 
of the Territory composing the Presidency of Bombay, each of whom shall be vested with all the powers 
possessed by the single Revenue  Com missioner, under Regulation V, 1830, and shall be empowered to act 
within the Presidency of Bombay, or over such portion as the Governor in Council of Bombay may, from 
time to time, prescribe  by a Order published in the Gazette .  
III. And it he hereby enacted , that each Revenue Commissioner shall have such number of Deputies 
and Assistants, as the Governor in Council may deem it expedient to appoint.  
 
                                                ------------------------------------------------  
 
  
 
 
 
 
             
              
       
       
<|CHUNK|>
[THE REVENUE RECOVERY ACT, 1890.pdf - page 1]
1 THE REVENUE RECOVERY ACT, 1890  
_________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
________ 
SECTIONS  
1. Title and extent. 
2. Definitions. 
3. Recovery of public demands by enforcement of pro cesses in other districts than those in which 
they become payable. 
4. Remedy available to person denying liability to pay amount recovered under last foregoing section. 
5. Recovery by Collectors of sums recoverable as ar rears of revenue by other public officers or by 
local authorities. 
6. Property liable to sale under this Act. 
7. Saving of local laws relating to revenue. 
8. Recovery in India of certain public demands aris ing beyond India. 
9. Recovery in India of land revenues’ etc., accrui ng in Burma. 
10. Duty of Collectors to remit moneys collected in  certain cases. 
THE SCHEDULE .
<|CHUNK|>
[THE REVENUE RECOVERY ACT, 1890.pdf - page 2]
2 THE REVENUE RECOVERY ACT, 1890 
ACT  NO. 1 OF 1890 1 
[14 th February , 1890.] 
An Act to make better provision for recovering cert ain public demands. 
WHEREAS  it is expedient to make better provision for recov ering certain public demands; It is hereby 
enacted as follows: — 
1. Title and extent. —(1) This Act may be called the Revenue Recovery Act, 1890. 
2[( 2) It extends to the whole of India except 3[*the State of Jammu and Kashmir];] 4*** 
5*   *   *   *   * 
2. Definitions.— In this Act, unless there is something repugnant in  the subject or context,— 
(1) “district” includes a presidency-town; 
(2) “Collector” means the chief officer in charge of the land-revenue administration of a district; 
and 
(3) “defaulter” means a person from whom an arrear of  land-revenue, or a sum recoverable as an 
arrear of land-revenue, is due, and includes a pers on who is responsible as surety for the payment of 
any such arrear or sum. 
3. Recovery of public demands by enforcement of pro cesses in other districts than those in 
which they become payable.— (1) Where an arrear of land-revenue, or a sum recover able as an arrear of 
land-revenue, is payable to a Collector by a defaul ter being or having property in a district other th an that 
in which the arrear accrued or the sum is payable, the Collector may send to the Collector of that oth er 
district a certificate in the form as nearly as may  be of the Schedule, stating— 
(a) the name of the defaulter and such other particul ars as may be necessary for his identification, 
and 
(b) the amount payable by him and the account on whic h it is due. 
(2) The certificate shall be signed by the Collector making it 6[or by any officer to whom such 
Collector may, by order in writing, delegate this d uty], and, save as otherwise provided by this Act, shall 
be conclusive proof of the matters therein stated. 
 (3) The Collector of the other district shall, on rec eiving the certificate, proceed to recover the 
amount stated th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE REVENUE RECOVERY ACT, 1890.pdf - page 2]
of the other district shall, on rec eiving the certificate, proceed to recover the 
amount stated therein as if it were an arrear of la nd-revenue which had accrued in his own district. 
 
                                                           
1. This Act has been modified in its application to  the Benares Family Domains, see  s.15 of the Benares Family Domains           
Act, 1904 (U.P. Act 3 of 1904). 
The Act has been extended to Goa, Daman and Diu wit h modifications by Reg. 12 of 1962, s. 3 and the Sch edule, extended 
to and brought into force in Dadra and Nagar Haveli  by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e .f. 1-7-1965), to the 
Union territory of Lakshadweep by Reg. 8 of 1965, s.  3 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 1-10-1967) and to the U nion territory of 
Pondicherry by Act 26 of 1968, s. 3 and the Schedul e. 
The Act has been amended in Assam by the Assam Act 16 of 1971. 
2. Subs. by the India (Adaptation of Income-tax, Pr ofits Tax and Revenue Recovery Acts) Order, 1947 (G.G .O. 31, dated the 
10th December, 1947) (Gazette of India, 1947, Extra ordinary, p. 1333), for sub-section ( 2). 
3. Subs. by Act 33 of 1950, s. 2 and the Schedule, for “Part B States”. 
4. The word “and” rep. by Act 10 of 1914, s. 3 and the Second Schedule. 
5. Sub-section ( 3) rep. by s. 3 and the Second Schedule, ibid . 
6. Ins. by Act 4 of 1914, s. 2 and the Schedule, Pa rt I. 
*. Now applicable to the Union territory of Jammu a nd Kashmir and the Union territory of Ladakh by the  Notification of  
Government of India, M/o Home Affairs vide No. S.O.  3912 (E), dated 30th October, 2019 (w.e.f. 31-10-2 019).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE REVENUE RECOVERY ACT, 1890.pdf - page 3]
3 STATE AMENDMENTS  
Assam 
Insertion of new section. —After Section 3 of the principal Act, the followin g shall be inserted as 
section 3A, namely:— 
“3A. —Certificate Officers to perform the functions of Co llector in respect of certificates 
received. —Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act, when any certificate is 
received under this Act, by the Collector of a Dist rict, any certificate officer in the district may e xercise 
all the powers and perform all the duties and funct ions of such Collector under this Act, in respect o f such 
certificate. 
Explanation —In this section ‘Certificate Officer’ has the same  meaning as in the Bengal Public 
Demands Recovery Act, 1913 (Bengal Act III of 1913) .” 
[Vide  Assam Act 16 of 1971, s. 2.] 
4. Remedy available to person denying liability to pay amount recovered under last foregoing 
section.— (1) When proceedings are taken against a person under  the last foregoing section for the 
recovery of an amount stated in a certificate, that  person may, if he denies his liability to pay the amount 
or any part thereof and pays the same under protest  made in writing at the time of payment and signed by 
him or his agent, institute a suit for the repaymen t of the amount or the part thereof so paid. 
(2) A suit under sub-section ( 1) must be instituted in a Civil Court having jurisd iction in the local area 
in which the office of the Collector who made the c ertificate is situate, and the suit shall be determ ined in 
accordance with the law in force at the place where  the arrear accrued or the liability for the paymen t of 
the sum arose. 
 (3) In the suit the plaintiff may, notwithstanding an ything in the last foregoing section, but subject t o 
the law in force at the place aforesaid, give evide nce with respect to any matter stated in the certif icate. 
 1[( 4) This section shall apply if under this Act as in force as part of the law of 2[Pakistan or] Burma, 
or under any other similar Act for
<|CHUNK|>
[THE REVENUE RECOVERY ACT, 1890.pdf - page 3]
this Act as in force as part of the law of 2[Pakistan or] Burma, 
or under any other similar Act forming part of the law of 2[Pakistan or] Burma, proceedings are taken 
against a person in 3[Pakistan or Burma, as the case may be,] for the re covery of an amount stated in a 
certificate made by a Collector in 4[any State to which this Act extends].] 
5. Recovery by Collectors of sums recoverable as ar rears of revenue by other public officers or 
by local authorities.— Where any sum is recoverable as an arrear ,of land- Revenue of any public officer 
other than a Collector or by local authority, the C ollector of the district in which the office of tha t officer 
or authority is situate shall, on the request of th e officer or authority, proceed to recover the sum as if it 
were an arrear of land-revenue which had accrued in  his own district, and may send a certificate of th e 
amount to be recovered to the Collector of another district under the foregoing provisions of this Act , as if 
the sum were payable to himself. 
6. Property liable to sale under this Act.— (1) When the Collector of a district receives a certi ficate 
under this Act, he may issue a proclamation prohibi ting the transfer or charging of any immovable 
property belonging to the defaulter in the district . 
(2) The Collector may at any time, by order in writin g, withdraw the proclamation, and it shall be 
deemed to be withdrawn when either the amount state d in the certificate has been recovered or the 
property has been sold for the recovery of that amo unt. 
(3) Any private alienation of the property or of any interest of the defaulter therein, whether by sale,  
gift, mortgage or otherwise, made after the issue o f the proclamation and before the withdrawal thereo f, 
                                                           
1. Ins. by the A.O.1937. 
2. Ins. by the India (Adaptation of Income-tax, Pro fits Tax and Revenue Recovery Acts) Order, 1941 (G.G. O. 31, dated the 10th 
December, 194
<|CHUNK|>
[THE REVENUE RECOVERY ACT, 1890.pdf - page 3]
-tax, Pro fits Tax and Revenue Recovery Acts) Order, 1941 (G.G. O. 31, dated the 10th 
December, 1947), (Gazette of India, 1947, Extraordi nary, p. 1333). 
3. Subs., ibid ., for “Burma”. 
4. Subs. by Act 33 of 1950, s. 2 and the Schedule f or “a Part A State or a Part C State”. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE REVENUE RECOVERY ACT, 1890.pdf - page 4]
4 shall be void as 1[against the 2[Government]] and any person who may purchase the p roperty at a sale 
held for the recovery of the amount stated in the c ertificate. 
(4) Subject to the foregoing provisions of this secti on, when proceedings are taken against any 
immovable property under this Act for the recovery of an amount stated in a certificate, the interest of the 
defaulter alone therein shall be so proceeded again st, and no incumbrances created, grants made or 
contracts entered into by him in 3good faith shall be rendered invalid by reason only  of proceedings being 
taken against those interests. 
(5) A proclamation under this section shall be made b y beat of drum or other customary method and 
by the posting of a copy thereof on a conspicuous p lace in or near the property to which it relates. 
7. Saving of local laws relating to revenue.— Nothing in the foregoing sections shall be construe d— 
(a) to impair any security provided by, or affect the  provisions of, any other enactment for the 
time being in force for the recovery of land-revenu e or of sums recoverable as arrears of land-
revenue, or 
(b) to authorise the arrest of any person for the rec overy of any tax payable to the corporation, 
commissioner, committee, board, council or person h aving authority over a municipality under any 
enactment for the time being in force. 
8. Recovery in India of certain public demands aris ing beyond India.— When this Act has been 
applied to any local area which is under the admini stration of 4[the Central Government 5***] but which 
is not part of 6[ 7*** India], an arrear of land-revenue accruing in t hat local area, or a sum recoverable as 
an arrear of land-revenue and payable to a Collecto r or other public officer or to a local authority i n that 
local area, may be recovered under this Act in 6[ 7*** India]. 
8[9. Recovery in India of land revenues, etc., accrui ng in Burma.— (1) The Central Government 
may direct 9 that an arrear of land-revenu
<|CHUNK|>
[THE REVENUE RECOVERY ACT, 1890.pdf - page 4]
s, etc., accrui ng in Burma.— (1) The Central Government 
may direct 9 that an arrear of land-revenue accruing in Burma o r a sum recoverable in Burma as an arrear 
of land-revenue and payable to a Collector or other  public officer or to a local authority in Burma ma y be 
recovered under this Act in 10 *** India and thereupon such arrear or sum shall be  so recoverable: 
Provided that the Central Government shall not give  any such direction unless it is satisfied that the  
remedy available under section 4 of this Act in 10 *** India to a person paying under protest in 10 *** India 
an arrear accruing in 10 *** India is available under Burma law in Burma to a person paying under protest 
in 10 *** India an arrear accruing in Burma. 
(2) For recovering by virtue of this section any arre ars of tax, penalty due under the enactments 
relating to income-tax or super-tax in force in Bur ma, the Collector shall have such additional powers  as 
he has in the case of Indian income-tax and super-t ax under the proviso to section 46( 2) of the Income-tax 
Act, 1922 (11 of 1922). 
11 [(3) Sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall apply in relation to Pakistan as they apply  in relation to Burma.] 
10. Duty of Collectors to remit moneys collected in  certain cases.— Where a Collector receives a 
certificate under this Act from, a Collector of ano ther State or a Collector in  8[Pakistan or] Burma, he 
shall remit any sum recovered by him by virtue of t hat certificate to that Collector, after deducting his 
expenses in connection with the matter.] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by the A O.1937, for “against the Governme nt”. 
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1948, for “Crown”. 
3. See  definition in the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), s. 22.  
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “the G. G. in C.”. 
5. The words “or the Crown Representative” omitted by  the India (Adaptation of Income-tax, Profits Tax a nd Revenue Recovery 
Acts) Order, 1947 (G. G. O. 31,
<|CHUNK|>
[THE REVENUE RECOVERY ACT, 1890.pdf - page 4]
 India (Adaptation of Income-tax, Profits Tax a nd Revenue Recovery 
Acts) Order, 1947 (G. G. O. 31, dated the 10th Dece mber, 1947) (Gazette of India, 1947, Extraordinary,  p. 1333).  
6. Subs., ibid ., for “British India”. 
7. The words “the Provinces of” omitted by the A.O. 1950. 
8. Ins. by the A. O. 1937. 
9. For a direction under this section, see  Gazette of India, 1937, Pt. I, p. 1941.  
10. The word “British” omitted by the India (Adaptat ion of Income-tax, Profits Tax and Revenue Recovery A cts) Order, 1947 
(G.G.O.31, dated the 10th December, 1947) (Gazette of India, 1947, Extraordinary, p. 1333). 
11. Ins., ibid . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE REVENUE RECOVERY ACT, 1890.pdf - page 5]
5 THE SCHEDULE 
CERTIFICATE  
[See  section 3, sub-section ( 1)] 
 
From 
The Collector of  
To 
The Collector of  
Dated the of 18 
The sum of Rs. is payable on account of by, son of,  resident of, who is believed (to be at) (to have 
property consisting of at) in your district . 
Subject to the provisions of the Revenue Recovery A ct, 1890, the said sum is recoverable by you as if 
it were an arrear of land-revenue which had accrued  in your own district, and you are hereby desired s o to 
recover it and to remit it to my office at 
 
A.B., 
 
Collector of 
 
___________ 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE REVENUE, BOMBAY, 1842.pdf - page 1]
 1 
 THE REVENUE, BOMBAY , 1842  
__________  
 
ACT NO.13 OF 1842  
_________  
 
Passed by the Hon’ble the President of the Council of India in Council, on the 28th of October, 1842, with 
the assent of the Right hon’ble the Governor General of India.   
An Act to enable the holders of Revenue which has been alienated to them by the State,  to collect that 
Revenue within the Presidency of Bombay.  
I. Whereas it is expedient to authorize  the grant by the Governor in Council of Bombay,  at his 
discretion, of Commissions to certain Jageerdars, and others, by virtue of which such persons shall posses 
increased powers for collecting the Revenue due to them;  — 
     It is hereby enacted, that it shall be lawful for the Governor in Council of Bomb ay, to grant any 
Jageerdar,  Surinjamdar, Inamdar, or other person holding Lands or Villages the Revenue of which has been 
alienated to him by the State, a Commission conferring upon him authority for the collection of such 
Revenue by the powers hereinafter  mentioned, or such of  them as shall be specified in the Commission in 
addition to the powers now exercisable by law.  
II. And it is hereby enacted, that such Commission, which shall be drawn  out according to the form of 
the annexed Schedule A, shall be g ranted or withheld, and, when granted , shall be liable to be withdrawn 
at the pleasure of Government, and that it may, if the Governor in Council of Bombay see fit, be issued to 
one or more Agents of such holder of alienated Revenue as well as to the  hold er in person.  
III. And it is hereby enacted, that the holder of such Commission shall have authority to demand 
security for the payment of the Revenue, in respect of the Lands or Villages specified in the Commission, 
and if the same be not furnished, to ta ke such precaution as the Collector is authorized to make under 
Section XI, Regulation XVII, of 1827, Bombay Code.  
IV. And it is hereby enacted, that the holder of such Commission shall have auth
<|CHUNK|>
[THE REVENUE, BOMBAY, 1842.pdf - page 1]
827, Bombay Code.  
IV. And it is hereby enacted, that the holder of such Commission shall have authority to send Mohussuls  
on Defaulters under the Provisions of Clauses 2,3, and 5, Section XII,  Regulation XVII of 1827, Bombay 
Code, provided that one foot Mohussul only be employed in each case, and  that the Mohussulee shall cease 
on the enforcement of any other  remedy for t he collection of the Revenue, except the taking of such security 
as aforesaid.  
V. And it is hereby enacted, that the holder of any such Commission shall be authorized to attach the 
property of persons making default in the payment of  such Revenue as afore said, making an immediate 
report to the Collector or his Assistant of the his having done so, and should the demand on account of 
which the attachment may be made app ear to the Collector or his Assistant to be just, he shall give orders 
for the sale of suc h property, and the sale shall be conducted agreeably to the Provisions of clause  VII, 
Section XII , Regulation XVII, of 1827, Bombay Code, except in cases in which the  holder of the 
Commission by whom the attachment has been  made shall be a Jageerdar, Sur injamdar or  Inamdar, vested 
by Regulation XIII, of 1830, with Civil  jurisdiction and with power to execute his own  decrees or  his 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE REVENUE, BOMBAY, 1842.pdf - page 2]
 2 
 Agents, when the sale shall be conducted by him and not by the Collector and  his subordinate Revenue 
Officers . 
VI. And it  is hereby enacted, that all compulsory process under this Act shall cease on the alleged 
defaulter furnishing security to the holder of the Commission or to the Collector or Assistant Collector of 
the District, to institute a suit within  15 days in a  competent Court for the purpose of trying the demand 
and to pay the amount which may be decreed against him with costs and interest in such  Court, provided 
that such suits in which any one of the privileged clas ses established by Regulation XXIX, of 1827, Se ctions 
III, and IV, and by Regulation VII, of 1830, Bombay Code, may be the defendant, shall be tried before the 
Collector and his Assistants, any  thing in Regulations I, and XVI, of 1831, notwithstanding.  And any holder 
of any such Commission as aforesai d by himself or his Agents proceeding with any compulsory process 
under this Act after the furnishing of such security as aforesaid, or after the due tender thereof, shall forfeit 
three times the amount of the Revenue sought to be recovered by such compuls ory process.  
VII. And it is hereby enacted, that if the Revenue or rent payable to a Jageerdar or other holder of 
Government  alienated lands or villages shall have been  fixed by a Government Officer before the grant of 
the Land in free tenure, or if the rent or Revenue tend ered by any Ryut or other person  be at the usual rate 
payable  according to the custom of the Village and  Purgunna as declared by the  Koolkurnee and  other  
Local Officers of Revenue, the enforcement of a demand by any holder of a Commission under this Act of 
an excess of rent or Revenue beyond the amount due as above provided shall be deemed to the extortion, 
and the person against  whom such demand sh all have been enforced shall obtain upon any judgement being  
passed after regular or summary  trial three times the amount of any suc
<|CHUNK|>
[THE REVENUE, BOMBAY, 1842.pdf - page 2]
 upon any judgement being  
passed after regular or summary  trial three times the amount of any such excessive demand as damages for  
the same.  Provided, however , that nothing  herein prescribed or con tained  shall prevent a holder of 
alienated Lands or  Villages from instituting a suit  in any court of competent  jurisdiction for the  purpose  
of establishing his claim to re -assess the Lands or re -settle the Revenue of any Ryut or other who may be 
paying less than the full Jum a to which  he is  justly liable, and upon such holder  obtaining a decree 
adjudging to him such power the demand made by him under such decree,  shall, if conformable thereto be 
deemed  a legal demand for arrears, and shall be leviable by the same process a s is above arrears.  
VIII.  And it is hereby enacted, that the power conferred by such Commission shall extend to the 
enforcement of the payment of the Revenue of the current season and of the season next immediately 
preceding, and not to that of former year s. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
<|CHUNK|>
[THE REVENUE, BOMBAY, 1842.pdf - page 3]
 3 
 SCHEDULE A.  
             Form of Commission to be used to a holder of alienated Revenue or his Agent for  
 enabling him to recover such Revenue  
 
         
 
   
 
 
 The Governor in Council of Bombay by virtue of the powers vested in him by Act XIII,  of 1842, 
is pleased to confer on you -------------- --------------  (Jageerdar, &  c., or Agent, & c., as the case may be) 
power to  realize all Revenue  demands due  to you (or to your principal) from the  Villages  and Lands 
specified in this Com mission in the manner prescr ibed in ( or in Sections ----------------- of) this Act.  
 
 The Villages and Lands over which the power thus conferred upon you extends are as follows:  
 
     (Here enter the description.)  
 The within delegated power is vested in you during the pleasure and subject to the re -call of the 
said Governor  in Council.  
 
_____ __________  
 SEAL  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005  
__________________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________________  
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title , extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
RIGHT TO INFORMATION AND OBLIGATIONS OF PUBLIC AUTHORITIES  
3. Right to information.  
4. Obligations of public authorities.  
5. Designation of Public Information Officers.  
6. Request for obtaining information.  
7. Disposal of request.  
8. Exemption from disclosure of information.  
9. Grounds for rejection to access in certain cases.  
10. Severability.  
11. Third party information.  
 
CHAPTER III  
THE CENTRA L INFORMATION  COMMISSION  
12. Constitution of Central Information Commission.  
13. Terms of office and conditions of service.  
14. Removal of C hief Information Commissioner or  Information Commissioner.  
 
CHAPTE R IV  
THE STATE  INFORMATION  COMMISSION  
15. Constitution of State Information Commission.  
16. Term of office and conditions of service.  
17. Removal of State Chief Information Commissioner or State Information Commissioner.  
 
CHAPTER V  
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE INFORMATION  COMMISSIONS , APPEAL AND PENALTIES  
18. Powers and functions of Information Commissions.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 2]
2 
 SECTIONS  
19. Appeal.  
20. Penalties.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
21. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
22. Act to have overriding effect.  
23. Bar of jurisdiction of courts.  
24. Act not to apply to certain organisations.  
25. Monitoring and reporting.  
26. Appropriate Government to prepare programmes.  
27. Power to make rules by appropriate Government.  
28. Power to make rules by competent authority.  
29. Laying of rules.  
30. Power to remove difficulties.  
31. Repeal. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE . 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE . 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 3]
3 
 THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005  
ACT NO. 22 OF 2005  
[15th June , 2005.]  
An Act to provide for setting out the practical regime of right to information for citizens to 
secure access to information under the control of public authorities, in order to promote 
transparency and accountability in the working of every public authorit y, the constitution of a 
Central Information Commission and State Information Commissions and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  the Constitution of India has established democratic Republic;  
AND WHEREAS democracy requires an informed citizenry and transparency of information which are 
vital to its functioning and also to contain corruption and to hold Governments a nd their instrumentalities 
accountable to the governed;  
AND WHEREAS  revelation of informatio n in actual practice is likely to conflict with other public 
interests including efficient operations of the Governments, optimum use of limited fiscal resources and 
the preservation of confidentiality of sensitive information;  
AND WHEREAS  it is necessary to harmonise these conflicting interests while preserving the 
paramountcy of the democratic ideal;  
Now, THEREFORE , it is expendient to provide for furnishing certain information to citizens who 
desire to have it.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Right to Information 
Act, 2005.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India  1***. 
(3) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 4, sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) of section 5, sections 12, 
13, 15,16, 24, 27 and 28 shall come into force at once, and the remaining provisions of this Act shall 
come into force on the one hundred and twentieth  day of its enactment.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appropriate Government ” means in rel
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 3]
 .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appropriate Government ” means in relation to a public authority which is established, 
constituted, owned, controlled or substantially financed by funds provided directly or indirectly — 
(i) by the Central Government or the Union territory administration, the Central Government;  
(ii) by the State Government, the State Government;  
(b) “Central Information Commission ” means the Central Information Commission constituted 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 12;  
(c) “Central Public Information Officer ” means the Central Public Information Officer designated 
under sub -section ( 1) and includes a Central Assistant Public Inform ation Officer designated as such 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 5;  
(d) “Chief Information Commissioner ” and “Information Commissioner ” mean the Chief 
Information Commissioner and Information Commissioner appointed under sub -section ( 3) of    
section 12;   
                                                           
1. The words “ except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule  
(w.e.f. 31 -10-2019).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 4]
4 
 (e) “competent authority ” means— 
(i) the Speaker in the case of the House of the People or the Legislative Assembly of a State 
or a Union territory having such Assembly and the Chairman in the case of the Council of States 
or Legislative Council of a State;  
(ii) the Chief Justice of India in the case of the Supreme Court;  
(iii) the Chief Justice of the High Court in the case of a High Court;  
(iv) the President or the Governor, as the case may be, in the case of other authorities 
established or constitu ted by or under the Constitution;  
(v) the administrator appointed under article 239 of the Constitution;  
(f) “information ” means any material in any form, including records, documents, memos, e -mails, 
opinions, advices, press releases, circulars, orders, l ogbooks, contracts, reports, papers, samples, 
models, data material held in any electronic form and information relating to any private body which 
can be accessed by a public authority under any other law for the time being in force;  
(g) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act by the appropriate Government 
or the competent authority,  as the case may be;  
(h) “public authority ” means any authority or body or institution of self - govern ment established 
or constituted — 
(a) by or under t he Constitution;  
(b) by any other law made by Parliament;  
(c) by any other law made by State Legislature;  
(d) by notification issued or order made by the appropri ate Government,  
and includes any — 
(i) body owned, controlled or substantially financed;  
(ii) non -Government organisation substantially financed,  
directly or indirectly by funds provided by the appropriate Government;  
(i) “record ” includes— 
(a) any document, manuscript and file;  
(b) any microfilm, microfiche and facsimile copy of a document;  
(c) any reproduction of image or images embodied in such microfilm (whether enlarged or 
not); and  
(d) any other material produced by a computer or any other de
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 4]
film (whether enlarged or 
not); and  
(d) any other material produced by a computer or any other device;  
(j) “right to information ” means the right to information accessible under this Act which is held 
by or under the control of any public auth ority and includes the right to — 
(i) inspection of work, documents, records;  
(ii) taking notes, extracts or certified copies of documents or r ecords;  
(iii) taking certified samples of material;  
(iv) obtaining information in the form of diskettes, floppies, tapes, video cassettes or in any 
other electronic mode or through printouts where such information is stored in a computer or in 
any other de vice;  
(k) “State Information Commission ” means the State Information Commission constituted under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 15;   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 5]
5 
 (l) “State Chief Information Commissioner ” and “State Information Commissioner ” mean the 
State Chief Information Commissioner and the State Information Commissioner appointed under sub -
section ( 3) of section 15;  
(m) “State Public Information Officer ” means the State Public Information Officer designated 
under sub -section ( 1) and incl udes a State Assistant Public Information Officer designated as such 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 5;  
(n) “third party ” means a person other than the citizen making a request for information and 
includes a public authority.  
CHAPTER II  
RIGHT TO INFORMATI ON AND OBLIGATIONS OF PUBLIC AUTHORITIES  
3. Right to information .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, all citizens shall have the right to 
information.  
4. Obl igations of public authorities .—(1) Every public authority shall — 
(a) maintain all its records duly catalogued and indexed in a manner and the form which 
facilitates the right to information under this Act and ensure that all records that are appropriate to be 
computerised are, within a reasonable time and subject to avail ability of resources, computerised and 
connected through a network all over the country on different systems so that access to such records 
is facilitated;  
(b) publish within one hundred and twenty days from the enactment of this Act, — 
(i) the particulars of its organisation, functions and duties;  
(ii) the powers and duties of its officers and employees;  
(iii) the procedure followed in the decision making process, including channels of supervision 
and accountability;  
(iv) the norms set by it for the discharge of its functions;  
(v) the rules, regulations, instructions, manuals and records, held by it or under its control or 
used by its employees for discharging its functions;  
(vi) a statement of the categories of documents that are h eld by it or under its control;  
(vii) the particulars of any arrangement that exists for consultation with, or represen
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 5]
s control;  
(vii) the particulars of any arrangement that exists for consultation with, or representation by, 
the members of the public in relation to the formulation of its policy or implementation thereof;  
(viii) a statement of the boards, councils, com mittees and other bodies consisting of two or 
more persons constituted as its part or for the purpose of its advice, and as to whether meetings of 
those boards, councils, committees and other bodies are open to the public, or the minutes of such 
meet ings a re accessible for public;  
(ix) a directory  of its officers and employees;  
(x) the monthly remuneration received by each of its officers and employees, including the 
system of compensation as provided in its regulations;  
(xi) the budget allocated to each of  its agency, indicating the particulars of all plans, proposed 
expenditures and  reports on disbursements made;  
(xii) the manner of execution of subsidy programmes, including the amounts allocated and 
the details of be neficiaries of such programmes;  
(xiii) particulars of recipients of concessions, permits or authorisations granted by it;  
(xiv) details in respect of the information, available to or held by it,  reduced in an electronic 
form;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 6]
6 
 (xv) the particulars of facilities available to citizens for obtainin g information, including the 
working hours of a library or reading room , if maintained for public use;  
(xvi) the names, designations and other particulars of t he Public Information Officers;  
(xvii) such other information as may be prescribed;  
and thereafte r update these publications every year;  
(c) publish all relevant facts while formulating important policies or announcing the decisions 
which affect public;  
(d) provide reasons for its administrative or quasi -judicial decisions to affected persons.  
(2) It shall be a constant endeavour of every public authority to take steps in accordance with the 
requirements of clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) to provide as much information suomotu  to the public at 
regular intervals through various means of communications, including internet, so that the public have 
minimum resort to the use of this Act to obtain information.  
(3) For the pur poses of sub -section ( 1), every information shall be disseminated widely and in such 
form and manner which is e asily accessible to the public.  
(4) All materials shall be disseminated taking into consideration the cost effectiveness, local language 
and the most effective method of communi cation in that local area and the information should be easily 
accessible, to the extent possible in electronic format with the Central Public Information Officer or State 
Public Information Officer, as the case may be, available free or at such cost of th e medium or the print 
cost price as may be prescribed.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4), “disseminated ” means making known or 
communicated the information to the public through notice boards, newspapers, public announcements, 
media  broadcasts, the internet or any other means, including inspection of offices of any public authority.  
5. Designation of Public Information Offic ers.—(1) Every public authority shall, wit
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 6]
c authority.  
5. Designation of Public Information Offic ers.—(1) Every public authority shall, within one 
hundred days of the enactment of this Act, designate as many officers as the Central Public Information 
Officers or State Public Information Officers, as the case may be, in all administrative units or offices 
under it as may be necessary to provide information to persons requesting for the information under this 
Act. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), every public authority shall designate an 
officer, within one hundred days of the enactme nt of this Act, at each sub -divisional level or other sub -
district level as a Central Assistant Public Information Officer or a State Assistant Public Information 
Officer, as the case may be, to receive the applications for information or appeals under thi s Act for 
forwarding the same forthwith to the Central Public Information Officer or the State Public Information 
Officer or senior officer specified under sub -section ( 1) of section 19 or the Central Information 
Commission or the State Information Commiss ion, as the case may be:  
Provided that where an application for information or appeal is given to a Central Assistant Public 
Information Officer or a State Assistant Public Information Officer, as the case may be, a period of five 
days shall be added in co mputing the period for response specified under sub -section ( 1) of section 7.  
(3) Every Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, 
shall deal with requests from persons seeking information and render reasona ble assistance to the persons 
seeking such information.  
(4) The Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, 
may seek the assistance of any other officer as he or she considers it necessary for the proper disc harge of 
his or her duties.  
(5) Any officer, whose assistance has been sought under sub -section ( 4), s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 6]
f 
his or her duties.  
(5) Any officer, whose assistance has been sought under sub -section ( 4), shall render all assistance to 
the Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, seeking 
his or her assistance and for the purposes of any contravention of the provisions of this Act, such other 
officer shall be treated as a Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as the 
case may be.   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 7]
7 
 6. Req uest for obtaining information .—(1) A person, who desires to obtain any information under 
this Act, shall make a request in writing or through electronic means in English or Hindi or in the official 
language of the area in which the application is being made, accompanying such fee as may  be 
prescribed, to — 
(a) the Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as the case may 
be, of the concerned public authority;  
(b) the Central Assistant Public Information Officer or State Assistant Public Information Officer, 
as the case may be,  
specifying the particulars of the information sought by him or her:  
Provided that where such request cannot be made in writing, the Central Public Information Officer 
or State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, shall render all reasonable assistance to the 
person making the request orally  to reduce the same in writing.  
(2) An applicant making request for information shall not be required to give any reason for 
requesting the information or any other personal details except th ose that may be necessary for contacting 
him. 
(3) Where an application is made to a public authority  requesting for an information, — 
(i) which is held by another public authority; or  
(ii) the subject matter of which is more closely connected with the functions of another public 
authority,  
the public authority, to which such application is made, shall transfer the application or such part of it as 
may be appropriate to that other public authority and inform the applicant immediately about such 
transfer:  
Provided that the transfer of an application pursuant to this sub -section shall be made as soon as 
practicable but in no case later than five days from the date of receipt of the application.  
7. Disposal of request .—(1) Subject to the proviso to sub -section (2) of section 5 or the proviso to 
sub-section ( 3) of section 6, the Central Public Information Officer or State Public Inf
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 7]
roviso to 
sub-section ( 3) of section 6, the Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as 
the case may be, on receipt of a request under section 6 shall, as expeditiously as possible, and in any case  
within thirty days of the receipt of the request, either provide the information on payment of such fee as 
may be prescribed or reject the request for any of the reasons specified in sections 8 and 9:  
Provided that where the information sought for concern s the life or liberty of a person, the same shall 
be provided within forty -eight hours of the receipt of the request.  
(2) If the Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, 
fails to give decision on the reque st for information within the period specified under sub -section ( 1), the 
Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, shall be 
deemed to have refused the request.  
(3) Where a decision is taken to provide the information on payment of any further fee representing 
the cost of providing the information, the Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information 
Officer, as  the case may be, shall send an intimation to the pe rson making the request, giving — 
(a) the details of further fees representing the cost of providing the information as determined by 
him, together with the calculations made to arrive at the amount in accordance with fee prescribed 
under sub -section ( 1), requesting him to deposit that fe es, and the period intervening between the 
despatch of the said intimation and payment of fees shall be excluded for the purpose of calculating 
the period of thirty days referred to in that sub -section;  
(b) information concerning his or her right with resp ect to review the decision as to the amount of 
fees charged or the form of access provided, including the particulars of the appellate authority, time 
limit, process and any other forms.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 7]
ding the particulars of the appellate authority, time 
limit, process and any other forms.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 8]
8 
 (4) Where access to the record or a part thereof is required to be pr ovided under this Act and the 
person to whom access is to be provided is sensorily disabled, the Central Public Information Officer or 
State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, shall provide assistance to enable access to the 
information, inclu ding providing such assistance as may be appropriate for the inspection.  
(5) Where access to information is to be provided in the printed or in any electronic format, the 
applicant shall, subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 6), pay such fee as may be  prescribed:  
Provided that the fee prescribed under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 and sub -sections ( 1) and ( 5) of 
section 7 shall be reasonable and no such fee shall be charged from the persons who are of below poverty 
line as may be determined by the appro priate Government.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 5), the person making request for the 
information shall be provided the information free of charge where a public authority fails to comply with 
the time limits specified in sub -section (1). 
(7) Before taking any decision under sub -section ( 1), the Central Public Information Officer or State 
Public Information Officer, as the case may be, shall take into consideration the representation made by a 
third party under section 11.  
(8) Wher e a request has been rejected under sub -section ( 1), the Central Public Information Officer or 
State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, shall communicate to  the person making the 
request,— 
(i) the reasons for such rejection;  
(ii) the period within which an appeal against such rejection may be preferred; and  
(iii) the particulars of the appellate authority.  
(9) An information shall ordinarily be provided in the form in which it is sought unless it would 
disproportionately divert the resources of the public authority or would be detrimental to the safety or 
preservation of the re
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 8]
e resources of the public authority or would be detrimental to the safety or 
preservation of the record in question.  
8. Exemption from disclosure of information .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, 
there shall be no obligation to give any citizen, — 
(a) information, disclosure of which would prejudicially affect the sovereignty and integrity of 
India, the security, strategic, scientific or economic interests of the State, relation with foreign State or 
lead to incitement of an offence;  
(b) information wh ich has been expressly forbidden to be published by any court of law or 
tribunal or the disclosure of which may constitute contempt of court;  
(c) information, the disclosure of which would cause a breach of privilege of Parliament or the 
State Legislature;  
(d) information including commercial confidence, trade secrets or intellectual property, the 
disclosure of which would harm the competitive position of a third party, unless the competent 
authority is satisfied that larger public interest warrants the dis closure of such information;  
(e) information available to a person in his fiduciary relationship, unless the competent authority 
is satisfied that the larger public interest warrants the disclosure of such information;  
(f) information received in confidenc e from foreign Government;  
(g) information, the disclosure of which would endanger the life or physical safety of any person 
or identify the source of information or assistance given in confidence for law enforcement or security 
purposes;  
(h) information w hich would impede the process of investigation or apprehension or prosecution 
of offenders;  
(i) cabinet papers including records of deliberations of the Council of Ministers, Secretaries and 
other officers:  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 9]
9 
 Provided that the decisions of Council of Ministe rs, the reasons thereof, and the material on the 
basis of which the decisions were taken shall be made public after the decision has been taken, and 
the matter is complete, or over:  
Provided further that those matters which come under the exemptions specif ied in this section 
shall not be disclosed;  
(j) information which relates to personal information the disclosure of which has no relationship 
to any public activity or interest, or which would cause unwarranted invasion of the privacy of the 
individual unl ess the Central Public Information Officer or the State Public Information Officer or the 
appellate authority, as the case may be, is satisfied that the larger public interest justifies the 
disclosure of such information:  
Provided that the information whic h cannot be denied to the Parliament or a State Legislature 
shall not be denied to any person.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything in  the Official Secrets Act, 1923 (19 of 1923) nor any of the 
exemptions permissible in accordance with sub -section ( 1), a public authority may allow access to 
information, if public interest in disclosure outweighs the harm to the protected interests.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of clauses ( a), (c) and ( i) of sub -section ( 1), any information relating to 
any occurrence,  event or matter which has taken place, occurred or happened twenty years before the date 
on which any request is made under sect ion 6 shall be provided to any person making a request under that 
section:  
Provided that where any question arises as to the da te from which the said period of twenty years has 
to be computed, the decision of the Central Government shall be final, subject to the usual appeals 
provided for in this Act.  
9. Grounds for reject ion to access in certain cases .—Without prejudice to the pr ovisions of              
section 8, a Central Public Information Officer or a State Public Information Officer, as the cas
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 9]
  
section 8, a Central Public Information Officer or a State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, 
may reject a request for information where such a request for providing access would involve an 
infringement of copyright su bsisting in a person other than the State.  
10. Severability .—(1) Where a request for access to information is rejected on the ground that it is in 
relation to information which is exempt from disclosure, then, notwithstanding anything contained in this 
Act, access may be provided to that part of the record which does not contain any information which is 
exempt from disclosure under this Act and which can reasonably be severed from any part th at contains 
exempt information.  
(2) Where access is granted to a part of the record under sub -section ( 1), the Central Public 
Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, shall give a not ice to the 
applicant, informing — 
(a) that only part of the record requested, after severance of the re cord containing information 
which is exempt from  disclosure, is being provided;  
(b) the reasons for the decision, including any findings on any material question of fact, referring 
to the material on which those findings were based;  
(c) the name and design ation of the person giving the decision;  
(d) the details of the fees calculated by him or her and the amount of fee which the applic ant is 
required to deposit; and  
(e) his or her rights with respect to review of the decision regarding non -disclosure of par t of the 
information, the amount of fee charged or the form of access provided, including the particulars of the 
senior officer specified under sub -section ( 1) of section 19 or the Central Information Commission or 
the State Information Commission, as the case may be, time limit, process and any other form of 
access.  
11. Third party infor mation .—(1) Where a Central Public Information Officer or a State Public 
Information Officer, as th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 9]
ation .—(1) Where a Central Public Information Officer or a State Public 
Information Officer, as the case may be, intends to disclose any information or record, or part thereof on a 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 10]
10 
 request made under this Act, which relates to or has been supplied by a third party and has been treated as 
confidential by that third party, the Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information 
Officer, as the case may be, shall, within five days from the receipt of the request, give a written notice to 
such third party of the request and of the fact that the Central Public Information Officer or State Public 
Information Officer, as the case may be, intends to disclose the information or record, or part thereof, and 
invite the third party to make a submission in writing or o rally, regarding whether the information should 
be disclosed, and such submission of the third party shall be kept in view while taking a decision about 
disclosure of information:  
Provided that except in the case of trade or commercial secrets protected by  law, disclosure may be 
allowed if the public interest in disclosure outweighs in importance any possible harm or injury to the 
interests of such third party.  
(2) Where a notice is served by the Central Public Information Officer or State Public Informatio n 
Officer, as the case may be, under sub -section ( 1) to a third party in respect of any information or record 
or part thereof, the third party shall, within ten days from the date of receipt of such notice, be given the 
opportunity to make representation a gainst the proposed disclosure.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 7, the Central Public Information Officer or State 
Public Information Officer, as the case may be, shall, within forty days after receipt of the request under 
section 6, if t he third party has been given an opportunity to make representation under sub -section ( 2), 
make a decision as to whether or not to disclose the information or record or part thereof and give in 
writing the notice of his decision to the third party.  
(4) A n otice given under sub -section ( 3) shall include a statement that the third party to
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 10]
rty.  
(4) A n otice given under sub -section ( 3) shall include a statement that the third party to whom the 
notice is given is entitled to prefer an appeal under section 19 against the decision.  
CHAPTER III  
THE CENTRAL INFORMATION COMMISSION  
12. Constitution of Ce ntral Information Commission .—(1) The Central Government shall, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a body to be known as the Central Information Commission 
to exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the functions assigned to, it u nder this Act.  
(2) The Central Informat ion Commission shall consist of — 
(a) the Chief Information Commissioner; and  
(b) such number of Central Information Commissioners, not exceeding ten, as may be deemed 
necessary.  
(3) The Chief Information Commissioner and Information Commissioners shall be appointed by the 
President on the recommendati on of a committee consisting of — 
(i) the Prime Minister, who shall be the Chairperson of the committee;  
(ii) the Leader of Opposition in the Lok  Sabha; and  
(iii) a Union C abinet Minister to be nominated by the Prime Minister.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that where the Leader of 
Opposition in the House of the People has not been recognised  as such, the Leader of the single largest 
group in opposition of the Government in the House of the People shall be deemed to be the Leader of 
Opposition.  
(4) The general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs of the Central Information 
Commission shall vest in the Chief Information Commissioner who shall be assisted by the Information 
Commissioners and may exercise all such powers and do all such acts and things which may be exercised 
or done by the Central Information Commission autonom ously without being subjected to directions by 
any other authority under this Act.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 11]
11 
 (5) The Chief Information Commissioner and Information Commissioners shall be persons of 
eminence in public life with wide knowledge and experience in law, science and techn ology, social 
service, management, journalism, mass media or administration and governance.  
(6) The Chief Information Commissioner or an Information Commissioner shall not be a Member of 
Parliament or Member of the Legislature of any State or Union territo ry, as the case may be, or hold any 
other office of profit or connected with any political party or carrying on any business or pursuing any 
profession.  
(7) The headquarters of the Central Information Commission shall be at Delhi and the Central 
Informatio n Commission may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, establish offices at 
other places in India.  
13. Term of of fice and conditions of service .—(1) The Chief Information Commissioner shall hold 
office 1[for such term as may be prescribed by the Central Government] and shall not be eligible for 
reappointment:  
Provided that no Chief Information Commissioner shall hold office as such after he has attained the 
age of sixty -five years.  
(2) Every Information C ommissioner shall hold office 1[for such term as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government]  or till he attains the age of sixty -five years, whichever is earlier, and shall not be 
eligible for reappointment as such Information Commissioner:  
Provided that every Information Commissioner shall, on vacating his office under this sub -section be 
eligible for appointment as the Chief Information Commissioner in the manner specified in                   
sub-section ( 3) of section 12:  
Provided further that where th e Information Commissioner is appointed as the Chief Information 
Commissioner, his term of office shall not be more than five years in aggregate as the Information 
Commissioner and the Chief Information Commissioner.  
(3) The Chief Information Commissioner or an Information Comm
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 11]
 the Chief Information Commissioner.  
(3) The Chief Information Commissioner or an Information Commissioner shall before he enters 
upon his office make and subscribe before the President or some other person appointed by him in that 
behalf, an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the  purpose in the First Schedule.  
(4) The Chief Information Commissioner or an Information Commissioner may, at any time, by 
writing under his hand addressed to the President, resign from his office:  
Provided that the Chief Information Commissioner or an Information Commissioner may be removed 
in the manner specified under section 14.  
2[(5) The  salaries  and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of the Chief 
Information Commissioner and the Information Commissioners shall be such as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government:  
Provided that the salaries, allowances and other conditions of service of the Chief Information 
Commissioner or the Information Commissioners shall not be varied to their disadvantage after their 
appointment:  
Provided further that the C hief Information Commissioner and the Information Commissioners 
appointed before the commencement of the Right to Information  (Amendment) Act, 2019 (24 of 2019 ) 
shall continue to be governed by the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder as if  the Right 
to Information (Amendment) Act, 2019 (24 of 2019) had not come into force.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 24  of 2019, s. 2, for “ for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office”  (w.e.f. 24 -10-
2019).  
2. Subs. by, s. 2, ibid., for sub -section ( 5) (w.e.f. 24 -10-2019).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 12]
12 
 (6) The Central Government shall provide the Chief  Information Commissioner and the Information 
Commissioners with such officers and employees as may be necessary for the efficient performance of 
their functions under this Act, and the salaries and allowances payable to, and the terms and conditions of 
service of the officers and other employees appointed for the purpose of this Act shall be such as may be 
prescribed.  
14. Removal of Chief Information Commission er or Information Commissioner .—(1) Subject to 
the provisions of sub -section ( 3), the Chief Information Commissioner or any Information Commissioner 
shall be removed from his office only by order of the President on the ground of proved misbehaviour or 
incapacity after the Supreme Court, on a reference made to it by the President, ha s, on inquiry, reported 
that the Chief Information Commissioner or any Information Commissioner, as the case may be, o ught on 
such ground be removed.  
(2) The President may suspend from office, and if deem necessary prohibit also from attending the 
office d uring inquiry, the Chief Information Commissioner or Information Commissioner in respect of 
whom a reference has been made to the Supreme Court under sub -section ( 1) until the President has 
passed orders on receipt of the report of the S upreme Court on suc h reference.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the President may by order remove from 
office the Chief Information Commissioner or any Information Commissioner if the Chief Information 
Commissioner or a Information Co mmissioner, as  the case may be, — 
(a) is adjudged an insolvent; or  
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the President, involves moral 
turpitude; or  
(c) engages during his term of office in any paid employment outside the duties of his office; or  
(d) is, in the opinion of the President, unfit to continue in office by reason of infirmity of mind or 
body; or  
(e) has acq
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 12]
the President, unfit to continue in office by reason of infirmity of mind or 
body; or  
(e) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as 
the Chief Information Commissioner or a Information Commissioner.  
(4) If the Chief Information Commissioner or a Information Commissioner in any way, concerned or 
interested in any contract or agreement made by or on behalf of the Government of India or participates in 
any way in the profit ther eof or in any benefit or emolument arising therefrom otherwise than as a 
member and in common with the other members of an incorporated company, he shall, for the purposes 
of sub -section ( 1), be deemed to be guilty of misbehaviour.  
CHAPTER IV  
THE STATE  INFORMATION  COMMISSION  
15. Constitution o f State Information Commission .—(1) Every State Government shall, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a body to be known as the ......... (name of the State) 
Information Commission to exercise the pow ers conferred on, and to perform the functions assigned to, it 
under this Act.  
(2) The State Informat ion Commission shall consist of — 
(a) the State Chief Information Commissioner, and  
(b) such number of State Information Commissioners, not exceeding ten, as may be deemed 
necessary.  
(3) The State Chief Information Commissioner and the State Information Commissioners shall be 
appointed by the Governor on the recommendatio n of a committee consisting of — 
(i) the Chief Minister, who shall be the Chairperson of the committee;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 13]
13 
 (ii) the Leader of Opposition in the Legislative Assembly; and  
(iii) a Cabinet Minister to be nominated by the Chief Minister.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that where the Leader of 
Opposition in the Legislative Assembly has not been recognised as such, the Leader of the single largest 
group in opposition of the Government in the Legislative Assembly  shall be deemed to be the Leader of 
Opposition.  
(4) The general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs of the State Information 
Commission shall vest in the State Chief Information Commissioner who shall be assisted by the State 
Informat ion Commissioners and may exercise all such powers and do all such acts and things which may 
be exercised or done by the State Information Commission autonomously without being subjected to 
directions by any other authority under this Act.  
(5) The State Chief Information Commissioner and the State Information Commissioners shall be 
persons of eminence in public life with wide knowledge and experience in law, science and technology, 
social service, management, journalism, mass media or administration and g overnance.  
(6) The State Chief Information Commissioner or a State Information Commissioner shall not be a 
Member of Parliament or Member of the Legislature of any State or Union territory, as the case may be, 
or hold any other office of profit or connecte d with any political party or carrying on any business or 
pursuing any profession.  
(7) The headquarters of the State Information Commission shall be at such place in the State as the 
State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify an d the State Information 
Commission may, with the previous approval of the State Government, establish offices at other places in 
the State.  
16. Term of of fice and conditions of service .—(1) The State Chief Information Commissioner shall 
hold office 1[for such term as may be prescrib
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 13]
.—(1) The State Chief Information Commissioner shall 
hold office 1[for such term as may be prescribed by the Central Government] and shall not be eligible for 
reappointment:  
Provided that no State Chief Information Commissioner shall hold office as such after he has attained 
the age of sixty -five years.  
(2) Every State I nformation Commissioner shall hold office 1[for such term as may be prescribed by 
the Central Government] or till he attains the age of sixty -five years, whichever is earlier, and shall not be 
eligible for reappointment as such State Information Commission er: 
Provided that every State Information Commissioner shall, on vacating his office under this sub -
section, be eligible for appointment as the State Chief Information Commissioner in the manner specified 
in sub -section ( 3) of section 15:  
Provided further that where the State Information Commissioner is appointed as the State Chief 
Information Commissioner, his term of office shall not be more than five years in aggregate as the State 
Information Commissioner and the State Chief Information Commissioner.  
(3) The State Chief Information Commissioner or a State Information Commissioner, shall before he 
enters upon his office make and subscribe before the Governor or some other person appointed by him in 
that behalf, an oath or affirmation according to the form  set out for the purpose in the First Schedule.  
(4) The State Chief Information Commissioner or a State Information Commissioner may, at any 
time, by writing under his hand addressed to the Governor, resign from his office:  
Provided that the State Chief In formation Commissioner or a State Information Commissioner may 
be removed in the manner specified under section 17.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 24 of 2019, s. 3, for, “for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office ”(w.e.f. 24 -10-
2019).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 13]
ch he enters upon his office ”(w.e.f. 24 -10-
2019).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 14]
14 
 1[(5) The  salaries  and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of the State 
Chief Information Commissioner and the State Information Commissioners shall be such as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government:  
Provided that the salaries, allowances and other conditions of service of the State Chief Information 
Commissioner and the State Information Commissioners shall n ot be varied to their disadvantage after 
their appointment:  
Provided further that the State Chief Information Commissioner and the State Information 
Commissioners appointed before the commencement of the Right to Information (Amendment) Act, 2019 
shall con tinue to be governed by the provisions of this Act and the rules made there under as if the Right 
to Information  (Amendment) Act, 2019 had not come into force.]  
(6) The State Government shall provide the State Chief Information Commissioner and the State 
Information Commissioners with such officers and employees as may be necessary for the efficient 
performance of their functions under this Act, and the salaries and allowances payable to and the terms 
and conditions of service of the officers and other empl oyees appointed for the purpose of this Act shall 
be such as may be prescribed.  
17. Removal of State Chief Information Commissioner or State Information Commissioner .—
(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3), the State Chief Information Commissioner or a State 
Information Commissioner shall be removed from his office only by order of the Governor on the ground 
of proved misbehaviour or incapacity after the Supreme Court, on a reference made to it by the Gove rnor, 
has on inquiry, reported that the State Chief Information Commissioner or a State Information 
Commissioner, as the case may be, ought on such ground be removed.  
(2) The Governor may suspend from office, and if deem necessary prohibit also from attend ing the 
office during inquiry, the State Chief Information Commissio
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 14]
sary prohibit also from attend ing the 
office during inquiry, the State Chief Information Commissioner or a State Information Commissioner in 
respect of whom a reference has been made to the Supreme Court under sub -section ( 1) until the 
Governor has passed orders on receipt of the repor t of the Supreme Court on such reference.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Governor may by order remove from 
office the State Chief Information Commissioner or a State Information Commissioner if a State Chief 
Information Comm issioner or a State Information Co mmissioner, as the case may be, — 
(a) is adjudged an insolvent; or  
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Governor, involves moral 
turpitude; or  
(c) engages during his term of office in any paid employment outside the duties of his office; or  
(d) is, in the opinion of the Governor, unfit to continue in office by reason of infirmity of mind or 
body; or  
(e) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functi ons as 
the State Chief Information Commissioner or a State Information Commissioner.  
(4) If the State Chief Information Commissioner or a State Information Commissioner in any way, 
concerned or interested in any contract or agreement made by or on behalf o f the Government of the State 
or participates in any way in the profit thereof or in any benefit or emoluments arising therefrom 
otherwise than as a member and in common with the other members of an incorporated company, he 
shall, for the purposes of sub -section ( 1), be deemed to be guilty of misbehaviour.  
CHAPTER V  
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE INFORMATION  COMMISSIONS , APPEAL AND PENALTIES  
18. Powers and functions of Info rmation Commissions .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, 
it shall be the duty of the Central Information Commission or State Information Commission, as the case 
may be, to receive and inquire in to a complaint 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 14]
sion or State Information Commission, as the case 
may be, to receive and inquire in to a complaint from any person, — 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 24 of 2019, s. 3, for sub -section (5), (w.e.f. 24 -10-2019).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 15]
15 
 (a) who has been unable to submit a request to a Central Public Information Officer or State 
Public Informatio n Officer, as the case may be, either by reason that no such officer has been 
appointed under this Act, or because the Central Assistant Public Information Officer or State 
Assistant Public Information Officer, as the case may be, has refused to accept his  or her application 
for information or appeal under this Act for forwarding the same to the Central Public Information 
Officer or State Public Information Officer or senior officer specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 19 
or the Central Information Commi ssion or the State Information Commission, as the case may be;  
(b) who has been refused access to any information requested under this Act;  
(c) who has not been given a response to a request for information or access to information within 
the time limit sp ecified under this Act;  
(d) who has been required to pay an amount of fee which he or she considers unreasonable;  
(e) who believes that he or she has been given incomplete, misleading or false information under 
this Act; and  
(f) in respect of any other mat ter relating to requesting or obtaining access to records under this 
Act. 
(2) Where the Central Information Commission or State Information Commission, as the case may 
be, is  satisfied that there are reasonable grounds to inquire into the matter, it may initiate an inquiry in 
respect thereof.  
(3) The Central Information Commission or State Information Commission, as the case may be, shall, 
while inquiring into any matter under  this section, have the same powers as are vested in a civil court 
while trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), in respect of  the following 
matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and compel them to give oral or written 
evidence on oath and to p roduce the documents or things;  
(b) requiring the discovery and inspection of docum
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 15]
 oath and to p roduce the documents or things;  
(b) requiring the discovery and inspection of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit;  
(d) requisitioning any public record or copies thereof from any court or office;  
(e) issuing summons for examination of witnesses or documents; and  
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything inconsistent contained in any other Act of Parliament or State 
Legislature, as the case may be, the Central Inform ation Commission or the State Information 
Commission, as the case may be, may, during the inquiry of any complaint under this Act, examine any 
record to which this Act applies which is under the control of the public authority, and no such record 
may be wi thheld from it on any grounds.  
19. Appeal .—(1) Any person who, does not receive a decision within the time specified in  
sub-section ( 1) or clause ( a) of sub -section ( 3) of section 7, or is aggrieved by a decision of the Central  
Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, may within thirty days 
from the expiry of such period or from the receipt of such a decision prefer an appeal to such officer who 
is senior in rank to the Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer as the case 
may be, in each public authority:  
Provided that such officer may admit the appeal after the expiry of the period of thirty days if he or 
she is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filin g the appeal in time.  
(2) Where an appeal is preferred against an order made by a Central Public Information Officer or a 
State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, under section 11 to disclose third party information, 
the appeal by the concerne d third party shall be made within thirty days from the date of the order.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 16]
16 
 (3) A second appeal against the decision under sub -section ( 1) shall lie within ninety days from the 
date on which the decision should have been made or was actually received, with the Central Information 
Commission or the State Information Commission:  
Provided that the Central Information Commission or the State Information Commission, as the case 
may be, may admit the appeal after the expiry of the period of ninety days if it is sa tisfied that the 
appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time.  
(4) If the decision of the Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as 
the case may be, against which an appeal is preferred relates  to information of a third party, the Central 
Information Commission or State Information Commission, as the case may be, shall give a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard to that third party.  
(5) In any appeal proceedings, the onus to prove that a denial  of a request was justified shall be on the 
Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, who denied 
the request.  
(6) An appeal under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall be disposed of within thirty days o f the 
receipt of the appeal or within such extended period not exceeding a total of forty -five days from the date 
of filing thereof, as the case may be, for reasons to be recorded in writing.  
(7) The decision of the Central Information Commission or State Information Commission, as the 
case may be, shall be binding.  
(8) In its decision, the Central Information Commission or State Information Commission, as th e case 
may be, has the power to — 
(a) require the public authority to take any such steps as may be necessary to secure compliance 
with the pr ovisions of this Act, including — 
(i) by providing access to information, if so requested, in a particular form;  
(ii) by appointing a Central Public Information Officer or State Public Informat
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 16]
 particular form;  
(ii) by appointing a Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as 
the case may be;  
(iii) by publishing certain information or categories of information;  
(iv) by making necessary changes to its practices in relation to the maintenance, management 
and destruction of records;  
(v) by enhancing the provision of training on the ri ght to information for its officials;  
(vi) by providing it with an annual report in compliance with clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 4;  
(b) require the public authority to compensate the complainant for any loss or other detriment 
suffered;  
(c) imp ose any of the penalties provided under this Act;  
(d) reject the application.  
(9) The Central Information Commission or State Information Commission, as the case may be, shall  
give notice of its decision, including any right of appeal, to the complainant and the public authority.  
(10) The Central Information Commission or State Information Commission, as the case may be, 
shall decide the appeal in accordance with such procedure  as may be prescribed.  
20. Penalties .—(1)Where the Central Information Commission or the State Information Commission, 
as the case may be, at the time of deciding any complaint or appeal is of the opinion that the Central 
Public Information Officer or the State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, has, without any 
reasonable cause, refused to receive an application for information or has not furnished information 
within the time specified under sub -section ( 1) of section 7 or malafidely denied th e request for 
information or knowingly given incorrect, incomplete or misleading information or destroyed information 
which was the subject of the request or obstructed in any manner in furnishing the information, it shall 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 17]
17 
 impose a penalty of two hundred a nd fifty rupees each day till application is received or information is 
furnished, so however, the total amount of such penalty shall not exceed twenty -five thousand rupees:  
Provided that the Central Public Information Officer or the State Public Informati on Officer, as the 
case may be, shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard before any penalty is imposed on 
him: 
Provided further that the burden of proving that he acted reasonably and diligently shall be on the 
Central Public Information Offi cer or the State Public Information Officer, as the case may be.  
(2) Where the Central Information Commission or the State Information Commission, as the case 
may be, at the time of deciding any complaint or appeal is of the opinion that the Central Public  
Information Officer or the State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, has, without any 
reasonable cause and persistently, failed to receive an application for information or has not furnished 
information within the time specified under sub -section ( 1) of section 7 or malafidely denied the request 
for information or knowingly given incorrect, incomplete or misleading information or destroyed 
information which was the subject of the request or obstructed in any manner in furnishing the 
information , it shall recommend for disciplinary action against the Central Public Information Officer or 
the State Public Information Officer, as the case may be, under the service rules applicable to him.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
21. Protection of action t aken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or 
any rule made thereunder.  
22. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of  this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in  the Official Secrets Act, 1923 (19 of 1923), and 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 17]
ing 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in  the Official Secrets Act, 1923 (19 of 1923), and any other 
law for the time being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.  
23. Bar of ju risdiction of courts .—No court shall entertain any suit, application or other proceeding 
in respect of any order made under this Act and no such order shall be called in question otherwise than 
by way of an appeal under this Act.  
24. Act not to apply to certain organis ations .—(1) Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to the 
intelligence and security organisations specified in the Second Schedule, being organisations  established 
by the Central Government or any information furnished by such organisations to that Government:  
Provided that the information pertaining to the allegations of corruption and human rights violations 
shall not be excluded under this sub -section : 
Provided further that in the case of information sought for is in respect of allegations of violation of 
human rights, the information shall only be provided after the approval of the Central Information 
Commission, and notwithstanding anything contained  in section 7, such information shall be provided 
within forty -five days from the date of the receipt of request.  
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the Schedule by 
including therein any other intelligence or sec urity organisation established by that Government or 
omitting therefrom any organisation already specified therein and on the publication of such notification, 
such organisation shall be deemed to be included in or, as the case may be, omitted from the Sch edule.  
(3) Every notification issued under sub -section ( 2) shall be laid before each House of Parliament.  
(4) Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to such intelligence and security organisation being 
organisations established by the State Government, as that Government may, fr
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 17]
ty organisation being 
organisations established by the State Government, as that Government may, from time to time, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify:  
Provided that the information pertaining to the allegations of corruption and human rights violations 
shall not be excluded under this sub -section:  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 18]
18 
 Provided furthe r that in the case of information sought for is in respect of allegations of violation of 
human rights, the information shall only be provided after the approval of the State Information 
Commission and, notwithstanding anything contained in section 7, such  information shall be provided 
within forty -five days from the date of the receipt of request.  
(5) Every notification issued under sub -section ( 4) shall be laid before the State Legislature.  
25. Monitoring and reporting .—(1) The Central Information Commission or State Information 
Commission, as the case may be, shall, as soon as practicable after the end of each year, prepare a report 
on the implementation of the provisions of this Act during that year and forward a copy thereof  to the 
appropriate Go vernment.  
(2) Each Ministry or Department shall, in relation to the public authorities within their jurisdiction, 
collect and provide such information to the Central Information Commission or State Information 
Commission, as the case may be, as is required  to prepare the report under this section and comply with 
the requirements concerning the furnishing of that information and keeping of records for the purposes of 
this section.  
(3) Each report shall state in respect of the ye ar to which the report relates ,— 
(a) the number of requests made to each public authority;  
(b) the number of decisions where applicants were not entitled to access to the documents 
pursuant to the requests, the provisions of this Act under which these decisions were made and the 
number  of times such provisions were invoked;  
(c) the number of appeals referred to the Central Information Commission or State Information 
Commission, as the case may be, for review, the nature of the appeals and the outcome of the appeals;  
(d) particulars of a ny disciplinary action taken against any officer in respect of the administration 
of this Act;  
(e) the amount of charges collected by each public autho
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 18]
spect of the administration 
of this Act;  
(e) the amount of charges collected by each public authority under this Act;  
(f) any facts which indicate an effort by the public authorities to administer and i mplement the 
spirit and intention of this Act;  
(g) recommendations for reform, including recommendations in respect of the particular public 
authorities, for the development, improvement, modernisation, reform or amendment to this Act or 
other legislation or common law or any other matter relevant for operationalising the right to access 
information.  
(4) The Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, may, as soon as practicable 
after the end of each year, cause a copy of the report of the Central Information Commission or the State 
Information Commission, as the case may be, referred to in sub -section ( 1) to be laid before each House 
of Parliament or, as the case may be, before each House of the State Legislature, where there are two 
Houses, and where there is one House of the State Legislature before that House.  
(5) If it appears to the Central Information Commission or State Information Commission, as the case 
may be, that the practice of a public authority in relation to the exercise of its functions under this Act 
does not conform with the provisions or spirit of this Act, it may give to the authority a recommendation 
specifying the steps which ought in its opinion to be taken for promoting such conformity.  
26. Appropriate Go vernment to prepare programmes .—(1) The appropriate Government may, to 
the extent of availability of financial  and other resources, — 
(a) develop and organise educational programmes to advance the understanding of the public, in 
particular of  disadvantaged communities as to how to exercise the rights contemplated under this Act;  
(b) encourage public authorities to participate in the development and organisation of 
programmes referred to in clause ( a) and to undert ake such programmes t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 18]
pment and organisation of 
programmes referred to in clause ( a) and to undert ake such programmes themselves ; 
(c) promote timely and effective dissemination of accurate information by public authorities 
about their activities; and  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 19]
19 
 (d) train Central Public Information Officers or State Public Information Officers, as the case may 
be, of public authorities and pro duce relevant training materials for use by the public authorities 
themselves.  
(2) The appropriate Government shall, within eighteen months from the commencement of this Act, 
compile in its official language a guide containing such information, in an easil y comprehensible form 
and manner, as may reasonably be required by a person who wishes to exercise any right specified in this 
Act. 
(3) The appropriate Government shall, if necessary, update and publish the guidelines referred to in 
sub-section ( 2) at regu lar intervals which shall, in particular and without prejudice to the general ity of 
sub-section ( 2), include — 
(a) the objects of this Act;  
(b) the postal and street address, the phone and fax number and, if available, electronic mail 
address of the Central  Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as the case may 
be, of every public authority appointed under sub -section ( 1) of section 5;  
(c) the manner and the form in which request for access to an information shall be made to a 
Centra l Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer, as the case may be;  
(d) the assistance available from and the duties of the Central Public Information Officer or State 
Public Information Officer, as the case may be, of  a public authority under this Act;  
(e) the assistance available from the Central Information Commission or State Information 
Commission, as the case may be;  
(f) all remedies in law available regarding an act or failure to act in respect of a right or duty  
conferred or imposed by this Act including the manner of filing an appeal to the Commission;  
(g) the provisions providing for the voluntary disclosure of categories of records in accordance 
with section 4;  
(h) the notices regarding fees to be paid in rela tion to requests for access to an informatio
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 19]
 4;  
(h) the notices regarding fees to be paid in rela tion to requests for access to an information; and  
(i) any additional regulations or circulars made or issued in relation to obtaining access to an 
information in accordance with this Act.  
(4) The appropriate Government must, if necessary, update and publi sh the guidelines at regular 
intervals.  
27. Power to make r ules by appropriate Government .—(1) The appropriate Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the cost of the medium or print cost price of the materials to be disseminated under                           
sub-section ( 4) of section 4;  
(b) the fee payable under sub -section ( 1) of section 6;  
(c) the fee payable under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 5) of section 7;  
1[(ca) the term of office of the Chief Information Commissioner and Information Commissioners 
under sub -sections ( 1) and (2) of section 13 and the State Chief Information Commissioner and State 
Information Commissioners under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) of section 16;  
(cb) the salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the Chief Information 
Commissioner a nd the Information Commissioners under sub -section ( 5) of section 13 and the State 
Chief Information Commissioner and the State Information Commissioners under sub -section ( 5) of 
section 16;]  
                                                           
1.  Ins. by Act 24 of 2019, s.  4  (w.e.f. 24 -10-2019).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 20]
20 
 (d) the salaries and allowances payable to and the terms and conditions of service of the officers 
and other employees under sub -section ( 6) of section 13 and sub -section ( 6) of section 16;  
(e) the procedure to be adopted by the Central Information Commission or State Information 
Commission, as the case may be, in d eciding the appeals under sub -section ( 10) of section 19; and  
(f) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
28. Power to mak e rules by competent authority .—(1) The competent authority may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the foll owing matters, namely: — 
(i) the cost of the medium or print cost price of the materials to be disseminated under                         
sub-section ( 4) of section 4;  
(ii) the fee payable under sub -section ( 1) of section 6;  
(iii) the fee payable under sub -section ( 1) of section 7; and  
(iv) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
29. Laying of rules .—(1) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesa id, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modifica tion or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule.  
(2) Every rule made under this Act by a State Government shall
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 20]
ng previously done under that rule.  
(2) Every rule made under this Act by a State Government shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
notified, before the State Legislature.  
30. Powe r to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear t o it to be necessary or expedient for removal of 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the date of 
the commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
31. Repeal .—The Freedom of Information Act, 2002 (5 of 2003) is hereby repealed.   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 21]
21 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See sections 13 ( 3) and 16( 3)] 
FORM OF OATH OR AFFIRMATION TO BE MADE BY THE CHIEF INFORMATION  COMMISSIONER/THE  
INFORMATION  COMMISSIONER /THE STATE  CHIEF INFORMATION  COMMISSIONER /THE STATE  
INFORMATION  COMMISSIONER  
“I, ....................., having been appointed Chief Information Commissioner/Information 
Commissioner/State Chief Information Commissioner /State Information Commissioner  
swear in the name of God  that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the  
solemnly affirm  
Constitution of India as by law established, that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India, tha t I 
will duly and faithfully and to the best of my ability, knowledge and judgment perform the duties of my 
office without fear or favour, affection or ill -will and that I will uphold the Constitution and the laws. ”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 22]
22 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 24)  
INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY ORGANISATION ESTABLISHED BY THE CENTRAL  GOVERNMENT  
1. Intelligence Bureau.  
1[2. Research and Analysis Wing  including its technical wing namely, the Aviation Research 
Centre of the Cabinet Secretariat .] 
3. Directorate of Revenue Intelligence.  
4. Central Economic Intelligence Bureau.  
5. Directorate of Enforcement.  
6. Narcotics Control Bureau.  
7. 2***. 
8. Special 3[Frontier ] Force  of the  Cabinet Secretariat . 
9. Border Security Force.  
10. Central Reserve Police Force.  
11. Indo-Tibetan Border Police.  
12. Central Industrial Security Force.  
13. National Security Guards.  
14. Assam Rifles.  
4[15. Sashtra Seema Bal .] 
5[16. Directorate General of Income -tax (Investigation).]  
5[17. National Technical Research Organisation.]  
5[18. Financial Intelligence Unit, India.]  
6[19. Special Protection Group.  
 20. Defence Research and Development Organisation.  
 21. Border Road Development Board.  
 7* * * * *] 
8[22. National Security Council Secretariat.]  
 9[23. Central Bureau of Investigation . 
 24. National Investigation Agency . 
 25. National Intelligence Grid .] 
10[26. Strategic Forces Command .] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by notification No. G.S.R. 319(E), dated 4 -5-2021.  
2. Serial Number 7 omitted by notification No. G.S.R. 319(E), dated 4 -5-2021.  
3. Subs. by notification No. G.S.R. 319(E), dated 4 -5-2021.  
4. Subs. by notification No. G.S.R. 347, dated 28 -9-2005.  
5. Subs. by notification No. G.S.R. 235(E) dated 27 -3-2008.  
6. Ins. by notification No. G.S.R. 347, dated 28 -9-2005.  
7. Omitted by G.S.R. 235( E) dated 27 -3-2008.  
8. Added by notification No. G.S.R. 726(E), dated 8 -10-2008.  
9. Added by notification No. G.S.R. 442(E), dated 9 -6-2011.  
10. Ins. by  notification No. G.S.R. 673(E) dated 8 -7-2016.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005.pdf - page 22]
7-2016.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SALES PROMOTION EMPLOYEES (CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) ACT, 1976.pdf - page 1]
1 THE SALES PROMOTION EMPLOYEES (CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) ACT, 1976  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Power of Central Government to declare certain industries to be notified industries . 
4. Leave . 
5. Issue of appointment letter . 
6. Application of certain Acts to sales promotion employees . 
7. Maintenance of registers.  
8. Inspectors . 
9. Penalty . 
10. Offences by companies . 
11. Cognizance of offence . 
11A. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with this Act . 
12. Power to make rules . 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SALES PROMOTION EMPLOYEES (CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) ACT, 1976.pdf - page 2]
2 THE SALES PROMOTION EMPLOYEES (CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) ACT, 1976  
ACT NO. 11 OF 1976  
[25th January , 1976.]  
An Act to regulate certain conditions of service of sales promotion employees in  certain 
establishments.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty -sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent , commencement and application. —(1) This Act may be called the Sales 
Promotion Employees (Conditions of Service) Act, 1976.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different States.  
(4) It shall apply in the first instance to every establishment enga ged in pharmaceutical industry.  
(5) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, apply the provisions of this 
Act, with effect from such date as may be spec ified in the notification, to any other establishment engaged 
in any notified industry.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “establishment ” means an establishment engaged in pharmaceutical indust ry or in any notified 
industry;  
(b) “notified industry ” means an industry declared as such under section 3;  
(c) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
2[(d) “sales promotion employee s” means any person by whatever name called (including an 
apprentice) emplo yed or engaged in any establishment for hire or reward to do any work relating to 
promotion of sales or business, or both, but do es not include any such person — 
(i) who, being employed or engaged in a supervisory capacity, draws wages exceeding 
sixtee n hun dred rupees per mensem; or  
(ii) who is employed or engaged mainly in a manager ial or administrative capacity.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, the wages per mensem  of a person shall be 
deemed to be the amount equal to thirty times his tota
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SALES PROMOTION EMPLOYEES (CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) ACT, 1976.pdf - page 2]
, the wages per mensem  of a person shall be 
deemed to be the amount equal to thirty times his total wages (whether or not including, or 
comprising only of, commission) in respect of the continuous period of his service falling within the 
period of twelve months immediately prec eding the date with reference to which the calculation is to 
be made, divided by the number of days comprising th at period of service;]  
(e) all words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1 947), shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.  
3. Power of Central Government to declare certain indust ries to be notified industries. —The 
Central Government may, having regard to the nature of any industry (not being pharmaceutic al 
industry), the number of employees employed in such industry to do any work relating to promotion of 
sales or business or both, the conditions of service of such employees and such other factors which, in the 
opinion of the Central Government, are relev ant, declare such industry to be a notified industry for the 
purposes of this Act.  
                                                           
1. 6th March , 1976, vide notification No. S.O. 176(E), dated 6th March , 1976, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,  Part I I,  
sec. 3( ii). 
2. Subs. by Act 48 of 1986, s. 2, for clause ( d) (w.e.f . 6-5-1987).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SALES PROMOTION EMPLOYEES (CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) ACT, 1976.pdf - page 3]
3 4. Leave. —1[(1)] In addition to such holidays, casual leave or other kinds of leave as may be 
prescribed, every sales promotion employee 2*** shall be granted, if so requested for — 
(a) earned leave on full wages for not less than one - eleventh of the period spent on duty;  
(b) leave on medical certificate on one -half of the wages for not less than one -eight eenth of the 
period of service.  
3[(2) The maximum limit up to wh ich a sales promotion employee may accumulate earned leave shal l 
be such as may be prescribed.  
(3) The limit up to which the earned leave may be availed of at a time by a sales promotion employee 
and the reasons for which such limit may be exceeded shall b e such as may be prescribed.  
(4) A s ales promotion employee shall, — 
(a) when he voluntarily relinquishes his p ost or retires from service, or  
(b) when his services are terminated for any reason whatsoever (not be ing termination as 
punishment),  
be entitled to cash compensation, subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed 
(including conditions by way of specifying the maximum period for which such cash compensation shall 
be payable), in respect of the earned leave ea rned by him and not av ailed of.  
(5) Where a sales promotion employee dies while in service, his heirs shall be entitled to cash 
compensation for the earned l eave earned by him and not availed of.  
(6) The cash compensation which will be payable to a sales promotion employee or, as the case may 
be, his heirs in respect of any period of earned leave for which he or his heirs, as the case may be, is or are 
entitled to cash compensation under sub -section ( 4) or sub -section ( 5), as the case may be, shall be an 
amount equal to the wage s due to such sales promotion employee for such period.]  
5. Issue of appointment letter. —Every employer in relation to a sales promotion employee shall 
furnish to such employee a letter of appointment, in s uch form as may be prescribed, — 
(
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SALES PROMOTION EMPLOYEES (CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) ACT, 1976.pdf - page 3]
ee shall 
furnish to such employee a letter of appointment, in s uch form as may be prescribed, — 
(a) in a case wher e he holds appointment as such at the commencement of this Act, within three 
months of such commencement; and  
(b) in any other case, on his appointment as such.  
6. Application of certain Acts to sales promotion employees. —(1) The provisions of the 
Workmen’ s Compensation Act, 1923 (8 of 1923), as in force for the time being, shall apply to, or in 
relation to, sales promotion employees as they apply to, or in relation to, workmen within the  meaning of 
that Act.  
4[(2) The provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), as in force for the time being, 
shall apply to, or in relation to, sales promotion employees as they apply to, or in relation to, workmen 
within the meaning of that Act and for the purposes of any proceeding under that Act in relati on to an 
industrial dispute, a sales promotion employee shall be deemed to include a sales promotion employee 
who has been dismissed, discharged or retrenched in connection with, or as a consequence of, that dispute 
or whose dismissal, discharge or retrenc hment had led to that dispute. ] 
(3) The provisions of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 (11 of 1948), as in force for the time being, 
shall apply to, or in relation to, sales promotion employees as they apply to, or in relation to, employees 
within the meaning o f that Act.  
                                                           
1.  Section  4 renumbered as s ub-section ( 1) thereof by Act 48 of 1986, s. 3 (w.e.f. 8 -3-1976).  
2. The words  and brackets “drawing wages (being wages, not including any commission)” omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 8 -3-
1976).   
3. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 8 -3-1976).  
4. Sub -section ( 2) shall stand omitted ( date to be notified) by Act 46 of 1982, s. 2.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SALES PROMOTION EMPLOYEES (CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) ACT, 1976.pdf - page 4]
4 (4) The provisions of the Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 (53 of 1961), as in force for the time being, 
shall apply to, or in relation to, sales promotion employees, being women, as they apply to, or in relation 
to, women employed, whether directly  or through any agency, for wages in any establishment within the 
meaning of that Act.  
(5) The provisions of the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965 (21 of 1965), as in force for the time being, 
shall apply to, or in relation to, sales promotion employees as they apply to, or in relation to, employees 
within the meaning of that Act.  
(6) The provisions of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 (39 of 1972), as in force for the time being, 
shall apply to, or in relation to, sales promotion employees as they apply to, or in relation to, employees 
within the meaning of that Act.  
1[(7) Notwithstanding anything co ntained i n the foregoing sub -sections,— 
(a) in the application of any Act referred to in any of the said sub -section s to sales promotion 
employees, the wages of a sales promotion employee for the purposes of such Act, shall be deemed to 
be his wages as com puted in accordance with the provisions of this Act;  
(b) where an Act referred to in any of the said sub -sections provides for a ceiling limit as to 
wages so as to exclude from the purview of the application of such Act persons whose wages exceed 
such ceil ing limit, such Act shall not apply to any sales promotion employee whose wages as 
computed in accordance with the provisions of this Act exceed such ceiling limit.]  
7. Maintenance of registers. —Every  employer in relation to an establishment shall keep and 
maintain such registers and other documents and in such manner as may be prescribed.  
8. Inspectors. —(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint such 
persons as it t hinks fit to be Inspectors for the purposes of this Act and may define the local limits within 
which they shall exercise their functions.  
(2) 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SALES PROMOTION EMPLOYEES (CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) ACT, 1976.pdf - page 4]
f this Act and may define the local limits within 
which they shall exercise their functions.  
(2) Any Inspector appointed under sub -section ( 1) may, for the purpose of ascertaining whether any 
of the provisions o f this Act have been complied with in respect of an establishment, — 
(a) require an employer to furnish such informatio n as he may consider necessary;  
(b) at any reasonable time enter the establishment or any premises connected therewith and 
require any one  found in charge thereof to produce before him for examination any registers and other 
documents relating to the employment of sales promotion employees;  
(c) examine with respect to any matter relevant to any of the purposes aforesaid, the employer, 
his ag ent or servant or any other person found in charge of the establishment or any premises 
connected therewith or any person whom the Inspector has reasonable cause to believe to be or to 
have been a sales promotion employee in the establishment;  
(d) make cop ies of or take extracts from any register or other documents maintained in relation to 
the establishment under this Act;  
(e) exercise such oth er powers as may be prescribed.  
(3) Every Inspector shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the 
Indian Penal Code, 1860 (45 of 1860)  
(4) Any person required to produce any register or other document or to give information by an 
Inspector under sub -section ( 2) shall be legally bound to do so.  
9. Penalty. —If any employer contravenes the provisions of section 4 or section 5 or section 7 or any 
rules made under this Act, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 48 of 1986, s. 4 (w.e.f. 6 -5-1987).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SALES PROMOTION EMPLOYEES (CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) ACT, 1976.pdf - page 5]
5 STATE AMENDMENT  
Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh  
Insertion of new section -After section  9, insert - 
“9A. Compounding of offences. -(1) Any offence punishable under sections  4, 5 and 7 or any 
rules made under this Act may, either before or after the institution of the prosecution, on an 
application by the a lleged offender, be compounded by payment of compounding amount not more 
than fifty thousand by such officer or authority as the appropriate Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf:  
Provided that the appropriate Gove rnment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the 
said specified compounding amount:  
Provided further that the offences of the same nature committed by the same offender for more 
than three occasions shall not be compoundable:  
Provided also th at such offences shall be compounded only after the alleged offender has acted to 
the satisfaction of such officer or authority that such offence is not continued any further:  
(2) Where an offence has been compounded under sub -section (1), no further proce edings shall 
be taken against the offender in respect of such offence in respect of such offence and the offender, if 
in custody, sha ll be released or discharged.".  
[Vide Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation  (Adaptation of Central Laws) Second 
Order, 2020, vide  Notification No. S.O. 3465(E), dated (5 -10-2020) and Vide Union Territory of Ladakh 
Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, Notification No. S.O. 3774(E), dated (23 -10-
2020).]  
10. Offe nces by companies. —(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well a s the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
according
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SALES PROMOTION EMPLOYEES (CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) ACT, 1976.pdf - page 5]
emed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this sect ion, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge 
or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretar y or other officer shall also be deemed to be 
guilty of such offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly.  
(3) For t he purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body  corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
11. Cognizance of offence. —(1) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a 
Magistrate of the first c lass shall try any offence punishable under this Act.  
(2) No court shall take cognizance of an offence under this Act, unless the complaint thereof is made 
within six months of the date on which the offence is alleged to have been committed.  
1[11A. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with this Act. —(1) The provisions of this Act or 
of any rule made thereunder shall have effect, notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 69 of 1982, s. 2 (w.e.f. 13 -11-1982).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SALES PROMOTION EMPLOYEES (CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) ACT, 1976.pdf - page 6]
6 in any other law or in the terms of any award, agreement, settlement or contract of service, whether made 
before or after the  coming into force of this Act:  
Provided that where under any such law, award, agreement, settlement or contract of service, a sales 
promotion employee is entitled to benefits in respect of  any matter which are more favourable to him than 
those to which he would be entitled under this Act, the sales promotion employee shall continue to be 
entitled to the more favourable benefits in respect of that matter, notwithstanding that he is entitled to 
receive benefits in respect o f other matters under this Act.  
(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed to preclude a sales promotion employee from 
entering into an agreement with his employer for granting him rights or privileges in respect o f any matter 
which are more favourable to him than those to which he would be entitled under this Act.]  
12. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carr y out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powe r, such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the kinds of leave that may be granted to a sales promotion employee 1[, the limit up to which 
he may accumulate earned leave, the limit up to whi ch he may avail of earned leave at a time and the 
reasons for which such limit may be exceeded, the conditions and restrictions subject to which he 
may be entitled to cash compensation] under section 4;  
(b) the form of the letter of appointment to be furnished under section 5;  
(c) the registers and other documents to be kept and maintained under section 7 and the manner in 
which such registers and other documents may be kept and maintained;  
(d) any other matter which has to be, or may be prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, bef
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SALES PROMOTION EMPLOYEES (CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) ACT, 1976.pdf - page 6]
ade by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may 
be co mprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree tha t the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything pr eviously d one under 
that rule.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 48 of  1986, s. 5 (w.e.f. 8 -3-1976).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SARÁÍS ACT, 1867.pdf - page 1]
THE SARÁÍ S ACT, 1867  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. [Repeal ed.] 
2. Interpretation clause . 
“Sarai.”  
“Keeper of a Sarai.”  
“Magistrate of the Districts”  
3. Notice of this Act to be given to keepers of Saráí s.  
4. Registers of Saráí s to be kept . 
5. Lodgers, & c., not to be received in Saráí s until registered . 
6. Magistrate may refuse to re fuse to register keeper not producing certificate of character . 
7. Duties of keepers of Saráí s. 
8. Power to order reports from keepers of Saráí s. 
9. Power to shut up, secure, clear, and clean deserted Saráí . 
10. Taking down or repairing ruinous Saráí s. 
11. Sale of materials of ruinous Saráí s. 
12. Penalty for permitting Saráí s to be filthy or overgrown.  
Proviso.  
13. Power for Local Government to make regulations.  
14. Penalty for infringing Act or regulations.  
15. Conviction for third offence to disqualify persons from keeping Saráí s. 
16. Nothing in Act to apply to certain Saráí s. 
17. Extent of Act.  
Power to State Government to extend this Act.  
18. Short title  
SCHEDULE.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SARÁÍS ACT, 1867.pdf - page 2]
 
 
 
 
 
THE SARÁÍ S ACT, 1867  
ACT NO. XXII  OF 18671. 
___________  
PASSED  BY THE GOVERNOR GENERAL OF INDIA IN COUNCIL . 
(Received the assent of the Governor General on the  15th March 1867 .) 
___________  
An Act for the regulation of public Saráí s and Puraos .. 
Preamble. —WHEREAS  it is expedient to provide for the regulation of public Saráí s and Puraos; It is 
hereby enacted as follows :— 
1. [Repeal of Bengal Regulation 14 of 1807 , section 11. Clause 5.] Rep. by the Amending Act, 1891 
(12 of 1891)  
2. Interpretation clause .—In this Act, unless there be something repugnant in the subject or 
context, — 
“Saráí .”—"Saráí " means any building used for the shelter and accommodation of travellers, and 
includes, in any case in which only part of a building is used as a Saráí, the part so used of such 
building. It also includes a Purao so far as the provisions of this Act are a pplicable thereto:  
“Keeper of a Sarai. ”—"Keeper of a Saráí" includes the owner and any person having or acting in 
the care or management thereof  : 
 2[“Magistrate of the District.” —“Magistrate of the District”  means the chief officer charged with 
the executive administration of a district in criminal matters whatever may be his designation : ] 
3[*                                            *                                                    *                                                   *] 
3. Notice of this Act to be given to keepers of Saráí.—Within six months after this Act shall come 
into operation, the Magistrate of the District in which any Saráí to which this Act shall apply may be 
situate shall, and from time to time thereafter such Magistra te may, give to the keeper of every such Saráí 
notice in writing of this Act, by leaving such notice for the keeper at the Saráí; and shall by such notice 
                                                           
 1. As to extent, see note to s. 17, infra.  
The Act has been declared, by notification under s. 3(a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SARÁÍS ACT, 1867.pdf - page 2]
1. As to extent, see note to s. 17, infra.  
The Act has been declared, by notification under s. 3(a) of the Schedule Districts Act, 1874 (14 of 1874), to be in force in the 
following Scheduled Districts, namely : — 
The Districts of Hazaribagh, Lohardaga (now the Ranchi District, see Calcutta Gazette, 1899, Pt. I, p.4 4), and Manbhum, 
and Pargana Dhalbhum and the Kolhan in the District of Singbhum. See Gazette of India, 1881, Pt. I, p. 504.  
The Tarai of the Province of Agra. See Gazette of India, 1876, Pt. I, p. 505.  
It has also been extended to the districts of Ganjam  and Koraput and to certain partially excluded areas in the Province of 
Orissa.  See Orissa Govt. notifications No. 776 -P, dated 23rd June, 1941 and No. 188 -P, dated 18th January, 1939, respectively.  
2. This reference should now be read as “District Magist rate”. See para. 2 of s. 3 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 
1898).  
3. The words “words in the singular include the plural, and vice versa” rep. by Act 10 of 1914, and the definition of “L.G.” rep. 
by the A.O. 1937.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SARÁÍS ACT, 1867.pdf - page 3]
require the keeper to register the Saráí as by this Act provided. Such notice may be in the form in the 
Schedule to this Act annexed or to the like effect.  
4. Registers of saráís to be kept. —The Magistrate of the District shall keep a register in which shall 
be entered by such magistrate or such  other person as he shall appoint in this behalf, the names and 
residences of the keepers of all Saráís within his jurisdiction , and the situation of every such Sarai. No 
charge shall be made for making any such entry.  
5. Lodgers , &c., not to be received i n Saráís until registered .—After one month after the giving of 
such notice to register as by this Act , provided , the keeper of any Saráí or any other person shall not 
receive any lodge or allow any person , cattle , sheep , elephant , camel or other animal , or any vehicle to 
halt or be placed in such  Saráí  until the same and the name and residence of the keeper thereof shall have 
been registered as by this Act provided , 
6. Magistrate may refuse to register keeper not producing certificate of character .—The 
Magistrate of the District may , if he shall think fit , refuse to register as the keeper of a Saráí, a person who 
does not produce a certificate of character in such form and signed by such person s as the State 
Government shall from time to time direct.  
7. Duties of keepers  of Saráís .—The keeper of a Saráí  shall be bound .— 
(1) When any person in such Saráí  is ill of any infectious or contagious disease , or dies of such 
disease to give immediate notice thereof to the nearest police -station ; 
(2) At all times when requires by any Magistrate or any other person duly authorized by the 
Magistrate of the District in this behalf , to give him free access to the Saráí  and allow him to inspect 
the same or any part thereof ; 
(3) To thoroughly cleanse the rooms and verand ahs, and drains of the Saráí , and the wells , tanks , or 
other sources from which water is obtained for the persons
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SARÁÍS ACT, 1867.pdf - page 3]
f the Saráí , and the wells , tanks , or 
other sources from which water is obtained for the persons or animals using it , to the satisfaction of 
and so often as shall be required by the Magistrate of the District, or such person as he shall appoint in 
this behalf :  
(4) To remove all noxious vegetation on or near the Saráí , and all tree s and branches of tree s 
capable of affor ding to thieves means of entering or leaving the Saráí : 
(5) To keep the gates, walls, fences, roofs and drains of the Saráí  in repair :  
(6) To provide such number of watchmen as may, in the opinion of the Magistrate of the District, 
subject to such rules a s the State Government may prescribe in this behalf, be necessary for the safety 
and protection of persons and animals or vehicles  lodging  in, halting at or placed in the Saráí  lodging 
and; 
(7) To exhibit a list of charges for the  use of the  Saráí  at such place and in such form and languages 
as the Magistrate of the District shall from time to time direct.  
8. Power to order reports from keepers of Saráís .—The keeper of a Saráí  shall from time to time, if 
required so to do by an order of the Magistrate of the District served upon him, report, either orally or in 
writing as may be directed by the Magistrate, to such Magistrate or to such person as the Magistrate shall 
appoint, ev ery person who resorted to such Saráí  during the preceding day or night. If written reports are 
required for any space of time exceeding a single day or night, schedules shall be furnished by the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SARÁÍS ACT, 1867.pdf - page 4]
Magistrate of the District to the keeper.  The keeper shall f rom time to time fill up the said schedule s with 
the information so required, and transmit them to the said Magistrate, in such manner and at such 
intervals as may from time to time be ordered by him.  
9. power to shut up , secure , clear , and clean deserted  Saráís .—If any Saráí  by reason of 
abandonment or of disputed ownership shall remain untenanted, and thereby become a resort of idle and 
disorderly persons, or become in a filthy or unwholesome state, or be complained of by any two or more 
of the neighbours  as a nuisance, the Magistrate of the District, after due enquiry, may cause notice in 
writing to be given  to the owner , or to the person claiming to be the owner, if he be known and resident 
within the district, and may also cause such notice to be put on  some conspicuous part of the Saráí , 
requiring the persons concerned therein, whoever they may be, to secure, enclose, clean or clear the same;  
and if such requisition shall not be complied with in eight days, the Magistrate of the District may cause 
the ne cessary work to be executed, and all expenses thereby incurred shall be paid by  the owner of the 
Saráí , and shall be recoverable like penalties under this Act, or, in case of abandonment or disputed 
ownership of the Saráí , by the sale of any material found  therein.  
10. Taking down or repairing ruinous Saráís .—If a Saráí  or any part thereof be deemed by the 
Magistrate of the District to be in a ruinous state, or likely to fall, or in any way dangerous to the persons 
or animals lodging in or halting at the Saráí , he shall give notice in writing to the keeper of the Saráí , 
requiring him forthwith to take down, repair or secure (as the case may be) the Saráí  or such part thereof 
as the case may require.  If the keeper do not begin to take down, repair or secure  the Saráí , or such part as 
aforesaid within three days after such notice, and complete such work wi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SARÁÍS ACT, 1867.pdf - page 4]
he Saráí , or such part as 
aforesaid within three days after such notice, and complete such work with due diligence, the Magistrate 
shall cause all or so much of the Saráí  as he shall think necessary to be taken down, repaired or otherwise 
secured.  All th e expenses so incurred by the Magistrate shall be paid by the keeper of the Saráí , and shall 
be recoverable from him as hereinafter mentioned.  
11. Sale of materials of ruinous Saráís .—If any such Saráí  or any part thereof be taken down by 
virtue of the pow ers aforesaid, the Magistrate of the District may sell the materials thereof, or so much of 
the same as shall be taken down under the provisions of the last preceding section, and apply the proceeds 
of such sale in payment of the expenses incurred, and sha ll restore the overplus (if any) arising from such 
sale to the owner of such Saráí on demand, and may recover the deficiency (if any) as if the amount 
thereof were a penalty under this Act.  
12. penalty for permitting saráís to be filthy or overgrown .—Whoev er, being the keeper of any 
Sarai, suffers the same to be in a filthy and unwholesome state, or overgrown with vegetation, or after the 
expiration of two days from the time of his receiving notice in writing from the Magistrate of the District 
to cleanse o r clear the same, or after he shall have been convicted of suffering the same to be in such state 
or so overgrown as aforesaid, shall allow the same to continue in such state, or so overgrown, shall be 
liable to the penalties provided in section 14 of this  Act:  
Proviso. —Provided that the Magistrate of the District may, in lieu of enforcing such daily penalty, 
enter on and cleanse or clear the said Saráí , and the expense incurred by the Magistrate in respect thereof 
shall be paid to him by the keeper, and shall be recoverable as by this Act provided in the case of 
penalties  
13. Power for State  Government to make regulations .—The State  Government may from t ime to 
time ma
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SARÁÍS ACT, 1867.pdf - page 4]
. Power for State  Government to make regulations .—The State  Government may from t ime to 
time make regulations for the better attainment of the objects of this Act, provided that such rules be not 
inconsistent with this Act or with any other law for the time being in force, and may from time to time 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SARÁÍS ACT, 1867.pdf - page 5]
repeal, alter and add to the same.  All regulations made under this Act , and all repeals thereof and 
alterations and additions thereto, shall be published in the official Gazette.  
14. Penalty for infringing Act or regulations .—If the keeper of a Saráí offend against any of the 
provisions of th is Act or any of the regulations made in pursuance of this Act, he shall for every such 
offence be liable on conviction before any Magistrate to a penalty not exceeding twenty rupees, and to a 
further penalty not exceeding one Rupee a day for every day during which the offence continues:  
Provided always , that this Act shall not exempt any person from any penalty or other liability to which he 
may be subject irrespective of this Act . All penalties imposed under this Act may be recovered in the 
same manner  as fines may be recovered under  1Section 61 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.  
 
15. Conviction for third offence to disqualify persons from keeping Saráís .—Where a keeper of a 
sarai is convicted of a third offence under this Act, he shall not afterwards a ct as keeper of a  Saráí  without 
the licence in writing of the Magistrate of the District, who may either withhold such licence or grant the 
same on such terms and conditions as he may think fit.  
16. Nothing in Act to apply to certain Saráís .—No part of this Act, except section 8, shall apply to 
any Saráí  which may be under th e direct management of the State Government or of any Municipal 
Committee.  
17. Extent of Act .—This Act shall in the first instance extend only to the  2territories under th e 
government of the Lieutena nt Governor of the North -West  Provinces of the Presidency of Fort William in 
Bengal.   
Power to Governor General in Council to extend this Act. —But it shall be lawful for the State  
Government,  by notification in the Local  Gazette , to 3extend this Act, mutatis  mutandis , to any other part 
of the 4[the territories  under its government],  except the towns of Cal
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SARÁÍS ACT, 1867.pdf - page 5]
andis , to any other part 
of the 4[the territories  under its government],  except the towns of Calcutta, Madras and Bombay    5*   *   *  
18. Short title. —This Act may be called the saráís  Act, 1867.  
 
___________  
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1. See now sections 386, 387  and 389 of the code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act 5 of 1898).  
2. Now that area form part of the U.P.  
3. It has been extended to Oudh, See  Notification No. 591, dated 25th July, 1883, in North -Western Provinces and Oudh 
Gazetted, 1883, Pt. I, p. 433.  
It has also been extended to the Punjab. See Notification No. 4499, dated 13th December, 1879, in Punjab Government Gazette, 
1879, Pt. I, p. 727.  
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1948 for “British India ” which had been subs. by the A.O. 1937 for “the territories which  are or may be 
vested in Her Majesty or Her Successors by the Statute 21 & 22 Vict., ch. 106 ( an Act for the better Government of India )”. 
5. The words “and the Settlement of Prince of Wales’ Island, Singapore and Malacca” rep. by Act 12 of 1891 . 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SARÁÍS ACT, 1867.pdf - page 6]
SCHEDULE.  
FORM OF NOTICE . 
Take notice that on the day of 1867, an Act called “The Saráís ’ Act, 1867, ” was passed, and that 
before  the      day of      18      you, being the keeper of a Saráís [ or Purao ] within [ here state the district 
over which the jurisdiction of the Magistrate giving  the notice extends ] must have your Saráís [ or Purao ] 
registered, and that the register is to be kept at [ here state where the register is to be kept ], and that if you 
do not have your Saráís [ or Purao] so registered, you will be liable to a penalty not exceeding twenty 
Rupees, and to a further penalty not exceeding one Rupee a day for every day during which the offence 
continues, and that on your applying to [ here give the name and address of the per  
son to keep the register ] he w ill register your Saráís [or Purao ] free of all charge to you.   
 
Dated the        day of         18      . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SEEDS ACT, 1966.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE SEEDS ACT,  1966                                                                                                                                        
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS                                                                                                            
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Central Seed Committee.  
4. Central Seed Laborat ory and State Seed Laboratory.  
5. Power to notify kinds or varieties of seeds.  
6. Power to specify minimum limits of germination and purity, etc.  
7. Regulation or sale of seeds of notified kinds o r varieties.  
8. Certification agency.  
8A. The  Central Seed Certification Board.  
8B. Other Committees.  
8C. Proceedings of Board or Committee not to be i nvalid by reason of any vacancy therein . 
8D. Procedure for Board.  
8E. Secretary and other officers.  
9. Grant of certificate by certification agency.  
10. Revocation of certificate.  
11. Appeal.  
12. Seed Analysts.  
13. Seed Inspectors.  
14. Powers of Seed Inspector.  
15. Procedure to be followed by Seed Inspectors.  
16. Report of Seed Analyst.  
17. Restriction on export and import of seeds of notified kinds o r varieties.  
18. Recognition of seed certification agencies of foreign countries.  
19. Penalty.  
20. Forfeiture of property.  
21. Offences by companies.  
22. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
23. Power to give directions.  
24. Exemption.  
25. Power to mak e rules.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SEEDS ACT, 1966.pdf - page 2]
2 
 THE SEEDS ACT, 1966  
ACT NO. 54 OF 1966  
[29th December, 1966 .] 
An Act to provide for regulating the quality of certain seeds for sale, and for matters connected 
therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventeenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Seeds Act, 1966.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall came into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act, and 
for different States or for different areas thereof.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the co ntext otherwise requires, — 
(1) “agriculture ” includes horticulture;  
(2) “Central Seed Laboratory ” means the Central Seed Laboratory established or declared as such 
under  sub-section ( 1) of section 4;  
(3) “certification agency ” means the certification agency established under section 8 or 
recognised under section 18;  
(4) “Committee ” means the Central Seed Committee constituted under sub -section ( 1) of      
section 3;  
(5) “container” means a box, bottle, g asket, tin, barrel, case , receptacle, sack, bag, wrapper or 
other thing in which any article or thing is placed or packed;  
(6) “export” means taking out of India to a place outside India;  
(7) “import” means bringing into India from a place outside India;  
(8) “kind” means one or m ore related species or sub -species of crop plants each individually or 
collectively known by one common name such as cabbage, maize, paddy and wheat;  
(9) “notified kind or variety ”, in relation to any seed, means any kind or variety thereof notified 
under section 5;  
(10) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(11) “seed” means any of the following classes of seeds used for sowing or planting — 
(i) seed of food crops including edible oil seeds and seeds of fruits and vegetables;  
(
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SEEDS ACT, 1966.pdf - page 2]
lanting — 
(i) seed of food crops including edible oil seeds and seeds of fruits and vegetables;  
(ii) cott on seeds;  
(iii) seeds of cattle fodder ; 
2[(iv) jute seeds ,] 
and includes seedlings, and tubers, bulbs, rhizomes, roots, cuttings, all types of grafts and other 
vegetatively propagated material, of food crops or cattle fodder;  
(12) “Seed Analyst ” means a Seed Analyst appointed under section 12;  
  
                                                           
1. 2nd September, 1968, vide notification No. S.O. 3122 , dated 29th August, 19 68, in respect of ss. 1 to 6, ss. 8 to 11, s. 18, ss. 22 
to 25  see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
1st October, 19 69, vide notification No. S.O. 4049, dated the 24th September , 1969, in respect of ss. 7, 12 to 17 (both inclusive) 
and 19 to 21  (both inclusive) , see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,  Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
2. Ins. by Act 55 of 1972, s. 2 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1973).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SEEDS ACT, 1966.pdf - page 3]
3 
 (13) “Seed Inspector ” means a Seed Inspector appointed under section 13;  
(14) “State Government ” in relation to a Union Territory, means the administrator thereof;  
(15) “State Seed Laboratory ”, in relation to any State, means the State Seed Laboratory 
established or declared as such under sub -section ( 2) of section 4 for that State; and  
(16) “variety” means a sub -division of a kind identifiable by growth, yield, plant, fruit, seed, or 
other characte ristic.  
3. Central Seed Committee .—(1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be after the 
commencement of this Act, constitute a Committee called the Central Seed Committee to advice the 
Central Government and the State Governments on matters arisin g out of the administration of this Act 
and to carry out the other functions assigned to it by or under this Act.  
(2) The Committee shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(i) a Chairman to be nominated by the Central Government;  
(ii) eight persons to be nominated by the Central Government to represent such interests as th at 
Government thinks fit, of whom not less than two persons shall be representatives of growers of seed;  
(iii) one person to be nominated by the Government of each of the St ates. 
(3) The members of the Committee shall, unless their seals become vacant earlier by resignation, 
death or otherwise, be entitled to hold office for two years and shall be eligible for re -nomination.  
(4) The Committee may, subject to the previous appr oval of the Central Government, make bye -laws 
fixing the quorum and regulating its own procedure and the conduct of all business to be transacted by it.  
(5) The Committee may appoint one or more sub -committees, consisting wholly of members of the 
Committee  or wholly of other persons or partly of members of the Committee and partly of other persons, 
as it thinks fit, for the purpose of discharging such of its functions as may be delegated to such                
sub-committe
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SEEDS ACT, 1966.pdf - page 3]
urpose of discharging such of its functions as may be delegated to such                
sub-committee or sub -committees by the Committe e. 
(6) The functions of the Committee or any sub -committee thereof may be exercised notwithstanding 
any vacancy therein.  
(7) The Central Government shall appoint a person to be the secretary of the Committee and shall 
provide the Committee with such cleric al and other staff as the Central Government considers necessary.  
4. Central Seed Laboratory and State Seed Laboratory .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, establish a Central Seed Laboratory or declare any seed laboratory as 
the Central Seed Laboratory to carry out the functions entrusted to the Central Seed Laboratory by or 
under this Act.  
(2) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish one or more State 
Seed Laborator ies or declare any seed laboratory as the State Seed Laboratory w here analysis of seeds of 
any notified kind or variety shall be carried out by Seed Analysts under this Act in the prescribed manner.  
5. Power to notify kinds or varieties of seeds .—If the Centr al Government, after consultation with 
the Committee, is of opinion that it is necessary or expedient to regulate the quality of seed of any kind or 
variety to be sold for purposes of agriculture, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare su ch 
kind or variety to be a notified kind or variety for the purposes of this Act and different kinds or varieties 
may be notified for different States or for different areas thereof.  
6. Power to specify minimum limits of germination and purity, etc .—The Ce ntral Government 
may, after consultation with the Committee and by notification in the Official Gazette, specify — 
(a) the minimum limits of germination and purity with respect to any seed of any notified kind or 
variety;  
(b) the mark or label to indicate that such seed conforms to the minimum limits of 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SEEDS ACT, 1966.pdf - page 3]
d or 
variety;  
(b) the mark or label to indicate that such seed conforms to the minimum limits of germination 
and purity specified under clause ( a) and the particulars which such mark or label may contain.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SEEDS ACT, 1966.pdf - page 4]
4 
 7. Regulation or sale of seeds of notified kinds o r varieties .—No person shall, himself or by any 
other person on his behalf, carry on the business of selling, keeping for sale, offering to sell, bartering or 
otherwise supplying any seed of any notified kind or variety, unless — 
(a) such seed is identifiable as to its kind or variety;  
(b) such seed conf orms to the minimum limits of germination and purity specified under        
clause ( a) of section 6;  
(c) the container of such seed bears in the prescribed manner, the mark or label containing the 
correct particulars thereof , specified under clause  (b) of section 6; and  
(d) he complies with such other requirements as may be prescribed.  
8. Certification agency .—The State Government or the Central Government in consultation with the 
State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish a ce rtificate agency for the State 
to carry out the functions entrusted to the certification agency by or under this Act.  
1[8A. The Central Seed Certification Board .—(1) The Central Government shall, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, establish a Central  Seed Certification Board (hereinafter referred to as the Board) to 
advise the Central Government and the State Governments on all matters relating to certification, and to 
co-ordinate the functioning of the agencies established under section 8.  
(2) The Bo ard shall consist of  the following members, namely :— 
(i) a Chairman, to be nominated by the Central Government;  
(ii) four members, to be nominated by the Central Government from out of the persons employed 
by the State Governments as Directors of Agriculture;  
(iii) three members, to be nominated by the Central Government from out of the persons 
employed by the Agricultural Universities as Directors of Research;  
(iv) thirteen persons, to be nominated by the Central Government to represent such inter ests as 
that Government thinks fit, of whom not less than four perso
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SEEDS ACT, 1966.pdf - page 4]
rnment to represent such inter ests as 
that Government thinks fit, of whom not less than four persons shall be representatives of seed 
producers or tradesmen.  
(3) A member of the Board shall, unless his seat becomes vacant earlier by resignation or otherwise, 
be entitled to hold office for two years from the date of his nomination:  
Provided that a person nominated under clause ( ii) or clause ( iii) of sub -section ( 2) shall hold office  
only for so long as he holds the appointment by virtue of which his nomination was made.  
8B. Other Committees .—The Board may appoint as ma ny Committees as it deems fit consisting 
wholly of the members of the Board or wholly of other persons or partly of members of the Board and 
partly of other persons as it thinks fit to exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be 
delegated to them, subject to such conditions as it may think fit, by the Board.  
8C. Proceedings of Board or Committee not to be invalid by reason of any vacancy         
therein .—No proceeding of the Board or any Committee the reof shall become invalid merely by reason 
of the existence of any vacancy therein or any defect in the constitution thereof.  
8D. Procedure for Board .—The Board may, subject to the previous approval of the                  
Central Government, make bye -laws for the purpose of regulating  its own procedure and    the procedure 
of any Committee thereof and the conduct of all business to be transacted by it or such Committee.  
8E. Secretary and other officers .—The Central Government shall — 
(i) appoint  a person to be the Secretary of the Board, and  
(ii) provide the Board with such technical and other staff as the Central Government considers 
necessary. ] 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 55 of 1972, s. 3 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1973).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SEEDS ACT, 1966.pdf - page 5]
5 
 9. Grant of certificate by certification agency .—(1) Any person  selling, keeping for sale, offering 
to sell, bartering or  otherwise supplying any seed of any notified kind or variety may, if he desires  to have 
such seed certified by the certification agency, apply to the  certification agency for the grant of a 
certificate for the purpose.  
(2) Every applic ation under sub -section ( 1) shall be made in such form, shall  contain such particulars 
and shall be accompanied by such fees as may be  prescribed.  
(3) On receipt of any such application for the grant of a certificate, the  certification age ncy may, after 
such enquiry as it thinks fit and after  satisfying itself that the seed to which the application relates 
conforms to the  1[prescribed standards] , grant a certificate in such form and on such  conditions as may be 
prescribed:  
2[Provided  that such standards shall not be lower tha n the minimum limits of germination  and purity 
specified for that seed under clause (a) of section 6.]  
10. Revocation of certificate .—If the certification agency is satisfied, either on a reference made to it 
in this behalf or otherwise, that — 
(a) the certificate granted by it under section 9 has been obtained by misrepresentation as to an 
essential fact; or  
(b) the holder of the certificate has, without reasonable cause, failed to comply with the 
conditions subject to  which the certificate has been granted or has contravened any of the provisions 
of this Act or the rules made thereunder,  
then, without prejudice to any other penalty to which the holder of the certificate may be liable under this 
Act, the certification a gency may, after giving the holder of the certificate an opportunity of showing 
cause, revoke the certificate.  
11. Appeal .—(1) Any person aggrieved by a decision of a certification agency under section 9 or 
section 10, may within thirty days from the date on which the decision is communicated to him and on 
payment of such 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SEEDS ACT, 1966.pdf - page 5]
thin thirty days from the date on which the decision is communicated to him and on 
payment of such fees as may be prescribed, prefer an appeal to such authority as may be specified by the 
State Government in this behalf:  
Provided that the appellate authority may entertain an appeal afte r the expiry of the said period of 
thirty days if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in 
time.  
(2) On receipt of an appeal under sub -section ( 1), the appellate authority shall, after giving the 
appell ate an opportunity of being heard, dispose of the appeal as expeditiously as possible.  
(3) Every order of the appellate authority under this section shall be final.  
12. Seed Analysts .—The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoi nt such 
persons as it thinks fit, having the prescribed qualifications, to be Seed Analysts and define the areas 
within which they shall exercise jurisdiction.  
13. Seed Inspectors .—(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint 
such persons as it thinks fit, having the prescribed qualifications, to be Seed Inspectors and define the 
areas within which they shall exercise jurisdiction.  
(2) Every Seed Inspector shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of sec tion 21 of 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860 ) and shall be officially subordinate to such authority as the State 
Government may specify in this behalf .  
14. Powers of Seed Inspector .—(1) The Seed Inspector may — 
(a) take samples of any seed in any notified kind or variety from — 
(i) any person selling such seed; or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 55 of 1972, s. 4, for certain words (w.e.f. 16 -1-1973).  
2. The p roviso added by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f.  16-1-1973).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SEEDS ACT, 1966.pdf - page 6]
6 
 (ii) any person who is in the course of conveying, delivering or preparing to deliver such seed 
to a purchaser or a consignee; or  
(iii) a purchaser or a consignee after delivery of such seed to him;  
(b) send such sample for analysis to the Seed Analyst for the area within which such sample has 
been taken;  
(c) enter and search at all reasonable times, with such assistance, if any, as he considers 
necessary, any place in which he has reason to believe that an offence under this Act has been or is 
being committed and order in writing the person in possession of any seed in respect of which the 
offence has been or is being committed, not to dispose of any stock of such seed for a specific period 
not exceeding thirty days or, unless the alleged offence is such that the defect may be removed by the 
possessor of the seed, seize the stock of such seed;  
(d) examine any record, register, document o r any other material object found in any place 
mentioned in clause ( c) and seize the same if he has reason to believe that if may furnish evidence of 
the commission of an offence punishable under this Act; and  
(e) exercise such other powers as may be neces sary for carrying out the purposes of this Act or 
any rule made there under.  
(2) Where any sample  of any seed of any notified kind or variety is taken under clause ( a) of         
sub-section ( 1), its cost, calculated at the rate at which such seed is usuall y sold to the public, shall be 
paid on demand to the person from whom it is taken.  
(3) The power conferred by this section includes power to break -open any container in which any 
seed of any notified kind or variety may be contained or to break -open the do or of any premises where 
any such seed may be kept for sale:  
Provided that the power to break -open the door shall be exercised only after the owner or any other 
person in occupation of the premises, if he is present therein, refuses to open the door on bei ng called 
upon to do so.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SEEDS ACT, 1966.pdf - page 6]
 the premises, if he is present therein, refuses to open the door on bei ng called 
upon to do so.  
(4) Where the Seed Inspector takes any action under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1), he shall, as far as 
possible, call not less than two persons to be present at the time when such action is taken and take their 
signatures on a memo randum to be prepared in the prescribed form and manner.  
(5) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898  (5 of 1898),  shall, so far as may be, apply 
to any search or seizure under this section as they apply to any search or seizure made under th e authority 
of a warrant issued under section 98 of the said Code.  
15. Procedure to be followed by Seed Inspectors .—(1) Whenever a Seed Inspector intends to take 
sample of any seed of any notified kind or variety or analysis, he shall — 
(a) give  notice in writing, then and there, of such intention to the person from whom he intends to 
take sample;  
(b) except in special cases provided by rules made under this Act, take three representative 
samples in the prescribed manner and mark and seal or fast en up each sample in such manner as its 
nature permits.  
(2) When samples of any seed of any notified kind or variety are taken under sub -section ( 1), the Seed 
Inspector shall — 
(a) deliver one sample to the person from whom it has been taken;  
(b) send in th e prescribed manner another sample for analysis to the Seed Analyst for the area 
within which such sample has been taken; and  
(c) retain the remaining sample in the prescribed manner for production in case any legal 
proceedings are taken or for analysis by  the Central Seed Laboratory under sub -section ( 2) of    
section  16, as the case may be.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SEEDS ACT, 1966.pdf - page 7]
7 
 (3) If the person from whom the samples have been taken refuses to accept one of the samples, the 
Seed Inspector shall send intimation to the Seed Analyst of such refusal and thereupon the Seed Analyst 
receiving the sample for analysis shall divide it into two p arts and shall seal or fasten up one of those parts 
and shall cause it, either upon receipt of the sample or when he delivers his report, to be delivered to the 
Seed Inspector who shall retain it for production in case legal proceedings are taken.  
(4) Wher e a Seed Inspector takes any action under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 14, — 
(a) he shall use all despatch in ascertaining whether or not the seed contravenes any of the 
provisions of section 7 and if it is ascertained that the seed does not so contravene, forthwith revoke 
the order passed under the said clause or, as the case may be, take such action as may be necessary for 
the return of the stock of the seed seized;  
(b) if he seizes the stock of the seed, he shall, as soon as may be, inform a magistrate and take his 
orders as to the custody thereof;  
(c) without prejudice to the institution of any prosecution, if the alleged offence is such that the 
defect may be removed by the possessor of the seed, he shall, on being satisfied that the defect has 
been so removed, forthwith revoke the order passed under the said clause.  
(5) Where a Seed Inspector seizes any record, register, document or any other material object under 
clause  (d) of sub -section ( 1) of section 14, he shall, as soon as may be, inform a magistrate and take his 
orders as to the custody thereof.  
16. Report of Seed Analyst .—(1) The Seed Analyst shall, as soon as may be after the receipt of the 
sample under sub-section ( 2) of section 15, analyse the sample at the State Seed Laboratory and deliver, 
in such form as may be prescribed, one copy of the report of the result of the analysis to the Seed 
Inspector and another copy thereof to the person fr
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SEEDS ACT, 1966.pdf - page 7]
eport of the result of the analysis to the Seed 
Inspector and another copy thereof to the person from whom the s ample has been taken.  
(2) After the institution of a prosecution under this Act, the accused vendor or the complainant may, 
on payment of the prescribed fee, make an application to the court for sending any of the samples 
mentioned in clause ( a) or clause (c) of sub -section ( 2) of section 15 to the Central Seed Laboratory for its 
report and on receipt of the application, the court shall first ascertain that the mark and the seal or 
fastening as provided in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 15 are int act and may then despatch the 
sample under its own seal to the Central Seed Laboratory which shall thereupon send its report to the 
court in the prescribed form within one month from the date o f receipt of the sample, specifying the result 
of the analysis.  
(3) The report  send by the Central Seed Laboratory under sub -section ( 2) shall supersede the report 
given by the Seed Analyst under sub -section ( 1). 
(4) Where the report sent by the Central Seed Laboratory under sub -section ( 2) is produced in any 
proceedi ngs under section 19, it shall not be necessary in such proceedings to produce any sample or part 
thereof taken for analysis.  
17. Restriction on export and import of seeds of notified kinds o r varieties .—No person shall, for 
the purpose of showing or planting by any person (including himself), export or import or cause to be 
exported or imported any seed of any notified kind or variety, unless — 
(a) it conforms to the minimum limits of germination and purity specified for that seed under       
clause ( a) of section 6; and  
(b) its container bears, in the prescribed manner, the mark or label with the correct particulars 
thereof specified for that seed under clause ( b) of section 6.  
18. Recognition of seed certification agencies of foreign countries .—The Ce ntral Government 
may, on the recommendation of th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SEEDS ACT, 1966.pdf - page 7]
tification agencies of foreign countries .—The Ce ntral Government 
may, on the recommendation of the Committee and by notification in the Official Gazette, recognise any 
seed certification agency established in any foreign country, for the purposes of this Act.  
19. Penalty .—If any person — 
(a) contravenes any provision of this Act or any rule made thereunder; or  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SEEDS ACT, 1966.pdf - page 8]
8 
 (b) prevents a Seed Inspector from taking sample under this Act; or  
(c) prevents a Seed Inspector from exercising any other power conferred on him by or under this 
Act, 
he shall, on co nviction, be punishable — 
(i) for the first offence with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, and  
(ii) in the event of such person having been previously convicted of an offence under this section, 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees, or with both.  
20. Forfeiture of property .—When a ny person has been convicted under this Act for the 
contravention of any of the provisions of th is Act or the rules made thereunder, the seed in respect of 
which the contravention has been committed may be forfeited to the Government.  
21. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as wel l as the company , shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment under this Act if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge and that he 
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager , secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or ot her officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explan
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SEEDS ACT, 1966.pdf - page 8]
ilty 
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other associat ion of    
individuals; and  
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
22. Protection of action taken in good faith .—Not suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Government or any officer of the Government for anything which is in good faith done or 
intended to be done under this Act.  
23. Power to give directions .—The Central Government may give such directions to any State 
Government as may appear to the Central Government to be necessary for carrying into execution in the 
State any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule made thereunder.  
24. Exemption .—Nothing in this Act shall apply to any seed of any notified kind or variety grown by 
a person and sold or delivered by him on his own premises direct to  another person for being used by that 
person for the purpose of sowing or planting.  
25. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules  to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,  such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the functions of the Committee and the travelling and daily allowances payable  to members of 
the Committee and members of any sub -Committee appointed under  sub-section (5) of section 3;  
(b) the functions of the Central Seed Laboratory;  
(c) the functions of a certification agency;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SEEDS ACT, 1966.pdf - page 9]
9 
 (d) the manner of marking or labelling the container of seed of any notified kind or  variety under 
clause ( c) of section 7 and under clause  (b) of section 17;  
(e) the requirements which may be complied with by a person carrying on the business  referred to 
in section 7;  
(f) the form of application for the grant of a certificate under section 9, the  particulars it may 
contain, the fees which should accompany it, the form of the  certificate and the conditions subject to 
which the certificate may be granted;  
1[(ff) the standards to which seeds should conform;]  
(g) the form and manner in which and the fee on payment of which an appeal may be  preferred 
under section 11 and the procedure to be followed by the appellate  authority in disposing of the 
appeal;  
(h) the qualifications and duties of Seed Analysts and Seed Inspectors;  
(i) the manner in which samples may be taken by the Seed Inspector, t he procedure  for sending 
such samples to the Seed Analyst or the Central Seed Laboratory and  the manner of analysing such 
samples;  
(j) the form of report of the result of the analysis under sub -section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2) of 
section 16 and the fees paya ble in respect of such report  under the said sub -section ( 2); 
(k) the records to be maintained by a person carrying on the business referred to in  section 7 and 
the particulars which such records shall contain; and  
(l) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made,  before each House 
of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of  thirty days which may be comprised in one s ession 
or 2[in two or more  successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately  following the 
session or the successive sessions aforesaid] both Houses agree in  making any modification in the rule or 
both Houses agree that the rule sho uld not be made, that rule shall, thereafter h
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SEEDS ACT, 1966.pdf - page 9]
n in the rule or 
both Houses agree that the rule sho uld not be made, that rule shall, thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form  or be of no effect, as the case may be; so , however, that any such modification  or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously  done under th at rule.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 55 of 1972, s. 5 (w.e.f. 16 -1-1973).  
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid.,  for certain words (w.e.f. 16 -1-1973).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SHORE NUISANCES (BOMBAY AND KOTABA) ACT, 1853.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE SHORE NUISANCES (BOMBAY AND KOTABA)  ACT, 1853  
ACT NO. XI OF1853 
[Passed on the  15th July,1853.] 
1. Empowers the Collector, & c. to require the removal of Nuisances, &c. in the harbor, &c. and in 
default to abate them himself.  
2, 3, 4, Authorizes the proprietor of the Nuisance on receipt of notice from Collector to apply by 
petition to Supreme Court, to stop proceedings of Collector, &c . (3) the onus probandi to lie on petitioner 
to prove his alleged right : (4) petition to be presented within a month,  except under special 
circumstances.  
5. Prescribes mode of proceeding in case of no petition being presented or of petition being decided 
against petitioner.  
7. Empowers Collector to sell materials of encroachment.  
8. Save rights of E.I. Co. as trustees fo r the Crown, &c.  
9. Defines the term “high water mark.”  
Schedule. 1. Notice. 2. Warrant.  
An Act to facilitate the removal of Nuisances and Encroachments below High -water Mark in the Islands 
of Bombay and Colaba.  
Whereas there is a large sea -shore in the Islands of Bombay and Colaba, and it is expedient, with a 
view to the safe Navigation of the Harbour of Bombay, and to the public interests generally, to facilitate 
the removal of nuisances, obstructions and enroachments below high -water mark in the said Harbour, or 
upon or about the shores of the said Islands; it is enacted as follows: — 
I.   It shall be lawful for the Collector of Land  Revenue at Bombay to give notice requiring the 
removal of any nuisance, obstruction or encroachment anywhere below high -water mark in the said 
Harbour of Bombay, or upon or about the shore of the said Islands; such notice shall be given by affixing 
the same in some conspicuous place on or near to the encroachment, obstruction or nuisance complained 
of, and by publication thereof in th e Bombay Government Gazette,  andshall State that, unless the 
nuisance, obstruction or encroachment be removed or abated within one month, the same will
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SHORE NUISANCES (BOMBAY AND KOTABA) ACT, 1853.pdf - page 1]
less the 
nuisance, obstruction or encroachment be removed or abated within one month, the same will be removed 
or abated by the said Collector;such notice may be in the Form No. 1, in the Schedule to this Act annexed, 
or to the like effect.  
II.  If any person shall deny the right of the said Collector to effect such abatement or removal, he 
shall, within one month after such notice shall have been given as aforesaid, apply to the Supreme Court 
of Judicature at Bombay by petition, setting forth the grounds of his alleged right and praying that the said 
Collector may be restrained f rom causing such abatement or removal; andthe said Court may thereupon 
(on the petitioner ’s giving sufficient security for costs), fix a time for hearing and adjudicating upon such 
petition, and given such directions, and make such orders as the said Court  may think just, and the said 
Court may also make an order for restraining the alleged nuisance, obstruction or encroachment from 
being extended, or from being abated or removed by the said Collector, until after adjudication upon the 
said petition, or the  dismissal thereof for want of prosecution.  
III. Upon the hearing of every such petition, the onus  of proving the alleged right shall be on the 
petitioner.  
IV. No person shall be allowed, after the expiration of such period of one month, to present any suc h 
petition as aforesaid, unless on satisfactory accounting to the said Court for the delay.  
V. If no such petition shall be presented within the said period of one month, or if the same be 
presented and determined against the right of the petitioner, or be  dismissed for want of prosecution, it 
shall be lawful for the Collector to cause such abatement or removal as aforesaid , by any person or 
persons to be authorized by warrant under his hand, andsuch warrant may be in the Form No. 2 in the 
Schedule to this Act annexed, or to the like effect; and the said Collector, and any person acting under his 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SHORE NUISANCES (BOMBAY AND KOTABA) ACT, 1853.pdf - page 1]
Act annexed, or to the like effect; and the said Collector, and any person acting under his 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SHORE NUISANCES (BOMBAY AND KOTABA) ACT, 1853.pdf - page 2]
2 
 warrant, shall not be answerable for any damage unavoidably occasioned in the removal of any such 
nuisance, obstruction or encroachment.  
VI. The said Collector may s ell the materials of any encroachment or obstruction removed under this 
Act, and may apply the proceeds of sale in or towards payment of the expenses of the removal, and, if any 
surplus shall remain, the same be forfeited, and be paid and applied in such m anner as the  Governor of 
Bombay in Council shall direct.  
VII. Nothing in this Act shall prejudice or affect the rights of  the East India Company as trustees for 
the Crown in any part of the said Harbour, or of the sea -shore of the said Islands, or preclude  or interfere 
with any such proceedings, civil or criminal, for abating such nuisances and encroachments as aforesaid, 
as might have been had if this Act had not been passed.  
VIII . The words “high -water mark” in this Act shall mean the ordinary line of high -water at monsoon 
tides.  
________  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SHORE NUISANCES (BOMBAY AND KOTABA) ACT, 1853.pdf - page 3]
3 
 SCHEDULE  
FORM NO. 1.  
Form No. 1 . 
NOTICE  is hereby given by the Collector of Land -revenue in Bombay, under Act XI. of 1853, that 
(describe the encroachment ) is to be removed or abated within one month from the date hereof; otherwise 
the same will be removed or abated by the said Collector under the authority of the said Act.Dated 
the         day of  in the year of  our Lord  
(Signature of Collector .) 
_________  
Form No. 2 . 
This W arrant, granted by the Collector of Lan d-revenue in Bombay, under Act XI . of 1853, is to 
authorize          of        to remove ( describe encroachment ). 
Dated                                                               (Signature of Collector .) 
———  
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SIR DINSHAW MANOCKJEE PETIT ACT, 1893.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE SIR DINSHAW MAN OCKJEE PETIT ACT, 1893  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SE CTIONS  
_____  
SECTIONS  
1. Incorporation of Truste e. 
2. Heirs of Sir Dinshaw Manockjee Petit to take his name.  
3. Vesting and application of income of settled property . 
4. Application of income during minority . 
5. Mansion -house limited to the use of the Baronet for the time being . 
6. Devolution of interest where beneficiary refuses, neglects or discontinues to use the names 
Dinshaw Manockjee Petit . 
7. Power to charge settled property for jointure of widow.  
8. Limitation to amount of jointure . 
9. Exclusion of wives from interest in Mansion -house.  
10. Limitation of transfers to life of transferor . 
11. Addition of stocks,  funds or securities to settled property . 
12. Insurance of Mansion -house, and application of money received in respect of insurance.  
13. Mansion -house and other hereditaments to be kept in repair . 
14. Power of Corporation to se ll or exchange Mansion -house or other hereditaments . 
15. Powers of Corporation  in respect of such sa le or exchange.  
16. Investment of moneys received on such sale or exchange . 
17. Investments and lands resulting from such sale or exchange to be held on trusts declared by this 
Act. 
18. Reimbursement of expenses of Corporation.  
19. Saving existing rights.  
THE SCHEDULE . 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SIR DINSHAW MANOCKJEE PETIT ACT, 1893.pdf - page 2]
2 
 THE SIR DINSHAW MAN OCKJEE PETIT ACT, 1893  
ACT NO. VI OF 1893  
PASSED BY THE GOVERNOR GENERAL OF INDIA IN COUNCI L. 
(Received the assent of the Governor General on the  9th March , 1893.)  
An Act for settling Bonds of the Municipal Corporation of the City of Bo mbay producing an annual income 
of one lakh and twenty  five thousand rupees and a Mansion -house and hereditaments called "Petit Hall" 
in the Island of Bombay, the property of Sir Dinshaw Manockjee Petit, Baronet, so as to accompany 
and support the tit le and dignity of a Baronet lately conferred by Her Present Majesty Queen Victoria 
on him for and during the term of his natural life, and from  and immediately after his decease to hold 
to his second son, Framjee Dinshaw Petit, Esquire, and the heirs male  of his body lawfully begotten, 
and in default of such issue with remainder to the heirs male of the body  of the said Sir Dinshaw 
Manockjee  Petit, and for other purposes connected therewith.  
WHEREAS  by Letters Patent of Her Majesty Queen  Victoria, by the G race of God of the United Kingdom  
of Great Britain and Ireland, Queen, Defender   of the Faith, dated at Westminster on or about the  first 
day of September in the fifty -fourth year of Her  Reign, and by Warrant under the Queen's sign -manual,  
Her said Majesty  made known that She, of Her special Grace, certain knowledge and more motion, had  
erected, appointed and created her trusty and well  beloved Sir Dinshaw Manockjee Petit  of "Petit  Hall,”  
in the Island of Bombay, Knight, to the dignity,  state and degree of a Baronet, and him, the  said Sir 
Dinshaw Manockjee Petit, for Her Majesty,  her heirs and successors, she did erect, appoint and  create 
a Baronet of the United Kingdom of Great  Britain and Ireland by the said Letters Patent, to hold  to him, 
for and during t he term of his natural life , and from and immediately after his decease to hold  to Framjee 
Dinshaw Petit, Esquire, second son of the  said Sir Dinsha
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SIR DINSHAW MANOCKJEE PETIT ACT, 1893.pdf - page 2]
ly after his decease to hold  to Framjee 
Dinshaw Petit, Esquire, second son of the  said Sir Dinshaw Manockjee Petit, and the heirs male  of his 
body lawfully begotten and to be begotten, and  in default of such issue with remainder to the heirs  male 
of the body of the said Sir Dinshaw Manockje e Petit lawfully begotten and to be begotten;  
And whereas in fulfilment of an engagement in that behalf made with Her Majesty's Government the 
said Sir Dinshaw Manockje e Petit is desirous of settling in perpetuity such property on himself and on the 
said Framjee Dinshaw Petit and the heirs male of their respective bodies who may succeed to the said 
Baronetcy as shall be adequate to support the dignity of the title confer red on him and them as aforesaid;  
And whereas the said Sir Dinshaw Manockjee Petit is seised of a Mansion -house and hereditaments 
situate in the Island of Bombay called "Petit Hall," and has an absolute estate of inheritance therein, and is 
desirous, in fu lfilment of the aforesaid engagement, of settling bonds or debentures of the Municipal 
Corporation of the City of Bombay producing an annual income of one lakh and twenty -five thousand 
rupees, and the said Mansion -house and hereditaments, to the uses, upon  the trusts and for the purposes 
hereinafter limited and declared, concerning the same respectively;  
And whereas the said Sir Dinshaw Manockjee Petit is also desirous that the said Framjee Dinshaw Petit 
and the heirs male of his body, and also the heirs m ale of the body of the said Sir Dinshaw Manockjee Petit, 
to whom the said title and dignity of Baronet shall descend, shall, at the time of such descent upon them 
respectively, take and bear the names of "Dinshaw Manockjee Petit" in lieu of any other name or names 
whatever which t hey respectively may bear at the time of such descent on them respectively ; and he is also 
desirous that the Accountant -General, Bombay, the Collector of Bombay and the Chief Presidency 
Magistrate,
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SIR DINSHAW MANOCKJEE PETIT ACT, 1893.pdf - page 2]
 that the Accountant -General, Bombay, the Collector of Bombay and the Chief Presidency 
Magistrate, Bombay, all for the time being, shall be trustees of the aforesaid Municipal bonds, Mansion -
house and hereditaments, and be likewise the trustees for carrying into execution the general purposes and  
powe rs of this Act, with relation to the same securities and also with relation to the sa me Mansion -house 
and hereditaments;  
And whereas the said Sir Dinshaw Manockjee  Petit is desirous of settling the said bonds and the  said 
Mansion -house and hereditaments so as aforesaid  agreed to be settled by him for the purpose of supporting  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SIR DINSHAW MANOCKJEE PETIT ACT, 1893.pdf - page 3]
3 
 the dignity of the said Baronetcy, to the uses,  upon the trusts and for the purposes hereinafter limited  and 
declared concerning the same respectively;  
And whereas it is expedient that the aforesaid purposes  should be effected by an Act of the Council of  
the Governor General for making Laws and Regulations;  
It is enacted as follows :— 
1. Incorporation of Trustee .—That Arthur Frederick Cox, Esquire, the Accountant -General of 
Bombay, James MacNabb Campbell, Esquire, the Collector of Bombay, and Charles Philip Cooper, 
Esqu ire, the Chief Presidency Magistrate of Bomba y, and their successors, the Accountant -General of 
Bombay, the Collector of Bombay, and the Chief Presidency Magistrate of Bombay, all for the time being, 
shall be and they are  hereby created a Corporation with  perpetual succession and a  common seal under the 
style and title of "The Trustees of the Dinshaw Manockjee Petit Baronetcy," and that the said Arthur 
Frederick Cox, James NacNabb  Campbe ll, and Charles Philip Cooper, and their said successors (her einafter 
styled "The  Corporation”),  shall be and they are hereby constituted, as such Corporation, the Trustee for 
executing the powers and purposes of this Act.  
2. Heirs of Sir Dinshaw Manockjee Petit to take his name. —The said Framjee  Dinshaw Petit and the 
heirs male of  his body and all other the heirs male of the body of the said Sir Dinshaw  Manockjee Petit to 
whom the said title and dignity shall de scend, pursu ant to the limitations of the Patent whereby the said  
dignity was granted, shall take upon themselves r espectively  the names of "Dinshaw Manockjee Petit"  in 
lieu and in the place of any other name or names  whatever; and the said Framjee Dinshaw Petit,  and also 
such heirs male of his body and all such  other the heirs male of the said Sir Dinshaw Manockjee  Petit 
severally and successively, shall be called by  the names of "Dinshaw Manockjee Petit," and by  those names 
shall name, style and wri
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SIR DINSHAW MANOCKJEE PETIT ACT, 1893.pdf - page 3]
be called by  the names of "Dinshaw Manockjee Petit," and by  those names 
shall name, style and write themselves"  respectively, upon all occasions whatever.  
3. Vesting and application of income of settled property .— Immediately from and after the passing 
of this Act, bonds of the Municipal Corporation of the City of Bombay , producing an annual income of not 
less of settled  than one lakh  and twenty -five thousand rupees shall property  be transferred  into the name of 
the Corporatio n, who  shall hold the same upon the trusts and for the purposes  hereinafter expressed 
concerning the same,  (that is to say,) upon trust to continue to hold  the said bonds until the same shall be 
discharged by the  Municipal Corporation of the Cit y of Bombay , or shall be sold by the said Trustees at 
their discretion,  and on such discharge or sale to invest the sum to  be re ceived on such occasion in or on 
any stocks,  funds or securities of or the principal or interest of which is guaranteed by the G overnment of 
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland or the  Government of India; and  in like manner, as often  
as the same shall bee n necessary, to alter, vary and, change such stocks, funds and securities for others of  
the same or like nature; and upon  further trust from  time to time to pay and apply the dividends, interest  
and annual income of the said bonds, stocks, funds and se curities unto and for the benefit of the said Sir  
Dinshaw Manockjee Petit during his natural life ; and  from and immediately after his decease for the benefit  
of the said F ramjee Dinshaw Petit if he shall survive  the said Dinshaw Manockjee Petit during his natural  
life; and from and immediately after the death of the  survivor of them the said Sir Dinshaw Ma nockjee  Petit 
and Framjee Dinshaw Petit for the benefit of  the person who, as heir male of the body of the said  Framjee 
Dinshaw Petit, or of the said Sir Dinshaw  Manockjee Petit, as the case may be, shall 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SIR DINSHAW MANOCKJEE PETIT ACT, 1893.pdf - page 3]
aid  Framjee 
Dinshaw Petit, or of the said Sir Dinshaw  Manockjee Petit, as the case may be, shall for the  time being have 
succeeded to and be in the enjoyment  of the title of Baronet conferred by the said Letters  Patent as aforesaid, 
notwithstanding any rule of law  or equity to the contrary, and upon failure and in  default of heirs male of 
the body of the said Framjee  Dinshaw Petit and Sir Dinshaw Manockjee Peti t, to whom the same title and 
dignity of Baronet may; descend, upon trust for the said Sir  Dinshaw Manockjee  Petit, his executors, 
administrators and assigns,  which ultimate remainder or reversion it shall be lawfu l for the said Sir Di nshaw 
Manockjee Petit , his executors, administrators and assigns, at any time or  times, during the continuance of 
the said title and  dignity of Baronet, and until there shall  be a failure  of heirs male of the body of the said 
Sir Dinshaw  Manockjee Petit as aforesaid,  to assig n, transfer, bequeath  and dispose of by deed or will or 
other assurance  or assurances.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SIR DINSHAW MANOCKJEE PETIT ACT, 1893.pdf - page 4]
4 
 4. Application of income during minority .—The Corporation during the minority of any person for 
the time being entitled to and in enjoyment of the said dignity of Baronet under the limit ations of the said 
Letters Patent shall pay and apply for and towards the maintenance, education and benefit of such Baronet, 
in each and every year during such his minority as aforesaid, so much only of the annual interest, dividends 
and income of the said Trust Funds and premises as tile Corporation shall in their discretion think proper, 
and shall from time to ti me invest the residue of the said annual dividends, interest and i ncome of the said 
Trust Funds and premises in and upon stocks, funds and securities of or the  principal or interest of which 
is guaranteed by the Government of the United Kingdom of Great  B ritain and Ireland or the Government 
of India; and shall upon such Baronet attaining bis majority pay over, transfer and assign to him or as he 
shall direct and for his absolute benefit the said investments and  all accumulations thereof.  
5. Mansion -house limited to the use of the Baronet for the time being. — The Mansion -house and 
other hereditaments called  “Petit Hall ” situate in the Island of Bomba y with their rights, members and 
appurtenances, of which the said Sir Dinshaw Manockjee Petit is seised   to him and his heirs, shall, by force 
of this Act, from and immediately after the passing thereof, stand  limited unto and  to the use of the 
Corporation upon  the trusts hereinafter declared, (that is to say,) upon  trust for the said Sir Dinshaw 
Manockjee Petit for  and during the term of his natural life and from and  immediately after his decease upon 
trust for the said  Framjee Dinshaw Petit for and during the term of  his natural life, provided he shall survive 
the said Sir  Dinshaw Manockjee Petit, and from  and immediately  after the decease of the survivor of them 
the said Si r Dinshaw Manockjee Petit and Framjee Dinshaw Petit  u
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SIR DINSHAW MANOCKJEE PETIT ACT, 1893.pdf - page 4]
 decease of the survivor of them 
the said Si r Dinshaw Manockjee Petit and Framjee Dinshaw Petit  upon trust for the heirs male of the body 
of the said  Framjee Dinshaw Petit who may succeed to the title  of Baronet conferred by the s aid Letters 
Patent as  aforesaid, and, upon failure and default of heirs male of the body of the said Framjee Dinshaw 
Petit to whom  the same title and dignity of Baronet may descend as  aforesaid, upon trust for the heirs male 
of the body of  the said Sir Din shaw Manockjee Petit who may succeed  to the said title and upon fail ure and 
default of  such last -mentioned heirs male upon trust for the  said Sir Dinshaw Manockjee Petit, his heirs and 
assigns  forever, which ultimate remainder or reversion  it shall be lawf ul for the said Sir Dinshaw Manockjee  
Petit and his heirs and assigns at any time or times  during the continuance of the said title and dignity  of 
Baronet, and until there shall be a failure of heirs  male of the body of the said Sir Dinshaw Manockjee  Petit, 
as aforesaid, to grant, convey, devise and dispose  of by deed or will or by any other assurance or  assurances 
by which such an estate in  remainder or  eversion is capable by law of b eing convoyed or disposed of by 
Parsee inhabitants of British India.  
6. Devolution of interest where beneficiary refuses, neglects or discontinues to use the names 
Dinshaw Manockjee Petit. —Provided always that in case any person to whom for the time being the said 
title of Baronet shall have descended shall, for the space o f one whole year after he shall by virtue of this  
Act become entit led to the dividends, inte rest and income of the said stocks, funds and securities, or to the 
possession or receipt of the rents and profits of the said hereditaments, or be ing then under age is shall  for 
the space of one whole year after he shall attain the age of twenty  one years, refuse or neglect to use the 
names, of  “Dinshaw Manockjee Petit ” as hereinbefore enact
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SIR DINSHAW MANOCKJEE PETIT ACT, 1893.pdf - page 4]
one years, refuse or neglect to use the 
names, of  “Dinshaw Manockjee Petit ” as hereinbefore enacted,  or in case any such person having so used 
those  names shall, for the space of six calendar months consecutively  during his natural 1ife, discontinue 
so to  use such names, then, in any or either of the said  cases the estate or interest in the said trust funds and  
premises of the person who shall so refuse or neglect   to use or having used shall so discontinue to use  the 
said names of “Dinshaw  Manockjee  Petit” shall during the remainder of his respective natural  life be 
suspended; and that,  during any and every  such suspension,  the dividends, interest and income of  the sa id 
stocks, funds and securities, and the possession  and actual occupation and also the rents and profits  of the 
said hereditaments shall devolve and belong,  to the person who, as heir male of the body of the  said Framjee 
Dinshaw Petit or the said Sir Dinshaw,  Manockjee Petit, as the case may be, would have succeeded  to and 
been in the enjoyment of the title of  Baronet conferred by  the said  Letters Patent in  case the person so 
refusing or neglecting  to use or discontinuing  to use the said names of  “Dins haw Manockjee  Petit” had 
departed this life; but if there should be  no such heir male, then to the person or persons who  would be 
entitled to the same in case there had then  been a total failure of issue male of the said Sir Dinshaw 
Manockjee Petit. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SIR DINSHAW MANOCKJEE PETIT ACT, 1893.pdf - page 5]
5 
 7. Power to charge settled property for jointure of widow. —It shall be lawful for the said Sir 
Dinshaw Manockjee Petit and Framjee Dinshaw Petit, and for any person upon whom the said title of 
Baronet shall from time to time descend, when in the actual enjoyment  of the said title, and who shall not 
refuse, neglect or discontinue to use, for the respective periods hereinbefore in that behalf mentioned, the 
said names of "Dinshaw  Manockjee Petit” as herein before enacted, either before or after his marriage with 
any woman or women by any deed or deeds, writing or writings, with or without power of revocation to be 
by him, sealed and delivered in the presence of two or more credible witnesse s (but subject  and, without 
prejudice to any annuity or annuities,  if any, which shall be then  subsisting and payable by  virtue of any 
appointment made under and in pursuance  of this present power), to limit and appoint unto  any woman or 
women whom he shall marry for her  or their life or lives, and for her or their jointure or  jointures in bar of 
dower or other legal or customary  rights any annuity or yearly sum not exceeding the sum of ten thousand 
rupees, clear of all taxes, charges and deductions whatsoever to commence and take effect immediately 
after the decease the person li miting  or appointing  the same and to be issuing and payable Petit of  the 
dividends, interest and,  annual income, of the said  stocks, funds and securities, and to be, paid and payable  
by equal half -yearly payments on, the thirtieth  day of June and the thi rty-first day of December, the  first of 
the said half -yearly payments to be made on  the half -yearly day which shall first happen after the  decease 
of the person who shall have appointed such  annuity or yearly sum:  Provided always that in case  any person 
on whom such title shall descend shall  have refused or neglected to use the names of " Dinshaw Manockjee 
Petit " or shall discontinue to use  such names f
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SIR DINSHAW MANOCKJEE PETIT ACT, 1893.pdf - page 5]
neglected to use the names of " Dinshaw Manockjee 
Petit " or shall discontinue to use  such names for six calendar months consecutively  during his natural life, 
every such,  limitation and  appointment,  either previously or afterwards made by  him, s hall be and become 
inoperative and invalid, and  no such annuity thereby created or appointed shall  take effect or be, payable, 
or chargeable, on the said  stocks, funds and securities,  notwithstanding any such li mitation or appointment.  
8. Limitation to amount of jointure .—Provided always that the said dividends, interest  and annual 
income of the said stocks, funds and  securities shall not at one and the same time be subject  to the payment 
of more than the yearly sum of  twenty thousand rupees f or or in respect of any jointure  or jointures whic h 
shall be made in pursuance  of the power hereinbefore contained,  so that if by  virtue of or under the same 
power t he said dividends,  interest and annual income would, in case  this present provision had not been 
interes ted, be charged at  any one time with a greater yearly sum for jointures  in the whole than the yearly 
sum of twenty thousand  rupees, the yearly sum which sh all occasion such ex cess or such part thereof as 
shall oc casion the same  shall during the time of such excess abate and not be  payable.  
9. Exclusion of wives from interest in Mansion -house. — The said Mansion -house and hereditaments  
called "Petit Hall," with their rights, m ember s and appurtenances, shall not be subject to any right, inter est 
estate whatsoever which the wife of t he said Sir Dinshaw Manockjee Petit or Framjee Dinshaw  Petit, or the  
wives of a ny of the persons who shall  successively become entitled  thereto, may  or might  have or claim to 
have in the s aid Mansion -house and hereditaments under any custom or law of the Parsees, or  other wise 
howsoever.  
10.  Limitation of transfers to life of transferor .—Save as regards the ultimate remain
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SIR DINSHAW MANOCKJEE PETIT ACT, 1893.pdf - page 5]
owsoever.  
10.  Limitation of transfers to life of transferor .—Save as regards the ultimate remainders or 
reversions, hereinbefore limited in trust for the said  Sir Dinshaw Manockjee Petit, his heirs, executors, 
administrators and assigns respectively, so long as the said title and dignity of Baronet shall endure, and 
until there shall be a failure of heirs male of the body of the said Sir Dinshaw Manockjee Petit, to w hom 
the said title and dignity of Baronet might descend pursuant to the limitations of the Patent whereby the 
said dignity was granted, neither the said Sir Djnshaw Manockjee Petit nor the said Ftamjee Dinshaw Petit 
nor any of the heirs male of their respe ctive bodies in  whose favour trusts are hereinbefore declared of the  
dividends, interest and annual incom e of the said  bonds, stocks, funds and securities or of the said Mansion - 
house and hereditaments called Petit Hall,"  shall transfer, dispose of, alien, convey, charge or  encumber the 
said bonds, stocks, funds and securities,  or any part thereof, or the dividends, interest and  annual income 
thereof, or of any part thereof, or the  said Mansion -house or hereditaments, or any part  thereof, for any 
greater or larger estate, interest or  time than during his natural life, and for such portion  thereof only as he 
shall continue to use the names of  "Dinshaw Manockjee Petit," nor shall any such  person as afo resaid either 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SIR DINSHAW MANOCKJEE PETIT ACT, 1893.pdf - page 6]
6 
 alone or jointly with any  other or othe rs of them or with any other person   or persons whomsoever have any 
power to discontinue  or bar the estates tail hereinbefore limited in t rust for  the heirs male of the respective 
bodies of the said  Framjee Dinshaw Petit and Sir Dinshaw Manockjee  Petit, or  either of them, or any estate 
or interest hereby  or herein created or declared in trust or for the  benefit of any person or persons for whose 
benefit  trusts are declared by this Act of the dividends, interest and annual income of the said bonds, stocks, 
funds  and securities, or of the said Mansion -house, hereditaments  and the rents and profits thereof, or to 
prevent  any such person or persons from succeeding to, holding  or enjoying, receivi ng or taking the same 
premises  according to the true intent of the provisions herein.  before contained, nor shall the same premises 
or any  of them be held by any Court of law or equity  to have vested in any such person as aforesaid for  any 
greater estate or interest than during hi s life, and only during such portion there of as he shall  continue to 
use the names of "Dinsbaw Manockjee  Petit," and every attempt to male any conveyance,  assignment or 
assurance contrary to the intention of  this Act shall be, and is hereby, declared and enacted to be void.  
11. Addition of stocks,  funds or securities to settled property. —If at any time or times hereafter the 
said Sir Dinshaw Manockjee Petit or any other person or persons shall be sons shall be desirous of 
augmenting the funds and securities for the time being subject to the trusts of this Act, and for that purpose 
and with that intent shall at  his or her own expense transfer and deliver to the Corporation any stocks, funds 
or securities of or the principal or interest of which is guaranteed by the Government of the United Kingdom 
of Great Britain and Ireland or the Government of India, then and as often as the same shall happen the said 
Corpora
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SIR DINSHAW MANOCKJEE PETIT ACT, 1893.pdf - page 6]
and Ireland or the Government of India, then and as often as the same shall happen the said 
Corporation may, with the previous consent of the Governor of Bombay in Council, accept such stocks, 
funds and securities, and the Same s hall thencef orth be held by  the s aid Corporation upon the same trusts 
as are declared  by this Act with regard to the said bonds of the  Municipal Corporation of the City of 
Bombay, or upon  such of them as shall then be subsisting and  capable  of taking effect: Provided always 
that the total amount  of the stocks, funds and securities for the time being  subject to the trust of this Act 
shall at no time exceed  fifty lakhs of rupees.  
12. Insurance of Mansion -house, and application of money received in respect of insurance. — 
The Corporation shall keep the said Mansio n-house called  “Petit Hall, ” and all the out -buildings and offices 
thereof, and  also all ot her messuages or  buildings which may from  time to time be  added thereto or 
substituted therefor, or which may here  after become subject to any of the trusts of this Act, adequately 
insured in the name of the said Corporation  of the persons for the time being constituting the same against 
loss or damage by, fire, and may apply any portion of the income of the funds for th e time being subject to 
the trusts of this Act to that purpose, and in case the hereditaments and premises so insured or any part 
thereof shall be  destroyed or damaged by  fire, the moneys received in respect of such insurance shall either 
be out under the direction of the said Corporation in re -building or reinstating the hereditaments and 
premises so destroyed or damaged by fire, or, upon the application of the person for the time being entitled 
to and in the enjoyment of the said dignity of Baronet and wi th the consent of the Governor of Bombay in 
Council, to be  notified by a resolution of the Government of B ombay, may be laid out in the purchase of 
other hereditaments in the Pr
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SIR DINSHAW MANOCKJEE PETIT ACT, 1893.pdf - page 6]
tion of the Government of B ombay, may be laid out in the purchase of 
other hereditaments in the Presidency of Bombay suitable for The support of the dignity of the said title,  in 
which last mentioned case the hereditaments so purchased shall immediately from and after the completion 
of the purchase thereof  be and become subject to the uses and trusts of this Act or such of them as shall 
then be subsisting and capable of taking effect in the same manner and to the same effect as if such last -
mentioned, hereditaments had expressly been named or described in the fifth section of this Act. Until such 
insurance moneys shall have been so laid out, the Corporation may invest the same o r any part thereof in 
any of the Government securities specified in section 16.  
13. Mansion -house and other hereditaments to be kept in repair. —The said Mansion -house and 
premises called “Petit Hall ” and all additions thereto, and  also all other messuages  and hered itaments   which 
from time to time may be or become subject to the trusts declared by this Ac concerning the said Mansion -
house and premises, shall be kept in good repair, order an condition by and at the expense of the person for 
the time being i n the enjoyment of the title of Baronet conferred by the said Letters Patent, and in case any 
such person shall at any time neglect or refuse to keep the said Mansion -house, hereditaments and premise 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SIR DINSHAW MANOCKJEE PETIT ACT, 1893.pdf - page 7]
7 
 or any them in such good order and condition, it shall b  e lawful for the Corporation to keep or cause the 
same to be kept in good order and condition and to defray the expense incident thereto from the income of 
the funds for the time being subject to the provisions of this Act.  
14. Power of Corporation to se ll or exchange Mansion -house or other hereditaments .—The 
Corporation shall hold the said Mansion -house and hereditaments known as “Petit Hall” and also any other 
hereditaments for the time being vested in them by virtue of this Act, upon trust with the con sent of the 
person entitled to an in the actual enjoyment of the title of Baronet conferred by the said Letters Patent, and 
with the consent of the Governor of Bombay in Council to be notified as aforesaid, to sell or exchange for 
other lands or hereditame nts in the Presidency of Bombay the said Mansion -house and hereditaments, and 
also any other such hereditaments as aforesaid, and upon any such exchange to give or receive any money 
for equality of exchange.  
15. Powers of Corporation  in respect of such sa le or exchange. —And it is hereby declared that any 
such sale as aforesaid may be made either by public auction or private contract, and that the Corporation 
may make any stipulations as to title or evidence or commencement of title or otherwise in any conditions 
of sale or  contract for sale or exchange of the said hereditaments  or any part thereof, and  may buy in or 
rescind  or vary any contract for sale or exchange and re -sell or re -exchange without being responsible for 
any loss  occasioned thereby.  
16. Investment of moneys received on such sale or exchange .— And it is hereby declared that the 
said Corporation  shall receive all moneys which may become  payable upon any such sale or exchange as 
aforesaid,  and with all convenient speed invest the same eithe r in the purchase of any stocks, funds or 
securities of  or the principal and interest of which is guarantee
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SIR DINSHAW MANOCKJEE PETIT ACT, 1893.pdf - page 7]
purchase of any stocks, funds or 
securities of  or the principal and interest of which is guaranteed  by the Government of the United Kingdom 
of Great  Britain and Ireland or the Government of India, or  in the purchase of other lands or hereditaments  
situate  in the Presidency of Bombay and suitable for the  support of the dignity of the said title, yet so as 
that every such purchase of lands or hereditaments be  made with the consent in writing of the person then  
entitled to and in the actual enjoyment of the said  title. 
17. Investments and lands resulting from such sale or exchange to be held on trusts declared by 
this Act.—And it is hereby declared that the stocks, funds and securities and the lands or hereditaments,  
respectively, so to be purchased or  taken in exchange as aforesaid shall from and immediately after the  
completion of the purchase or exchange thereof, respectively , be held upon the trusts in and by this Act  
declared of and concerning the said bonds of the  Municipal Corporation for the City of Bombay and  the 
said Mansion -house and premises calle d “Petit Hall," respectively, or such of them, respectively, as  may 
then be subsisting and capable of taking effect.  
18. Reimbursement of expenses of Corporation. —It shall be lawful for the Corporati on out of the 
money which shall come to their hands by virtue   of the trusts and provisions of this Act to retain and 
reimburse themselves all costs, damages and expenses which they shall or may sustain, expend or disburse 
in or about the execution of the aforesaid powers; trusts and provisions, or in relation thereto.  
19. Saving existing rights. — Saving always to the Queen's Most Excellent Majesty, Her heirs and 
successors, and to all and every other person and persons, bodies politic and corporate, and hi s, her and 
their respective heirs, successors, executors and administrators and every of them (other than and except 
the said Sir Dinshaw Manockjee Petit, bis devisees, h
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SIR DINSHAW MANOCKJEE PETIT ACT, 1893.pdf - page 7]
tors and every of them (other than and except 
the said Sir Dinshaw Manockjee Petit, bis devisees, heirs and assigns), all such estate, right. title, interest, 
claim and demand whatsoeve r of, into. out of or upon the said Mansion -house and hereditaments called 
"Petit Hall," or any part or parts there of, as they, every or any of them, Had before the passing of this Act, 
and would, could or might have had, held or enjoyed in case this Act b ad not been passed . 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 1]
1 THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
PREAMBLE . 
SECTIONS  
1. Societies formed by memorandum of association and registration.  
2. Memorandum of association.  
3. Registration and fees.  
4. Annual list of managing body to be filed.  
5. Property of society how vested.  
6. Suits by and against societies.  
7. Suits not to abate.  
8. Enforcement of judgment against society.  
9. Recovery of penalty accruing under bye -law. 
10. Members liable to be sued as strangers.  
Recovery by successful defendant of costs adju dged.  
11. Members guilty of offences punishable as strangers.  
12. Societies enabled to alter, extend or abridge their purposes.  
13. Provision for dissolution of societies and adjustment of their affairs.  
14. Upon a dissolution no member to receive profit.  
Clause not to apply to Joint -stock Companies.  
15. Member defined. Disqualified members.  
16. Governing body defined.  
17. Registration of societies formed before Act.  
18. Such societies to file memorandum, etc., with Registrar of Joint -stock Companies.  
19. Inspection of documents, Certified copies.  
20. To what societies Act applies.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 2]
2 THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860  
ACT NO. 21 OF 18601 
[21st May , 1860.]  
An Act for the Registration of Literary, Scientific and Charitable Societies . 
Preamble. —WHEREAS  it is expedient that provision should be made for improving the legal 
condition of societies established for the promotion of literature, science, or the fine arts, or for the  
diffusion of useful knowledge, 2[the diffusion of political education] or for charitable purposes; It is 
enacted as follows: — 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Union territory of Ladakh  
After the preamble and before the existing section 1, insert — 
“1. Appointment, etc. of Registrar of Societies, etc .-(1) The Administration of Union territory 
of Ladakh may, by notification, appoint a person to be  called the Registrar of Societies and he shall 
exercise such powers and perform such duties and functions as are conferred by or u nder the 
                                                      
1. Short title given by the Indian Short Titles Act, 1897 (14 of 1897).  
The Act (with the exception of the first four sections) is based on the Literary and Scientific Institutions Act, 1854 (17 an d 18 
Vict., c. 112), ss. 20 et seq . 
It has been declared to be in force in the whole of India, except the Scheduled Districts, by s . 3 of the Laws Local Extent Act, 
1874 (15 of 1874).  
It has been extended to the New Provinces and Merged States by Act 59 of 1949.  
It has been declared, by notification under s. 3( a) of the Scheduled Districts Act, 1874 (14 of 1874), to be in force in the 
following Scheduled Districts, namely: —  
West Jalpaiguri  . . . . . .   See Gazette of India,  1881, Pt. I, p. 74.  
The Districts of Hazaribagh, Lohardaga (now  
the Ranchi District, se e Calcutta Gazette, 1899,   . . . 
Pt. I, p. 44), and Manbhum and ParganaDhalbhum  . . . 
and the Kolhan in the District of Singbhum  . . . . Ditto   1881, Pt. I, p. 504.  
The Scheduled po rtion of the Mirzapur District . . . . Ditto   1879, Pt. I, p. 383.  

<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 2]
I, p. 504.  
The Scheduled po rtion of the Mirzapur District . . . . Ditto   1879, Pt. I, p. 383.  
Jaunsar  Bawar  . . . . . . . Ditto   1879, Pt. I, p. 302.  
The Scheduled Districts in Ganjam and Vizagapatam .   . . Ditto   1898, Pt. I, p. 870 . 
Assam (except the North Lushai Hills) . . . . . Ditto   1897, Pt. I, p. 299.  
It has been extended, by notification under s. 5 of the last -mentioned Act, to the following Scheduled Districts, namely: — 
Kumaon and Garhwal.  . . . . . .   See Gazette of India,  1876, Pt. I, p. 606.  
Ajmer and Merwara.  . . . . . .     Ditto   1878, Pt. I, p. 380.  
The Act has been extended to Goa, Daman  and Diu with modifications by Reg. 12 of 1962, s. 3 and the Schedule  to Dadra and 
Nagar Haveli with modifications by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and the First Schedule  (w.e.f. 1 -7-1965) and to the Union territory of 
Lakshadweep, by Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 and Sch.  (w.e.f. 1 -10-1967).  
It has been amended in —  
C. P. and Berar by C. P. and B erar Act 3 of 1940,  
Assam by Assam Acts 14 of 1948, 15 of 1948, 1 of 1952, 7 of 1957 and 11 of 1958,  
Bihar by Bihar Acts 30 of 1948, 4 of 1951 and 2 of 1960,  
Punjab by East Punjab Acts 32 of 1948, 6 of 1949 and Punjab Act 21 of 1961,  
West Bengal by West Bengal Act 16 of 1950,  
Andhra by President ’s Act 10 of 1954,  
Madras by Mad. Act 9 of 1960,  
Orissa by Orissa Acts 21 of 1958, 8 of 1969 and 9 of 1979,  
Maharashtra by Maharashtra Acts 11 of 1968 and 49 of 1971,  
Himachal Pradesh by H. P. Act 23 of 1973,  
Uttar Pradesh by U. P. Acts 25 of 1959, 52 of 1975, 13 of 1978 and 11 of 1984,  
Bombay by Bo m. Act 76 of 1958,  
Haryana by Haryana Act 23 of 1974,  
Pondicherry by Act 9 of 1969, and  
Union territory of Delhi by Act 26 of 1983.  
The Act came into force in Pondicherry vide Reg. 7 of 1963 and the First Schedule  (w.e.f. 1 -10-1963).  
The Act has been repealed in its application to Bellary District by Mysore Act 14 of 1955 and in Mysore by Mysore Acts  17 
of 1960 and 19 of 1973. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 2]
Bellary District by Mysore Act 14 of 1955 and in Mysore by Mysore Acts  17 
of 1960 and 19 of 1973.  
It has been repealed in its application to Mahakoshal, Vindhya Pradesh and Bhopal regions of Madhya Pradesh by Madhya 
Pradesh Act 1 of 1960 (when notified).  
2. Ins. by Act 22 of 1927, s. 2.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 3]
3 provisions of this Act, and shall subject to such general or special order as the Administration of the 
Union territory of Ladakh may from time to time make, superintend the administration and carry out 
the provisions of this Act throughout the Un ion territory of Ladakh. ”; 
“(2) The Administration of the Union territory of Ladakh may by notification, appoint one or 
more Additional Registrars with such local jurisdiction as may be assigned to them.  
 (3) The Additional Registrars so appointed shall, subject to the control of the Registrar of 
Societies, exercise such of the powers and perform such of the functions of the Registrar of Societies 
as the Administration of the Union territory of Ladakh  may authorise in that behalf. ”; 
(b) number the existing  section   as section 1A and in this section as so numbered, for 
"Registrar of Joint -Stock Companies" subst itute "Registrar of Societies .". 
[Vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Second Order, 2020,  vide 
Notification No.  S.O. 3805(E), dated (26-10-2020 ).] 
STATE AMENDMENT  
Arunachal Pradesh  
Extension of Central Act, 1860 (21 of 1860). - The Societies Registration Act, 1860, as in force in 
the territories to which it generally extends, is hereby extended to the Union Territory of Arunachal 
Pradesh, subject to the modifications mentioned in the Schedule.  
Certain notifications to be inopera tive.—On the commencement of this Act, the notifications Nos. 
5459P, 5463p, and 5467p dated the 13th October, 1914, in so far as they relate to the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860, shall  cease to be operative in the Union Territory of Arunachal Pradesh.  
THE SCHEDULE  
(See Section)  
Modification to the Societies Registration Act, 1860.  
1. Throughout the Act, -- 
 (1) for the words “Registrar of Joint -Stock Companies” wherever they occur, the word 
“Registrar” shall be substituted.  
(2) for the words “State Government” wherever they occur the word “Administrator
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 3]
l be substituted.  
(2) for the words “State Government” wherever they occur the word “Administrator” shall be 
substituted.  
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh Act 6 of 1978, s. 2]  
Amendment of Schedule .—In the Schedule to the Societies Registration (Extension to Arunachal 
Pradesh) Act, 19 (hereinafter referred to as the Principal Act) : -  
(1) for the word "Administrator" wherever it occurs, the words "State Government' be substituted.  
(2) the clause (a) of serial 2 shall be omitted.  
(3) after serial 2, the following shall be inserted, namely :  
"2-A, for section 3 of the Central Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) the following shall be substituted, 
namely : -  
3. (1) Upon such memorandum and certified copy being filed along with particulars of the address 
of the Society's office which shall be its registered address, by the Se cretary of the Society on behalf 
of the persons subscribing to the memorandum, the Registrar shall certify under his hand that the 
Society is registered under this Act, and there shall be paid to the Registrar for every such registration 
a fee of ten thous and rupees or such smaller fee as the State Government may not ification  in respect of 
any class of Societies :  
Provided that the State Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, increase 
from time to time the fee payable under this sub -section  : 
Provided further that the Registrar may, in his discretion, issue public notice(s) to such 
person as he thinks fit inviting objections, if any, against the proposed registration and consider 
all objections that may be received by him before registering the Society.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub -section (1), the Registrar shall refuse to register a Society, if 
after giving it an opportunity of showing cause against such refusal he is satisfied that :  
(a) the name of the Society is identical with that of  any other society previously registered 
under this Act ;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 3]
y previously registered 
under this Act ;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 4]
4 (b) the name of the Society sought to be registered uses any of the words, namely, 'Union', 
'State', `Land Mortgage', 'Land Development', 'Co -operative', `Gandhi' Reserve Bank' or any 
words expressing or implying the sanction, approval or patronage of the Central or any State 
Government or any word which suggests or is calculated to suggest any connection with any 
local authority or any corporation or body constituted by or under any law for the time be ing 
in force, or is such as is otherwise likely to deceive the public or the members of any other 
society previously registered under this Act.  
(c) any one or more of the objects of the Society sought to be registered is not an object 
mentioned in sections 1 a nd 20 ; or  
(d) its objects are contrary to any other law for the time being in force :  
Provided that the State Government may in exceptional circumstances, for reasons to 
be recorded permit any society to use the word 'Union' or the word 'Gandhi' in its name, 
and thereupon, the use of that word in the name of the society shall not be a ground for 
refusal to register or to renew the certificate of registration of such society.  
3-A Renewal of certificate of registration -(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section 
(2), a certificate of registration issued under section 3 shall remain in force for a period of 
three years from the date of issue :  
Provided that a certificate issued before the commencement of the Societies 
Registration (Extension to Arunacha l Pradesh) (Amendment) Act, 2008 (hereinafter in the 
section referred to as the said Act), shall remain in force for a period of three years from the 
date of such commencement on payment of the difference of the fees specified under sub -
section (3) and the  fees already paid.  
(2) A Society registered under section 3 whether before or after the commencement 
of the said Act, shall on application alongwith a copy of duly audited statement 
of account made to the Registrar within one
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 4]
 application alongwith a copy of duly audited statement 
of account made to the Registrar within one month of the expiration of th e period 
referred to in sub -section (1) and on payment of the fee specified in sub -section 
(3), be entitled to have its certificate of registration renewed for one year at a 
time :  
Provided that in the case of a society registered before the commencement o f the said 
Act, the Registrar shall refuse to renew the certificate of registration, if, after giving it an 
opportunity of showing cause against such refusal, he is satisfied that any of the grounds 
mentioned in sub -section (2) of section 3 exist in respec t thereof.  
(3) There shall be paid to the Registrar with every application for renewal of the 
certificate of registration :  
(a) a fee equal to the registration fee payable under section 3 or rupees four 
thousand, whichever is less, if such application is filed  within the period 
specified in sub section (2) :  
Provided that the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
increase from time to time, the fee payable under this clause subject to the condition that 
the fee so increased shall not ex ceed the registration fee payable under section 3 ;  
(b) an additional fee of four hundred rupees or such higher fee not exceeding one -
fifth of the fee payable under clause (a) as may be notified by the State 
Government, if such application is filed within one month of the date of 
expiration of the period specified in sub -section (2) ; and  
(c) an additional fee at the rate of twenty rupees per month or part thereof or 
such higher additional fee per month not exceeding half of the additional fee 
payable under clause (b) as may be notified by the State Government, if 
such application is filed beyond one month of the expiration of the period 
specified in sub -section (2).  
(4) Every application for renewal of the certificate shall be accompanied by a list of 
members of t he managing body elect
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 4]
or renewal of the certificate shall be accompanied by a list of 
members of t he managing body elected after the registration of the society or 
after the renewal of certificate of registration and also the certificate sought to be 
renewed unless dispensed with by the Registrar on the ground of its loss or 
destruction or any other su fficient cause.  
(5) A society which fails to get its certificate of registration renewed in accordance 
with this section within one year from the expiration of the period for which the 
certificate was operative shall become an unregistered society :  
Provid ed that the Registrar may, for sufficient cause, allow an application for renewal more than 
one year after the expiration of the period for which the certificate was operative on payment of a fee 
of four hundred rupees or such higher fee not exceeding ten times of the additional fee payable under 
clause (b) of sub -section (3) as may be notified by the State Government from time to time.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 5]
5 (6) Where a certificate of registration is renewed in accordance with sub -section (2) or sub -section 
(5) such renewal shal l operate from the date of expiration of the period from which the certificate was 
operative.  
3-B Reference to the State Government  —If any question arises whether any society is 
entitled to get itself registered in accordance with section 3 or to get its certificate of registration 
renewed in accordance with section 3 -A, the matter shall be referred to the State Government, and 
the decision of the State Government, thereon shall be final".  
(4) in serial 6, of the Schedule to the State Act No. 6 of 1978 in section 19 of the Central Act 
No. 21 of 1860 for the words "one rupee" and "fifteen paise" respectively the words "ten rupees" and 
"five rupees" shall be substituted.  
(5) in serial 7, (i) in se ction 21 (1) for the words "five hundred" and "fifty rupees" respectively, 
the words, "five thousand rupees" and "five hundred rupees" shall be substituted.  
(ii) in section 21 (2) for the words "two thousand" the words "twenty thousand" shall be 
inserted.  
(7) after serial 7, serial 8 shall be added, namely : —  
"8. after section 22, the following shall be added, namely :  
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh Act 9 of 2008, s. 2]  
1. Societies formed by memorandum of association and registration. —Any seven or more 
persons a ssociated for any literary, scientific, or charitable purpose, or for any such purpose as is 
described in section 20 of this Act, may, by subscribing their names to a memorandum of association, 
andfiling the same with the Registrar of Joint -stock Companies  1***, form themselves into a society 
under this Act.  
Orissa  
Insertion of new section before section 1, Act 21 of 1860 .—In the Societies Registration Act, 1860 
(21 of 1860) (hereinafter referred to as the said Act), section 1 shall be renumbered as section  1-A and 
before the said section as so renumbered, the following new section shall be inserted, name
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 5]
1-A and 
before the said section as so renumbered, the following new section shall be inserted, namely: — 
1. Appointment of Registrar of Societies. —The State Government may, by notification, appoint 
a person to be called the Registrar of Societies and he shall exercise such  powers and perform such 
duties and  functions as are conferred by or under the provisions of this Act, and shall subject to such 
general or special order as the State Govern ment may from time to time make , superintend the 
administration and carry out the  provisions of this Act throughout the State or Orissa.  
[Vide the Orissa Act 21 of 1958, s.  2] 
Adaptation .—In the said Act, for the expressions, “Registrar of Joint Stock Companies” and 
“Registrar” wherever they occur, the expression “Registrar of Societies” shall be substituted.  
[Vide the Orissa Act 21 of 1958, s.  3] 
Pending proceedings and construction of reference to Registrar of Companies in instruments 
issued or made before this Act. —(1) All proceedings und er the said Act pending before the Registrar of 
Joint Stock Compani es at the date of commencement of this Act shall stand transferred  to the Registrar of 
Societies and any such proceedings shall be continued and disposed of by the Registrar of Societies, as if 
it had been origina lly instituted before such Registrar under the said Act.  
  (2) In all certificates of registration and in all rules or bye -laws of societies and in all other 
instruments issued or made under the said Act before the dat e of commencement of this Act, referen ces to 
the Registrar of Joint St ock Companies or the Registrar of Companies shall be deemed to be and be 
construed as references to the Registrar of Societies.  
[Vide the Orissa Act 21 of 1958, s.  4] 
  
                                                      
1. The words and figures “under Act 19  of 1857 ” rep. by Act 16 of 1874, s. 1 and Sch., Pt. I. See now the Companies Act, 1956 
(1 of 1956).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 5]
74, s. 1 and Sch., Pt. I. See now the Companies Act, 1956 
(1 of 1956).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 6]
6 Orissa  
Amendment of Section 1. —In the Societies Registration Act, 1860  (21 of 1860) , as applicable to the 
State of Orissa , section 1 shall  be renumbered as sub -section (1) thereof and after sub -section (1) as so 
renumbered, the following sub -sections shall be inserted, namely: — 
“(2) The State Governme nt may, by notification, appoint one or more Additional Registrars with such 
local jurisdiction as may be assigned to them by the State Government.  
  (3) The Additional Registrars so appointed shall, subject to the control of the Registrar of Societies, 
exercise such of the powers and perform such of the functions of the Registrar of Societies as the State 
Government may authorize in that behalf.”.  
[Vide the Orissa Act 9 of 1979, s. 2]  
Union territory of Ladakh  
After the preamble and before the existing sec tion 1, insert -- 
"1. Appointment, etc. of Registrar of Societies, etc .--(1) The Administration of Union territory 
of Ladakh may, by notification, appoint a person to be called the Registrar of Societies and he shall 
exercise such powers and perform such duties and functions as are conferred by or under the 
provisions of this Act, and shall subject to such general or special order as the Administration of the 
Union territory of Ladakh may from time to time make, superintend the administration and carry out  
the provisions of this Act throughout the Union territory of Ladakh.";  
"(2) The Administration of the Union territory of Ladakh may by notification, appoint one or 
more Additional Registrars with such local jurisdiction as may be assigned to them.  
(3) The  Additional Registrars so appointed shall, subject to the control of the Registrar of 
Societies, exercise such of the powers and perform such of the functions of the Registrar of Societies 
as the Administration of the Union territory of Ladakh may authoris e in that behalf.";  
(b) number the existing section as section 1A and in this section as so numbered, for "Registra
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 6]
";  
(b) number the existing section as section 1A and in this section as so numbered, for "Registrar of 
Joint -Stock Companies" substitute "Registrar of Societies.".  
[Vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws)  Second Order, 2020, vide 
Notification No. S.O. 3805(E), dated (26 -10-2020).]  
Arunachal Pradesh  
After section 1, the following section shall be inserted, namely: -- 
“Definitions -1A. --In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires: - 
(a) “Administrator” means the Administrator of the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh 
appointed by the President under Article 239 of the Constitution;  
(b) “Registrar” means the Registrar of Societies appointed by the Administrator.”  
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh Act 6 of 1978, s .  2 and the schedule]  
Uttarakhand  
Substitution of section 1 .—In Societies Registration Act 1860, (which is hereinafter  referred to as 
Principal Act) the section 1 shall be substituted as follows, namely: -- 
“1. Societies formed by memorandum of associati on and registration .---Any seven or more 
persons associated for any literary, scientific or charitable purpose, or for any such purpose as is 
described in section 20 of the Act, may, be digital signature of their name in online form of 
Memorandum of Associ ation and rules filling the same online with the Registrar form themselves 
into a society under this Act.  
[Vide Uttarakhand Act 4 of 2019, s. 2]  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 7]
7 Haryana  
Insertion of section 1A in Central Act 21 of 1860. —After section 1 of the Societies Registration Act,  
1860 (hereinafter called the principal Act) , The following section shall be inserted, namely: -- 
“1A. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, -- 
(a) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(b) “State Government” means the Government of the State of Haryana.”.  
[Vide Haryana Act 14 of 2007, s. 2]  
 2. Memorandum of association. —The memorandum of association shall contain the following 
things (that is to say) —  
the name of the society;  
the objects of the society;  
the names, addresses, and occupations of the governors, council, directors, committee, or other 
governing body to whom, by the rules of the society, the management of its affairs is entrusted.  
A copy of the rules and regulations of the society, certified to be  a correct copy by not less than 
three of the members of the governing body, shall be filed with the memorandum of association.  
13. Registration and fees. —Upon such memorandum and certified copy being filed, the Registrar 
shall certify under his hand that the society is registered under this Act. There shall be paid to the 
Registrar for every such registration fee of fifty rupees, or such smaller fee as 2[the State Govern ment] 
may, from time to time, direct; and all fees so paid shall be accounted for to 3[the State Government].  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Orissa  
Insertion of a new section .—In the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) (hereinafter 
referred to as the principal Act), after Section 3, the following section shall be inserted, namely: — 
3-A. Prohibition against registration of societies with  undesirable names .—No society shall be 
registered by a name which, in the opinion of the Registrar of Societies  is undesirable , being  a name 
identical with or, which in the opinion of the Registrar of Societies  so nearly resembles the name by 
which any ot
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 7]
r, which in the opinion of the Registrar of Societies  so nearly resembles the name by 
which any other existing society has been previously registered under this Act or anybody corporate 
which has been incorporated or registered under  any other law for the time being in force as to be likely 
to dec eive the public or members of either society  or anybody corporate, or which , without  the previous 
permission of the Government  concerned , suggests or is calculated to suggest the patronage of that 
Government or connection with  anybody constituted   by that Government  or any local authority, or 
which may, subject to any rules made in that behalf, be deemed to be undesirable by the Registrar of 
Societies.”.  
[Vide the Odisha Act 6 of 2013, s. 2]  
Union territory of Ladakh  
Section 3. —For "Registrar", substi tute "Registrar of Societies."  
[Vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Second Order, 2020, vide 
Notification No. S .O.3805(E), dated (26-10-2020 ).] 
  
                                                      
1. This section was amended in its application to Berar by s. 14 of the Central Provinces and Berar Vidya  Mandir Act, 1939 (C. 
P. & B. Act 3 of 1940).  
2. The words “the Governors -General of India i n Council ” have been successively adapted by the A. O. 1937 and the A. O. 1950 
to read as above.  
3. The word “Govt.”  has been successively adapted by the A.O . 1937 and the A. O . 1950 to read as above.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 8]
8 Uttarakhand  
Amendment of section 3. —In Principal Act sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of shall be substituted as 
follows, namely: -- 
“3.  Registration and fees .—(1) Upon such memorandum and its digitally signed copy being 
filed alongwith particulars of the address of Society office which will be registered address, by the 
secretar y of the society on behalf of the persons subscribing to the memorandum, the Registrar shall 
certify under his digital signature that the society is registered under this Act, For every such 
registration fees of five thousand five hundred and fifty rupees shall be paid to Registrar. For every 
such registration for Youth/Women Mangal Dal, Women Group/Community Group fees of fifty 
rupees shall be paid.  
Provided further that the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, increase 
from time to time the fee payable under this sub-section.  
Provided further that the Registrar may, in his discretion, issue public offline notice or issue 
offline notice to such persons as he thinks fit inviting offline objections, if any against the proposed 
regist ration and consider all objections that may be received by him before registering the society.  
The prescribed fee of registration shall be submitted online after the online approval of 
registration by the Registrar. After depositing the prescribed fees, th e digitally signed Society 
Registration Certificate shall be downloaded by the applicant.  
[Vide Uttarakhand Act 4 of 2019, s. 3]  
Haryana  
Amendment of Section 3 of Central Act 21 of 1860. — In Section 3 of the Societies Registration Act, 
1860 (hereinafter called the principal Act), for the words "fifty rupees", the words "two hundred and fifty  
rupees" shall be substituted.  
[Vide Haryana Act 14 of 2001, s. 2]  
Insertion of section 3A in Centra l Act 21 of 1860 .—After section 3 of the principal Act, the following 
section shall be inserted, namely: -- 
“3A. Refusal of registration .—(1) The Registrar 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 8]
 following 
section shall be inserted, namely: -- 
“3A. Refusal of registration .—(1) The Registrar may, in his discretion, issue public notice or 
issue notice to such persons as he thinks fit inviting  objections, if any, against the proposed 
registration and consider all objections that may be received by him before registering the society.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3, the Registrar  shall refuse to register a 
society, if after g iving it an opportunity of showing cause against such refusal, he is satisfied that — 
(a) the name of the society is identical with that of any other society  previously registered 
under this Act;  
(b) the name of the society sought to be registered uses any  of the words, namely: -- ‘Union’, 
‘State’, ‘Land Mortgage’, ‘Land  development’, ‘Co -operative’, ‘Gandhi’, ‘Reserve Bank’ or any 
words expressing or implying the sanction. Approval or patronage of the Central or any State 
Government or any word which sugge sts or is calculated  to suggest any connection with any 
local authority or any corporation or body constituted by or under any law for the time being in 
force or is such as is otherwise likely to deceive the public or the members of any other society 
previously registered under this Act;  
(c) anyone or more of the objects of the society sought to be registered is not an object 
mentioned in section 1 and 20; or  
(d) its objects are contrary to any other law for the time being in force or contrary to public 
policy.”. 
[Vide Haryana Act 14 of 200 7, s. 3] 
4. Annual list of managing body to be filed. —Oncein every year, on or before the fourteenth day 
succeeding the day on which, according to the rules of the society, the annual general meeting of the 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 9]
9 society is held, or, if the rules do not provide for an annual general meeting, in the month of January, a list 
shall be filed with the Registrar of Joint -stock Companies, of the names, addresses and occupations of the 
governors, council, directors, committee, or oth er governing body then entrusted with the management of 
the affairs of the society.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Assam  
Insertion of new section  4A  in  Act XXI of 1860 .- After section 4 of the principal Act, the following 
new section shall be inserted, namely: - 
“4A. Changes in managing body and rules to be filed .-(1) Together with the list mentioned in 
section 4, there shall be sent to the Registrar of Joint Stock Companies a statement showing changes 
during the year to which the list relates in the personnel of the g overnors, council, directors, committee or 
other governing body to whom the management of the affairs of the society is entrusted and also a copy 
of the rules of the society corrected up -to-date and certified to be a correct copy by not less than three of 
the members of the governing body.  
(2) A copy of every alteration made in the rules of the society, certified to be a correct copy by not 
less than three members of the governing body, shall be sent to the Registrar of Joint Stock Companies 
within fifteen days of  the making of such alterations. ” 
[Vide Assam  Act 11 of 1952, s. 2]  
Orissa  
Insertion of new sections 4 -A, 4-B and 4 -C, Act (21 of 1860) .—In the Societies Registration Act, 
1860 (21 of 1860) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) after section  4, the following new sections 
shall be inserted, namely: - 
“4-A Changes in the list mention 4 and rules to be filed .—(1) Without  prejudice to the provisions 
of section 4 any change in personnel on the list filed under the said section occurring duri ng the year to 
which such list relates shall be intimated to the Registrar or S ocieties within two months of such change.  
(2) A copy of every alteratio
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 9]
ted to the Registrar or S ocieties within two months of such change.  
(2) A copy of every alteration made in the rules and regulations of the Society, certified to be a 
correct copy by not less than three  of the Govern ors, Directors or Members of the governing body, as the 
case may be, shall be sent to the Registrar or Societies within two months of the making of such 
alteration.  
4-B. Persons by whom lists, etc ., are to be sent .—It shall be the duty — 
(a) Of the Chairman or, as the case may be, the President, the Secretary or any other person 
authorized in that behalf by the rules and regulations of the Society or by a resolution of the 
governing body of the Society; or  
(b) Of the Chairman or, as the case m ay be, the President of the governing body of the Society 
where is no such authorization, to file the list mentioned in section 4, or to send the intimation or as 
the case may be, the copy mentioned in section 4 -A to the Registrar of Societies.  
4-C. Offenc e.—(1) If any person who is required so do to under the preceding section fails without  
reasonable cause to comply with the provisions thereof, he shall, on conviction, be punishable with fine 
which may extend to one hundred rupees.  
(2) If any person willf ully makes or causes to be made any false entry or alternation in, or any 
omission  from, the list filed under section 4 or any statement or copy of rules and regulations sent to the 
Registrar of Societies under section 4 -A, he shall, on conviction, be puni shable with fine which may 
extend to five hundred rupees.”  
[Vide the Orissa Act 8 of 1969, s. 2]  
Union territory of Ladakh  
Section 4 .—For "Registrar of Joint -Stock Companies", substitute "Registrar of Societies".  
Insertion of new sections —After section  4, insert t he following sections, namely: — 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 10]
10 "4A. Changes in list mentioned in section  4 and rules to be filed. -(1) Without prejudice to the 
provisions of section  4 and change in personnel on the list filed under said section occurring during 
the year to which such list relates shall be intimated to the Registrar of Societies within two months of 
the making of such changes.  
(2) A copy of every alteration made in the rules and regulation of the society, certified to be a 
correct copy by not less than three of the  Governors, Directors or members of governing body, as the 
case may be, shall be sent to the Registrar of Societies within two months of such alteration.  
4B. Persons by whom lists, etc., are to be sent. -It shall be the duty -- 
(a) of the Chairman or, as the  case may be, the President, the Secretary or any other person 
authorised in that behalf by the rules and regulations of the society or by a resolution of the 
governing body of the society; or  
(b) of the Chairman, or as the case may be, the President of th e governing body of the society 
where there is no such authorisation,  
to file the list mentioned in section  4 or to send the intimation, or as the case may be, the copy 
mentioned in section 4A to the Registrar of Societies.  
4C. Offence. -(1) If any person w ho is required so to do under the preceding section fails 
without reasonable cause to comply with the provisions thereof, he shall, on conviction, be 
punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.  
(2) If any person wilfully makes or causes t o be made any false entry or alteration in, or any 
omission from, the list filed under section  4 or any statement or copy of rules and regulations sent 
to the Registrar of Societies under section 4A, he shall on, conviction, be punishable with fine 
which m ay extend to five thousand rupees.".  
[Vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Second Order, 2020, 
vide Notification No. S .O.3805(E), dated (26 -10-2020).]  
Arunacha
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 10]
tral Laws) Second Order, 2020, 
vide Notification No. S .O.3805(E), dated (26 -10-2020).]  
Arunachal Pradesh  
After section 4, the following section shall be inserted, namely: - 
“4A. Change in Managing Body and rules to be file s.—(1) Together with the list mentioned, in 
section 4, there shall be sent to the Registrar a statement showing changes during the year to which 
the list relates in the personnel of the Go vernor, council, directors, committee or other governing 
body to whom the management of the affairs of the societies is entrusted and also a copy of the rules 
of the society corrected up -to-date and certified to be a correct copy by not less than three mem bers of 
the governing body.  
(2) A copy of every alteration made in the rules of the society certified to be a correct copy by not 
less than three members of the governing body, shall be sent to the Registrar within fifteen days of 
the making of such alteration.”  
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh Act 6 of 1978, s. 2 and the schedule]  
Haryana  
Amendment of Section 4 of Central Act 21 of 1860. —In Section 4 of the principal Act, the following 
words shall be added at the end, namely : —  
"There shall be paid to the Re gistrar for every list a fee of ten rupees.".  
[Vide Haryana Act 14 of 2001, s. 3] 
5. Property of society how vested. —The property, movable and immovable, belonging to a society 
registered under this Act, if not vested in trustees, shall be deemed to be ves ted, for the time being, in the 
governing body of such society, and in all proceedings, civil and criminal, may be described as the 
property of the governing body of such society by their proper title.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 11]
11 STATE AMENDMENT  
Uttarakhand  
Insertion of section 5A.—In Principal Act after section 5 the following section shall be inserted, 
namely: -- 
“5A. Restriction on transfer of property .---(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law, 
contract or other instrument, it shall not be lawful for the governing bo dy of a society registered under 
this Act or any of its members to transfer, without the previous approval of the court, any immovable 
property belonging to any such society.  
(2) Every transfer made in contravention of sub -section (1) shall be void.  
Explan ation  I.—For the purposes of this section the word “court” shall have the meaning 
assigned to it in section 13.  
Explanation  II.—For the purposes of this section the word “transfer” means — 
(d) a mortgage, charge, sale, gift or exchange.  
(e) lease for term e xceeding five years; or  
(f) irrevocable licence.”  
[Vide Uttarakhand Act 4 of 2019, s. 4]  
Omission of section 5 -A of Act no. 21 of 1860 .—Section 5 -A of the Societies Registration Act, 1860 
shall be omitted.  
[Vide Uttarakhand Act 23 of 2014, s. 2]  
6. Suits by and against societies. —Everysociety registered under this Act may sue or be sued in the 
name of the president, chairman, or principal secretary, or trustees, as shall be determined by the rules and 
regulations of the society, and, in default of such det ermination, in the name of such person as shall be 
appointed by the governing body for the occasion:  
Provided that it shall be competent for any person having a claim or demand against the society, to 
sue the president or chairman, or principal secretary o r the trustees thereof, if on application to the 
governing body some other officer or person be not nominated to be the defendant.  
7. Suits not to abate. —Nosuit or proceeding in any Civil Court shall abate or discontinue by reason 
of the person, by or agai nst whom such suit or proceedings shall have been brought or continued, dying or 
ceasing to fill th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 11]
nst whom such suit or proceedings shall have been brought or continued, dying or 
ceasing to fill the character in the name whereof he shall have sued or been sued, but the same suit or 
proceeding shall be continued in the name of or against the successor o f such person.  
8. Enforcement of judgment against society. —Ifa judgment shall be recovered against the person 
or officer named on behalf of the society, such judgment shall not be put in force against the property, 
movable or immovable, or agains t the body of such person or officer, but against the property of the 
society.  
The application for execution shall set forth the judgment, the fact of the party against whom it shall 
have been recovered having sued or having been sued, as the case may be, o n behalf of the society only, 
and shall require to have the judgment enforced against the property of the society.  
9. Recovery of penalty accruing under bye -law.—Wheneverby any bye -law duly made in 
accord ance with the rules and regulations of the society, or, if the rules do not provide for the making of 
bye-laws, by any bye -law made at a general meeting of the members of the society convened for the 
purpose (for the making of which the concurrent votes of three -fifths of the members present at such 
meeting  shall be necessary), any pecuniary penalty is imposed for the breach of any rule or bye -law of the 
society, such penalty, when accrued, may be recove red in any Court having jurisdict ion where the 
defendant shall reside, or the society shall be situate, as  the governing body there of shall deem expedient.  
10. Members liable to be sued as strangers. —Anymember who may be in arrear of a subscription 
which according to the rules of the society he is bound to pay, or who shall possess himself of or detain 
any pr operty of the society in a manner or for a time contrary to such rules, or shall injure or destroy any 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 11]
ll injure or destroy any 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 12]
12 property of the society, may be sued for such arrear or for the damage accruing from such detention, injury, 
or destruction of property in the manner her einbefore provided.  
Recovery by successful defendant of costs adjudged. —Butif the defendant shall be successful in 
any suit or other proceeding brought against him at the instance of the society, and shall be adjudged to 
recover his costs, he may elect to proceed to recover the same from the officer in whose name thesuit 
shall bebrought, or from the society, and in the  latter case shall have process against the property of the 
said society in the manner above described.  
11. Members guilty of offences punish able as strangers. —Anymember of the society who shall 
steal, purloin or embezzle any money or other property, or wilfully  and maliciously destroy or injure any 
property of such society, or shall forge any deed, bond, security for money, receipt, or other instrument, 
whereby the funds of the society may be exposed to loss, shall be subject to the same prosecution, and, if 
convicted, shall be liable to be punished in like manner, as any person not a member would be subject and 
liable to in respect of the like offence.  
12. Societies enabled to alter, extend, or abridge their purposes. —Whenever it shall appear to the 
governing bo dy of any society registered under this Act, which has been established for any particular 
purpose or purposes, that it is advisable to alter, extend, or abridge such purpose to or for other purposes 
within the meaning of this Act, or to amalgamate such so ciety either wholly or partially with any other 
society, such governing body may submit the proposition to the members of the society in a written or 
printed report, and may convene a special meeting for the consideration thereof according to the 
regulatio ns of the society;  
but no such proposition shall be carried into effect unless such report shall have been delivered or 
sent by post to every member of 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 12]
arried into effect unless such report shall have been delivered or 
sent by post to every member of the society ten days previous to the special meeting convened by the 
governing body for the consideratio n thereof, nor unless such proposition shall have been agreed to by the 
votes of three -fifths of the members delivered in person or by proxy, and confirmed by the votes of three -
fifths of the members present at a second special meeting convened by the gove rning body at an interval 
of one month after the former meeting.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Assam  
Insertion of new sections 12A,12B and 12C in Act XXI of 1860. - After section 12 of the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860 (XXI of 1860), the following shall be inserted, n amely :-- 
"12A. Change of name .--Any society registered under this Act may, with the consent of not less 
than two -thirds of the total number of its members' by a resolution at a general meeting convened for 
the purpose and subject to the provisions of secti on 12B, change its name.  
12B. Notice of change of name .--(1) Notice in writing of every change of name, signed by the 
Secretary and, by seven members of the society changing its name, shall be sent to the Registrar;  
(2) If the proposed name is identical with that by which any other existing society has been 
registered or, in the opinion of the Registrar, so nearly resembles such name as to be likely to deceive 
the public, the Registrar shall refuse to register the change of name.  
(3) Save as provided in sub-section (2), the Registrar shall, if he is satisfied that the provisions of 
this Act in respect of change of name have been complied with, register the  change of name and the 
change of name shall have effect from the date of such registration.  
12C. Eff ects of change of name .--The change in the name of a society registered under this Act 
shall not affect any rights or obligations of the society or render defective any legal proceeding by or 
against the society,  and an
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 12]
igations of the society or render defective any legal proceeding by or 
against the society,  and any legal proceeding which might have b een continued or commenced by or 
against it by its former name may be continued or commenced by or against it by its new name".  
[Vide Assam Act 14 of 1948, s. 2]  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 13]
13 Orissa  
Amendment of a section 12, Act (21 of 1860) .—In section 12 of the principal Act — 
(a) i n the first paragraph after the words “any other society” the words “ or whenever the 
governing body of any such society decides to change the name of the society” shall be inserted;  
(b) after the second paragraph the following proviso shall be inserted, n amely: — 
“Provided that no proposition for amalgamation shall be carried into effect unless it has been 
considered, agreed to and confirmed by all the concerned societies in the manner prescribed in this 
section”.  
[Vide the Orissa Act  8 of 1969, s. 3]  
Orissa  
Insertion of new sections 12 -A, 12 -B and 12 -C, Act 21 of 1860. —After section 12 of the principal 
Act the following new sections shall be inserted, namely: — 
12-A. Registration of change of name .—(1) Where a proposition for change of name has been 
agreed to and confirmed in the manner prescribed by section 12, a copy of the proposition so agreed to 
and confirmed shall be  forwarded to the Registrar of Societies for registering the change  of name .  If the 
proposed name is identical with that by which any  other existing society has been registered or in the 
opinion of the Registrar so nearly resembles the name of such other society as is likely to deceive the 
public or the members of either society, the Registrar shall refuse to register the change of name . 
(2) Save as provided in sub -section (1), the Registrar shall, if he is satisfied that the provisions of this 
Act in respect of the change of name have been complied with, register the change of name and issue a 
certificate of registration altered to meet  the circumstances of the case. On the issue of such certificate the 
change of name shall be complete.  
(3) The Registrar shall charge for any copy of a certificate issued under sub -section (2) a fee of rupee 
one and all fees  so paid shall be accounted for to the State Government.  
12-B. Effect of change of name .—The cha
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 13]
  so paid shall be accounted for to the State Government.  
12-B. Effect of change of name .—The change in the name of a society shall not affect any rights or 
obligations of the society or render defective any legal proceeding by or against the society; and any legal 
proceeding which might have been continued or commenced by or against it by its former name may be 
continued or commenced by or against it by the new name.  
12-C. Registration of change of name effected before commencement of the societies 
Registration Amendment .—If any society r egistered under this Act has, before the date of the coming 
into force of the Societies Registration (Orissa Amendment) Act, 1969 intimated to the Registrar the 
change of its name and if the Registrar has recorded such change the Registrar may, notwithstan ding 
anything contained in this Act, on an application made by the society in this behalf and on payment of 
fees as provided in sub -section (3) of section 12 -A register the change of such name and issue a certificate 
to the society under sub -section (2) of  the said section. On the issue of such certificate the change shall be 
deemed to be complete from the date on which such change was recorded by the Registrar.”  
[Vide the Orissa Act 8 of 1969 , s. 4]  
Orissa  
Amendment of section 12A. —In the principal Act, in  section 12A, — 
(a) for sub -section (1), the following sub -sections shall be substituted, namely: — 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 14]
14 “(1) Where a proposition for change of name has been agreed to and confirmed in the manner 
prescribed by section 12, a copy of the proposition so agreed to an d confirmed shall be forwarded to 
the Registrar  of Societies for registering  the change of name”.  
(1A) The Registrar of Societies may refuse to register the change of name, if he is of the opinion 
that the proposed change of name is undesirable for any o f the reasons mentioned in section 3A.”.  
(b) after sub -section (3), the following  sub -section shall be inserted, namely: — 
“(4) if, through inadvertence or otherwise a society is registered by a name which is identical with 
or, which in the opinion of the  Registrar of Societies so nearly resembles the name by which any 
other existing  society  has been previously registered under this Act or any body corporate which has 
been incorporated or registered under any other law for the time being in force or any body 
constituted by the Government  or any local authority the  Registrar  of Societies may after hearing 
the party concerned  direct the society to change  the name and the society shall change  its name 
within a period of  three months from the date of i ssue of the direction in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act, or such longer period as the Registrar of Societies may think fit to allow.”.  
[Vide the Orissa Act 6 of 2013, s. 3]  
Insertion of a new section .—In the principal Act, after section 12 -C, the following section shall  be 
inserted, namely: — 
12-D. Registrar’s power to cancel registration in certain circumstance .—(1) Notwithstanding  
anything  contained in this Act, the Registrar may, be order in writing  , cancel the registration of any 
societ y on any of the following grounds, namely: — 
(a) the registration of the society, or  its name or change of name is contrary to the provisions of 
this Act or of any other law for the  time being in force; or  
(b) its activities or, opposed activities have be en, or a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 14]
er law for the  time being in force; or  
(b) its activities or, opposed activities have be en, or are subversive  of the objects of the society or 
proposed to public policy; or  
(c) the registration certificate has been obtained by misrepresentation  of fact or fraud; or  
(d) the society fails to comply the direction issued under sub -section (4) of section 12 -A: 
Provided that no order of cancellation of registration of any society shall be passed until the society 
has been given a reasonable opportunity of altering its name or objects or of showing cause against the 
action proposed to be taken in regard to it.”.  
[Vide the Act Orissa Act 6 of 2013, s. 4]  
Union territory of Ladakh  
Section 12. — 
(i) after "any other society", insert "or whenever the governing body of any such society decides 
to change the name of the society"; and  
(ii) after the words "after the formal meeting" insert -- 
"Provided that no proposition for amalgamation shall be carried into effect unless it has been 
considered, agreed to and confirmed by all concerned societies in the mann er prescribed in this 
section. ”. 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 15]
15 Insertion of new  secti ons— 
After section  12, insert — 
"12A. Registration of change of name. -(1) Where a proposition for change of name has 
been agreed to and confirmed in the manner prescribed by section  12, a copy of the proposition 
so agreed to and confirmed shall be forwarded to the Registrar for registering the change of name 
and if the proposed change in the name is in his opinion undesirable for any of the reasons 
mentioned in section 3A, the Registrar shall refuse to register the change of name.  
(2) Save as provid ed in sub -section (1), the Registrar shall, if he is satisfied that the 
provisions of this Act in respect of change of name have been complied with, register the change 
of name and issue a certificate of registration altered to meet the circumstances of th e case, and 
on the issue of such a certificate the change of name shall be complete.  
(3) The Registrar shall charge for any copy of a certificate issued under sub -section (2), a fee 
of rupee five hundred and all fees so paid shall be accounted for to the A dministration of the 
Union territory of Ladakh.  
(4) If, through inadvertence or otherwise, a society is registered by a name which should not 
have been registered (due regard being had to the provisions of section 3A), the Registrar may, 
after hearing the party concerned direct the society to change the name; and the society shall 
change its name within a period of three months from the date of the direction in accordance with 
the provisions of this Act, or such longer period as the Registrar may think fit to allow.  
12B. Effect of change of name. -The change in the name of society shall not affect any rights 
or obligations of the society or render defective any legal proceeding by or against the society and 
any legal proceeding which might have been continued  or commenced by or against it by its 
former name may be continued or commenced by or against it by its new name.  
12C. Maintenance of accounts and thei
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 15]
 be continued or commenced by or against it by its new name.  
12C. Maintenance of accounts and their balancing and accounting. -(1) Every governing 
body entrusted with the management of the affairs of a so ciety registered under this Act shall 
keep regular accounts.  
(2) Such accounts shall be kept in such form as may be approved by the Registrar, and shall 
contain such particulars as may be prescribed by rules.  
(3) The accounts shall be balanced each year on  the 31st day of March or such other day as 
may be fixed by the Registrar.  
(4) The accounts shall be audited annually in such manner as may be prescribed by rules and 
by a person who is a Chartered Accountant within the meaning of the Chartered Accountants  Act, 
1949 (38 of 1949), or by such persons as may be authorised in this behalf by the Administration 
of the Union territory of Ladakh.  
12D. Auditor's duty to prepare balance sheet and report irregularities, etc. -(1) It shall be 
the duty of every auditor a uditing the accounts of a society under section 12C to prepare balance -
sheet and income and expenditure account and to forward a copy of the same to the Registrar.  
(2) The auditor shall in his report specify all cases of irregular, illegal or improper 
expe nditure or failure or omission to recover money or other property belonging to the society or 
of loss or waste of money or other property thereof, and state whether such expenditure, failure, 
omission, loss or waste was caused in consequence of branch of t rust or misapplication or any 
other misconduct on the part of the govern ing body or any other person.".  
[Vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Second Order, 2020, vide 
Notification No. S .O.3805(E), dated (26-10-2020 ).] 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 16]
16 Arunachal Pradesh  
After section 12, the following sections shall be inserted namely: — 
“12A. Change of name .—A society registered under this Act may, with the consent of not less than 
two-thirds of the total number of its members, by a resolution, at a gene ral meeting convened for the 
purpose and subject to the provisions of section 12B change its name.”  
“12B. Notice of change of name. —(1) Notice in writing of every change of name, signed by the 
Secretary and by seven members of the society, shall be sent to  the Registrar.  
(2) If the proposed name is identical with that by which any other existing society has been registered 
or, in the opinion of the Registrar, so nearly resembles such name as to be likely to deceive the public, the 
Registrar shall refuse to register the change of name.  
(3) Save as provided in sub -section (2), the Registrar shall, if he is satisfied that the provisions of this 
Act in respect of change of name shall have been complied with, register the change of name and the 
change of name sha ll have effect from the date such registration.”.  
“12C.Effect of change of name .—The change in the name of a  society registered under this Act 
shall not effect any right or obligation of the society or render defective any legal proceeding by or 
against the society and any legal proceeding which might have been continued or commenced by or 
against it by its former name may be continued or commenced by or against it by its changed name.”  
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh  Act 6 of 1978, s.  2 and the Schedule ] 
Haryana  
Insertion of section 12C , 12D and 12 E in Central Act 21 of 1 860.—After section 12B of the principal 
Act, the following sections shall be inserted, namely: — 
"12C. Maintenance of accounts and their balancing and  auditing .—(1) Every governing body 
entrusted with the management  of the affairs of a society registered under this Act shall keep regular  
accounts.   
(2) The accounts shall be kept in such form as may 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 16]
under this Act shall keep regular  
accounts.   
(2) The accounts shall be kept in such form as may be approved  by the Registrar, and shall 
contain such particulars as may be  prescribed.  
(3) The accoun ts shall be balanced each year on the 31st day of  March or on such other day as 
may be fixed by the Registrar.   
(4) The accounts shall be audited annually in such manner as  may be prescribed and by a person 
who is a chartered accountant  within the meaning of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 (Act 38  of 
1949) , or by such person as may be authori zed in this behalf by the  State Government.  
12D. Auditor's duty to prepare balance sheet and report  irregularities, etc .—(1) It shall be 
the duty of every auditor auditing  the accounts of a society under section 12C to prepare balance 
sheet  and income and expenditure account and to forward a copy of the  same to the Registrar.  
(2) The auditor shall in his report specify all cases of irregular,  illegal or improper exp enditure or 
failure or omission to recover money  or other property belonging to the society or of loss or waste of 
money  or other property thereof, and state whether such expenditure, failure,  omission, loss or waste 
caused in consequence of breach of trus t or misapplication or any other misconduct on the part of the 
governing  body or any other person.  
12E. Registrar's power  to cancel registration in certain  circumstances .—(1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Act,  the Registrar may, by order in wr iting cancel the registration of any  
society on any of the following grounds: -- 
(a) that the registration of the society or of its name or change  of name is contrary to the 
provisions of this Act or of any  other law for the time being in force;  
(b) that it s activities or proposed activities have been or are or  will be subversive of the 
objects of the society or opposed  to public policy;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 16]
 or opposed  to public policy;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 17]
17 (c) that the registration certificate has been obtained by  misrepresentation or fraud;  
(d) that the society is carrying on  any unlawful activity or  allows unlawful activity to be 
carried on within any premises  under the control of the society :  
Provided that no order of cancellation of registration of any  society shall be passed until the 
society has been given a reasonable  opportunity of altering its name or object or of showing cause 
against  the action proposed to be taken in regard to it.  
(2) An appeal against an order made under sub -section (1) may  be preferred to such authority and 
within such time and in such manner  as may be prescribed.  
(3) The decision of the authority under sub -section (2), shall be  final.".  
[Vide Haryana Act 14 of 2007, s. 4]  
13. Provision for dissolution of societies and adjustment of their affairs. —Anynumber not less 
than three -fifths of the member s of any society may determine that it shall be dissolved, and thereupon it 
shall be dissolved forthwith, or at the time then agreed upon, and all necessary steps shall be taken for the 
disposal and settlement of the property of the society, its claims and  liabilities, according to the rules of 
the said society applicable thereto, if any, and, if not, then as the governing body shall find expedient 
provided that, in the event of any dispute arising among the said governing body or the members of the 
society , the adjustment of its affairs shall be referred to the principal Court of ori ginal civil jurisdiction of 
the district in which the chief building of the society is situate; and the Court shall make such order in the 
matter as it shall deem requisite:  
Provided that no society shall be dissolved unless three -fifths of the members shall have expressed a 
wish for such dissolution by their votes delivered in person, or by proxy, at a general meeting convened 
for the purpose:  
Provided that 1[whenever any Gover nment] is a member of, or a contrib
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 17]
 convened 
for the purpose:  
Provided that 1[whenever any Gover nment] is a member of, or a contributor to, or otherwise 
interested in any society registered under this Act, such society shall not be dissolved 2[without the 
consent of the Government of the State of registration].  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Assam  
Amendment of section 13 of Act XXI of 1860 .- In section 13 of the said Act, -- 
(a) after the words "as the governing body" the words "or special Committee formed to 
replace the governing body in respect of all matters affecting the winding up of the affairs  of the 
Society ;" shall be inserted;  
(b) after the words "the said governing body" the words "should it not have been replaced by 
the aforesaid special Committee in respect of all matters affecting the winding up of the Society , 
or the said special Committee ,’’ shall be inserted.  
(2) After section  13 of the Act, the following proviso shall be inserted as the first proviso, 
namely: - 
Provided that any matter decided by three -fifths of those present either in person or by proxy at 
any meeting of the mem bers of the Society or of the governing body thereof or of any special 
Committee  appointed  at a General Meeting for the purpose of winding up of the affairs of a Society 
shall not be deemed to be a matter of dispute within the meaning of this section.  
[Vide Assam Act 15 of 1948, s. 2]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by  the A.O. 1937, for “whenever the Government”.  
2. Subs., ibid,.for “without the consent of Government”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 18]
18 Arunachal Pradesh  
In section 13 :-- 
(a) after the words “as the governing body”, the words “or special committee formed to replace 
the governing body  in respect of all matters affecting the winding up of the affairs of the society” 
shall be inserted;  
(b) after the words “the said governing body”, the words “should  it have not been replaced by the 
aforesaid special committee in respect of all matters affecting the winding up of the society , or the 
said special committee” shal l be inserted;  
(c) in the second proviso, for the words “Government of the State of registration”,  the word 
“Administrator” shall be substituted;  
(d) after the second proviso, the following further proviso shall be inserted, namely: -- 
 Provided further th at any matter decided by three -fifth of those present either in person or by 
proxy at any meeting of the members of the society or of any governing body thereof or of any 
special committee appointed at a general meeting for the purpose of winding up of the  affairs of a 
society shall not be deemed to be a matter of dispute within the meaning of this section.”  
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh Act 6 of 1978, s. 2 and the Schedule ] 
14. Upon a dissolution no member to receive profit. —If upon the dissolution of any society 
registered under this Act there shall remain after the satisfaction of all its debts and liabilities any property 
whatsoever, the same shall not be paid to or distributed among the members of the said society or any of 
them, but shall be given to s ome other society, to be determined by the votes of not less than three -fifths 
of the members present personally or by proxy at the time of the disso lution, or, in default thereof, by 
such Court as aforesaid:  
Clause not to apply to Joint -stock Companies. —Provided, however, that this clause shall not apply 
to any society which shall have been founded or established by the contributions of shareholders in the 
nature of a Joint -stock Company.  
STATE AM
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 18]
stablished by the contributions of shareholders in the 
nature of a Joint -stock Company.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Assam  
Amendment of section 14 of Act XXI of 1860 .—In section 14 of the said Act, after the words “some 
other society,” the words “whether registered under this Act or not,” shall be inserted.  
[Vide Assam Act 15 of 1948, s. 3]  
Tripura  
Amendment of Central Act XXI of 1860 by inserting a new section 14A —In its application to the 
Union territory of Tripura, after section 14 insert the following new section, namely —  
“14A. Disposal of property of a dissolved society .—Notwithstanding anything contained in section 
14 it shall be lawful for the members of any soc iety dissolved under section 13 to determine by a majority 
of the votes of the members present personally or by proxy at the time of the dissolution of such society 
that any property whatsoever remaining after the satisfaction of all the debts and liabilit ies shall be given 
to the Government of Tripura to be utilised for any of the purposes referred to in section 1.  
[Vide Tripura Act 5 of 1969, s. 2]  
15. Member defined. Disqualified members. —For the purposes of this Act a member of a society 
shall be a per son who, having been admitted therein according to the rules and regulations thereof, shall 
have paid a subscription, or shall have signed the roll or list of members thereof, and shall not have 
resigned in accordance with such rules and regulations; but i n all proceedings under this Act no person 
shall be entitled to vote or be counted as a member whose subscription at the time shall have been in 
arrear for a period exceeding three months.  
16. Governing body defined. —The governing body of the society shall be the governors, council, 
directors, committee, trustees or other body to whom by the rules and regulations of the society the 
management of its affairs is entrusted.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 18]
  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 19]
19 STATE AMENDMENT  
Haryana  
Amendment of section 16 of Central Act 21 of 1860. — In section 16 of the principal Act, after the 
words and signs "committee, trustees,", the words "trustee mandal" shall be inserted.  
[Vide Haryana Act 14 of 2007, s. 5]  
Insertion of section 16A in Central Act 21 of 1860. — After section 16 of the principal Act, the 
following section shall be inserted, namely: -- 
"16A. Duties, functions and powers of governing body .— The duties, functions and powers of 
governing body of the society shall be such as may be prescribed." . 
[Vide Haryana Act 14 of 2007, s. 6]  
17. Regis tration of societies formed before Act. —Any company or society established for a 
literary, scientific, or charitable  purpose, and registered under 1Act 43 of 1850, or any such society 
established and constituted previously to the passing of this Act but no t registered under the said 3Act 43 
of 1850, may at any time hereafter be registered as a society under this Act; subject to the proviso that no 
such company or society shall be registered under this Act unless an assent to its being so registered has 
been  given by three -fifths of the members present personally, or by proxy, at some general meeting 
convened for that purpose by the governing body.  
In the case of a compa ny or society registered under 3Act 43 of 1850, the directors shall be deemed to 
be such g overning body.  
In the case of a society not so registered, if no such body shall have been constituted on the 
establishment of the society, it shall be competent for the members thereof, upon  due notice, to create for 
itself a governing body to act for the  society thenceforth.  
18. Such societies to file memorandum, etc., with Registrar of Joint -stock Companies. —In order 
to any such society as is mentioned in the last preceding section obtaining registry under this Act, it shall 
be sufficient that the govern ing body file with the Registrar of Joint -stock Companies 2*** a 
memorandu
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 19]
ficient that the govern ing body file with the Registrar of Joint -stock Companies 2*** a 
memorandum showing the name of the society, the objects of the society, and the names, addresses and 
occupations of the governing body, together with a copy of the rules and regulations of th e society 
certified as provided in section 2, and a copy of the report of the proceedings of the general meeting at 
which the registration was resolved on.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Union territory of ladakh  
Section 18 .—For "Registrar of Joint -Stock Companies", subst itute "Registrar of Societies".  
[Vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Second Order, 2020, vide 
Notification No. S .O. 3805(E), dated (26-10-2020 ).] 
19. Inspection of documents, Certified copies. —Any person may insp ect all documents filed with 
the Registrar under this Act on payment of a fee of one rupee for each inspection; and any person may 
require a copy or extract of any document or any part of any document, to be certified by the Registrar, on 
payment of two an nas for every hundred words of such copy or extract; and such certified copy shall be 
prima facie  evidence of the matters therein contained in all legal proceedings whatever.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Union territory of ladakh  
Section 19. —For "Registrar", substitute  "Registrar of Societies".  
                                                      
1. Rep. by the Indian Companies Act, 1866 (10 of 1866), s. 719, see now the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956).  
2. The words and figures “under Act 19 of 1857”, rep. by Act 16 of 1874, s. 1 and the Schedule, Pt. 1, see now the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 
1956).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 20]
20 [Vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Second Order, 2020, vide 
Notification No. S .O. 3805(E), dated (26-10-2020 ).] 
Arunachal Pradesh  
In section 19,  for the words “two annas”, the words fifteen paise” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh Act 6 of 1978, s.  2 and the Schedule ] 
Uttarakhand  
Substitution of section 19. —In Principal Act section 19 shall be substituted as follows, nam ely:-- 
“19. Inspection of documents, Certified copies. —Any person may inspect all document files with 
the Registrar under this act on payment of a fee of thee hundred rupees for each inspection ; and any 
person may require a digitally signed copy or extract  of any documents or any part of any document  or 
any part of any document s, to be digitally certified by the Registrar  on payment of rupees one hundred as 
ordinary fee and rupees two such copy or extract and digital signed copy shall  prima facie  evidence of 
the matters therein contained in all legal proceedings whatever.  
Provided further that the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, increase from 
time to time the fee payable under this sub -section.  
[Vide Uttarakhand Act 4 of 2019, s. 5] 
Haryana  
Amendment of Section 19 of Central Act 21 of 1860. — In Section 19 of the principal Act, — 
(i) for the words "one rupee", the words "twenty rupees" shall be substituted ; and  
(ii) for the words "twenty -five naye paise  for every hundred words", the words "ten rupees per 
page or part thereof ” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Haryana Act 14 of 2001, s. 4]  
20. To what societies Act applies. —The following societies may be registered under this Act: —  
Charitable societies, the military orphan funds or societies established at the several presidencies of 
India, societies established for the promotion of science, literature, or the fine arts, for instruction, the  
diffusion of useful knowledge,1[the diffusion of political education ] the
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 20]
s, for instruction, the  
diffusion of useful knowledge,1[the diffusion of political education ] the foundation or maintenance of 
libraries or reading -rooms for general use among the members or open to the public, or public museums 
and galleries of paintings and other works of art, collections of natural history, mechanical and 
philosophical inventi ons, instruments, or designs.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Assam  
Insertion of new sections 21 and 22 in Act XXI of 1860 .—After section 20 of the principal Act, the 
following new section shall be inserted, namely:  — 
“21. Penalties .—(1) if the President, Secretary or any  other person authorized in this behalf by a 
resolution of the governing body of the society fails to comply with the provisions of section 4, he shall, 
on conviction, be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees a nd in case of a 
continu ing brea ch, shall also be punishable with fine not exceeding fifty rupees for each day, during the 
period the breach continues after fi rst conviction for such offence . 
(2) If any person willfully makes or causes to be made any false entry in, or any omissi on from, the 
list required by section 4, or in or from any statement of copy of rules or of alterations in rules sent to the 
Registrar of Joint Stock Companies under sec tion 4A, he shall, on conviction, be punishable with fine 
which may extend to two thous and rupees.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 22 of 1927, s. 2.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 21]
21 Haryana  
Insertion of section 22 to 32 in Central Act 21 of 1860 .— After section 21 of the principal Act, the 
following sections shall be added at the end, namely: — 
"22. Power of Registrar to call for information .—(1) The  Registrar may , by written order, 
require any society to furnish in  writing such information or document within such time, being  
ordinarily not less than three weeks from the date of receipt of the  order by the society, as he may 
specify in the order in connection  with t he affairs of the society or any documents filed by the society  
under this Act . 
(2) On receipt by the society of an order under sub -section  (1), it shall be the duty of the 
President, Secretary or any other  person authorized in this behalf to furnish such information or  
documents.  
23. Investigations of affairs of society .— (1) Where on the  information received under section 
22 or otherwise, the Registrar  is of opinion that there is apprehension that the affairs of a society  
registered under  this Act are being so conducted as to defeat the  objects of the society or that the 
society or its governing body by  whatever name called, or any offic e-bearer thereof in actual  effective 
control of the society is guilty of mismanaging its affairs  or of any breach of fidu ciary or other like 
obligations, the Registrar  may, either himself or by any person authorized by him in that  behalf, 
inspect or investigate into the affairs of the society or  inspect any institution managed by the society.  
(2) It shall be the duty of ever y office -bearer of the society  when so required by the Registrar or 
other person authori sed under  sub-section (1) to produce any books of account and other records of  or 
relating to the society which are in his custody and to give him all  assistance in con nection with such 
inspection or investigation.  
(3) The Registrar or other person authorized under sub -section  (1) may call upon and examine on 
oath any office 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 21]
ar or other person authorized under sub -section  (1) may call upon and examine on 
oath any office -bearer, member or  employee of the society in relation to the affairs of the society and 
it shall be the duty of every office -bearer, member or employee, when  called upon, to appear before 
him for such examination.  
(4) The Registrar or other person authorized under sub -section  (1) may, if in his opinion it is 
necessary for the purpose of inspection  or investigation, seize any or all the records including account 
books  of the society:  
Provided that any person from whose custody such records are  seized shall be entitled to make 
copies thereof in the presence of the  person seizing such records.  
(5) On the conclusion of the inspection or investigation, as  the case may be, the person, if any, 
appointed by the Registrar to  inspect or investigate shall make a report to the Registrar on the result 
of his inspection  or investigation.  
(6) The Registrar may, after such inspection or investigation, give such directions to the society 
or to its governing body or any office -bearer thereof, as he may think fit , for the removal of any 
defects  or irregularities within such time es may be specified and in the event  of defa ult in taking 
action according to such directions, the Registrar  may proceed to take action under section 12E or 
section 30, as the case may he.  
24. Disputes regarding election of office -bearers .—(1) The prescribed authority may, on a 
reference made to it by the Registrar or by at least one -fourth of the members of a society registered 
in Haryana, beat and decide in a summary man ner any  doubt or dispute in respect of the election or 
continuance in office of an office -bearer  of such of society, and may pass such orders -in respect 
thereof  it deems fit:  
Provided that the election of an office -bearer shall b e set aside  where the prescribed authority is 
satisfied — 
(a) that any corrupt practice has been committed b
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 21]
  where the prescribed authority is 
satisfied — 
(a) that any corrupt practice has been committed by such office  bearer;  or 
(b) that the nomination  of any candidate has been improperly  rejected; or   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 22]
22 (c) that the result of the election insofar as it concerns  to such  office -bearer has been 
materially affected by the improper  acceptance of any nomination or by the improper reception,  
refusal or rejection of any vote or the reception of any vote  which is void or by any non -
compliance with the  provisions of any rules of the society.  
Explanation I. — A person shall be deemed to have committed a corrupt practice who,  directly or 
indirectly, by himself  or by any other  person , – 
(i) induces, or attempts to induce, by fraud, intentional  misrepresentation, coercion  or threat 
of injury, any elector  to give on to refrain from giving a vote in favour of any  candidate, or any 
person to stand or not to stand as , or to  withdraw or not to withdraw from being a candidate at the  
election;  
(ii) with a view to inducing any elector to give or to refrain  from giving a vote in favour of 
any candidate, or to inducing  any person to stand or not to stand as, or to withdraw or not  to 
withdraw from being a candidate at the election, offers  or gives any money , or valuable 
consideration, or any place  or employment, or holds out any promise of individual  advantage or 
profit to any person;  
(iii) abets (within the meaning of the Indian Penal Code) the  doing of any of the acts 
specified in clauses (i) and (ii);  
(iv) induces or attempts to induce ni candidate or elector to  believe that he, or any person in 
whom he is interested, will  become or will be rendered an object of divine di spleasure  or spiritual 
censure;  
(v) canvasses on grounds of caste, community, sect or religion;   
(vi) commits such other practice as the State Government may  prescribe to be a corrupt 
practice.  
Explanation II. -- A promise of individual advantage or profit to a person includes a promise for the 
benefit of the person himself, or of  anyone in whom he is interested.  
Explanation III.--- The State Government may prescribe the procedure  for hearing and deci
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 22]
rested.  
Explanation III.--- The State Government may prescribe the procedure  for hearing and decision of 
doubts  or disputes in respect of such  elections and make provision in respect of any other matter relating  
to such elections for which insufficient provision exists in this Act or  in the rules of the society.   
(2) Where by an order made  under sub -section (1) an  election is set aside or an office -bearer is held 
no longer entitled to continue in  notice or where the Registrar is satisfied that any election of office  
bearers  of a society has not been held within  the time specified in the  rules of that society, he ma y call a 
meeting of the genera l body of  such society for electing such office bearer or office -bearers, and such  
meeting shal1 be presided over and be conducted by the Registrar or  by any officer advisory  by him in 
this behalf, and the prescribe the  rules of the s ociety  relating to meetings and elections shall apply  to such 
meeting and election with necessary modifications.  
(3) Where a meeting is called by the Registrar under sub -section  (2), no other meeting shall be called 
for the purpose of electi on by  any other authority or by any person claiming to be an office -bearer  of the 
society.  
Explanat ion.— For the purposes of this section, the expression  'prescribed authority' mean, an officer 
or court authorized in this  behalf by the State Government by notification published in the  Official 
Gazette . 
25. Terms of gift to be observed. —Where a society accepts a gift or  nation of money or property of 
any other kind from any person  for a specific purpose, it shall not use the money or other property  gifted 
or donated or any part thereof for any other purpose except  for the promotion of the activities of the 
society.  
26. Penalties. —Any society which – 
(a) fails to furnish the list of managing body or other  information required to be furnished under 
section 22 or  wilfully makes or  causes to be
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 22]
or other  information required to be furnished under 
section 22 or  wilfully makes or  causes to be made a false entry in, or any  omission from, the list or 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 23]
23 any statement or copy of rules or  of alteration in rules or other information sent to the  Registrar under 
the said section ; 
(b) wilfully  fails, neglects or refuses to maintain, balance and  audit accounts as referred to in 
section 12C ; 
(c) wilfully fails to produce any books of accounts or other  records as required by sub -section (2) 
of section 23;  
(d) wilfully fails to appear before the Re gistrar or other person  authorised by him or otherwise 
contravenes the provisions  of sub -section (3) of section 23;  
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand  rupees.  
27. Compounding of offences. —(1) The Registrar may accept from  any person against whom a 
reasonable suspicion exists that he has  committed any offence punishable under section 26 or against 
whom  a prosecution under that s ection  has b een instituted, a sum of money  by way of composition 
fee for the offence which such person  is suspect or accused to have committed.  
(2) On the payment of such composition fee the suspected  person shall be discharged and no 
further proceedings shall be taken  against him, and  if persecution of such composition shall have the 
effect of his acquit tal. 
28. Manner of payment of fees. — Fees payable under the provisions  of this Act shall be paid in 
such manner as may be prescribed.  
29. Mode of service of notice by Registrar. — (1) Any notice, order  or requisition mean s for a 
society or for the governing  body thereof to  be issued by the Registrar may be served on the Secretary 
of the  society, and service on the Secretary shall be as effectual as if the  same had been served on 
every member of the society or, as the case  may be, on every member of the governing body thereof, 
unless the  Registrar otherwise directs.  
(2) The sending of such notice, order or requisition to the  Secretary of the society by registered 
post at its registered office  shall amount to sufficient service ther eof on the society.  
30. Appo
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 23]
ost at its registered office  shall amount to sufficient service ther eof on the society.  
30. Appointment of Administrator. — (1) Where on receipt of a  complaint from three office -
bearers of a society or three affected  persons or on inspection of records, the Registrar is satisfied, --- 
(i) that the society is working against the objectives and  ideals as per sections 1 and 20 on the 
basis of which the  society was granted certificate;  
(ii) that the society is not working democratically or the  elections have not taken place within 
the speci fied time or election taken place fraudulently or  against the clauses of memorandum of 
associ ation;  
(iii) that the office -bears have been nominated against the clause of memorandum of 
association;  
(iv) that the number of members in a trustee mandal has been  purposely kept below seven, 
the Registrar may recommend  to the State Govern ment to appoint an Administrator :  
Provided that no adverse order shall be passed unless an  opportunity of being heard has been 
given to the conce rned society:  
Provided further that the action of the Registrar in this behalf  shall be final a nd no appeal shall lie 
in any court against such action.  
(2) The State Government may, by order published in the Official  Gazette, shall appoint an 
Administrator of such society who shall not  be below the rank of Deputy Secretary for such period, 
not exceeding  six months , as may be specified in the order to manage the affairs of  the society :  
Provided that for reasons to be recorded in writing, the State  Government may, by like order, 
extend the said period for a fu rther duration of six months.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 24]
24 (3) On the appointment of the Administrat ion under sub -section  (2), the governing body of the 
society shall cease to exercise any  powers and perform and discharge any functions or duties 
conferred  or imposed on it by this Act, or its memorandum of association or the rules and regulations 
of any other law and subject to any directions  which the State Government may from time to time 
issue, all such  functions or duties shall be performed or discharged by the  Administrator.  
(4) The Administrator shall, before the exp iry of the period of  his appointment, take necessary 
action to convene the general body  meeting of the society and hold election for the constitution of the  
governing body.  
(5) If the Administrator is not, for reasons beyond his controlable  to convene the general body 
meeting or inspite  of such meeting  being convened the general body fails to elect the governing body,  
the Administrator shall forthwith send a report to the State Government  who may pass such orders as 
are considered necessary, either extendin g the period of appointment of the Administrator for a 
further duration  or if satisfied that public interest so requires, for the dissolution of the  society.  
(6) The State Government may, if it thinks fit, appoint a  committee to advise and assist the 
Admin istrator appointed under  sub-section ( 1) in the exercise of the powers and performance and  
discharge of the duties and functions conferred or imposed on him  under this Act. The members of 
the committee shall have such  qualifications  as may be prescribed and shall hold office during the  
pleasure of the State Government.  
(7) Where an order of dissolution is passed under sub -section  (5), the assets of the society shall 
vest in and the liabilities shall  devolve on the State Government.  
31. indemnity .— No suit , prosecution or other legal proceedings  shalt lie in any court against the 
State Government, the Registrar or  against any person appointe
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 24]
 shalt lie in any court against the 
State Government, the Registrar or  against any person appointed for inspection or investigation under  
section 23, for anything in good faith done or intended to be done  under this Act or the rules made 
thereunder . 
32. Power to make rules. —(1) The State Government may, after  previous publication, make 
rules not inconsistent with this Act for  carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the general ity of the  foregoing power, the State 
Government may make rules — 
(a) prescribing the form of the register of societies and the  mode in which entries relating to 
registration are to be  made therein, and the mode in which such entries are to be  amended or 
notes made therein;  
(b) regulating the filing of documents received by the Registrar;   
(c) prescribing the particulars to be contained in the form of  accounts under sub -section (2) of 
section 12C; 
(d) prescribing the manner in which the accounts shall be  audited under sub -section (4) of 
section 12C;  
(e) prescribing the authority before whom and the time within  which an appeal shall be 
preferred under sub -section (2) of  (g) section 12E . and the manner in which such appeal shall be 
filed;  
(f) prescribing the  duties, functions and powers of  governing body of the society under 
section 16A; 
(g) prescribing conditions for the inspection of original  documents and regulating the grant of 
copies of documents  under section 19;  
(h) prescribing the procedure for hearin g and decision of doubts  or disputes in respect of 
elections under sub -section (1) of  section 24;  
(i) prescribing the manner in which fees payable under this  Act shall be paid under section 
28; 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 25]
25 (j) prescribing the qualifications of members of society under  sub-section (6 ), of section 30:  
(k) providing for any other matter for which there is no  provision or insufficient provision 
exists in this Act and  for which provision is, in the opinion of the State  Government , necessary 
for giving effect to the purposes  of this Act.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may  be, after it is made , before the 
House of the State Legislature, while it  is in session, If the House agrees in making any modification 
in the rule or the House agrees that the rule should not be made, the rule  shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no  effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or  annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything  previously done 
under that rule. ”. 
[Vide Haryana Act 14 of 2007, s. 7]  
22. Procedure .—(1) No Court inferior to that of a Magistrate of the First Class shall try an offence 
punishable under this Act.  
(2) No Court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this Ac t except upon complaint 
made by the Registrar of Joint Stock Companies or any other person, authorized in writing by him, in this 
behalf.”  
[Vide Assam 11 of 1952, s. 3]  
Arunachal Pradesh  
After section 20, the following sections shall be inserted, namely: - 
“21. Penalties .—(1) If the President, Secretary or any other person authorised in this behalf by a 
resolution of the governing body of the society fails to comply with the provisions of section 4A, he 
shall, on conviction be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees and in case of a 
continuing breach, shall also be punishable with fine not exceeding fifty rupees for each day, during 
the period the breach continue after the first conviction for such offence.  
(2) If any person willfully mak es or causes to be made any false entry in, or any commission from 
the list required by sect
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 25]
ly mak es or causes to be made any false entry in, or any commission from 
the list required by section 4,  or in or from any statement or copy of rules or of alterations in rules 
sent to the Registrar under section 4A, he shall, on conviction, be punishable with fine which may 
extend to two thousand rupees.  
22. Procedure. —(1) No court inferior to that of a Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall try 
any offence punishable under this Act.  
Explanation. —Judicial Magistrate of the first class for the purposes of this Act means the Deputy 
Commissioner, Additional Deputy Commissioner, Assistant Commissioner and Extra Assistant 
Commissioner who has been empowered under the Assam Frontier (Adminis tration of Just) 
Regulation, 1945 ( 1 of 1945), to administer justice in the territory of Arunachal Pradesh.  
(2) No. court shall take congnizance of an offence punishable under this Act except upon 
complaint made by the Registrar or any other person, author ised in writing by him, in this behalf.”  
[Vide Arunachal Pradesh Act 6 of 1978, s. 2 and the Schedule]  
Haryana  
Amendment of section 20 of Act 21 of 1860 .—In section 20, for the words and sign, “instruments or 
design”, the words and sign “instruments or de sign, promotion of the interest or welfare of the public and 
any other object as may be notified by the Government as beneficial to the public”, shall be substituted.  
[Vide Haryana Act 23 of 1974, s. 2]  
Insertion of section 22 to 32 in Central Act  21 of 18 60.—After section 21 of the principal Act, the 
following sections shall  be added at the end, namely: — 
"22. Power of Registrar to call for information .—(1) The  Registrar may. by written order, 
require any society to furnish in  writing such information or do cument within such time, being  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 26]
26 ordinarily not less than three weeks from the date of receipt of the  order by the society, as he may 
specify in the order in connection  with the affairs of the society or any documents filed by the society  
under this Act.  
(2) On receipt by the society of an order under sub -section  (1), it shall be the duty of the 
President, Secretary or any other  person authorized in this behalf to furnish such information or  
documents.  
23. Investigations of affairs of society .—(1) Where on the information received under section 
22 or otherwise, the Registrar  is of opinion that there is apprehension that the affairs of a society  
registered under this Act are being so conducted as to defeat the  objects of the society or that the 
society or its  governing body by  whatever name called, or any office -bearer thereof in actual  effective 
control of the society is guilty of mismanaging its affairs  or of any breach of fiduciary or other like 
obligations, the Registrar  may, either himself or by any perso n authorized by him in that  behalf, 
inspect or investigate into the affairs of the society or  inspect any institution managed by the society.  
(2) It shall be the duty of every office -bearer of the society  when so required by the Registrar or 
other person a uthorised under  sub -section (1) to produce any books of account and other records of  
or relating to the society which are in his custody and to give him all  assistance in connection with 
such inspection or investigation.  
(3) The Registrar or other person authorized under sub -section  (1) may call upon and examine on 
oath any office -bearer, member or  employee of the society in relation to the affairs of the society and 
it shall be the duty of every office -bearer, member or employee, when  called upon, to a ppear before 
him for such examination.  
(4) The Registrar or other person authorized under sub -section  (1) may, if in his opinion it is 
necessary for the purpose of inspection  or 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 26]
d under sub -section  (1) may, if in his opinion it is 
necessary for the purpose of inspection  or investigation, seize any or all the records including account 
books  of the so ciety:  
Provided that any person from whose custody such records are  seized shall be entitled to make 
copies thereof in the presence of the  person seizing such records  (5) On the conclusion of the 
inspection or investigation, as  the case may be, the person,  if any, appointed by the Registrar to  
inspect or investigate shall make a report to the Registrar on the  result of his inspection or 
investigation.  
(6) The Registrar may, after such inspection or investigation,  give such directions to the society oi 
to its governing body or any  office -bearer thereof , as he may think fit. for the removal of any defects  
or irregularities within such time es may be specified and in the event  of default in taking action 
according to such directions, the Registrar  may proceed to take action under section 12E or        
section 30, as the  case may be. 
24. Dispute regarding election of office -bearers .—(1) The prescribed authority may, on a 
refence made to it by the Registra r or by at least one -fourth of the members of a society registered in 
Haryana,  meet  and decide in a summary manner any doubt or dispute in respe ct of the election or 
continuance in office of an office -bearer of such society, and may pass such orders in respect thereof 
as it deems fit:  
Provided that th e election of an office -bearer shall be set aside where the prescribed authority is 
satisfied — 
(a) that any corrupt has been committed by such office -bearer; or  
(b) that the nomination of any candidate has been improperly rejected; or  
(c) that the result o f the election insofar as it concerns to such  office -bearer has been 
materially affected by the improper  acceptance of any nomination or by the improper  reception,  
refusal or rejection of any vote or the reception of any vote  which is v
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 26]
the improper  reception,  
refusal or rejection of any vote or the reception of any vote  which is void or by any non-
compliance with the  provisions of any rules of the society.  
Explanation I. — A person shall be deemed to have committed a  corrupt practice who , directly or 
indirectly, by himself or by any other  person. – 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 27]
27 (i) induces, or attempts to induce, by fraud, in tentional  misrepresentation, coercion or threat 
of injury, any elector  to give oi to refrain from giving a vote in favour of any  candidate, or any 
person to stand or not to stand as, or to  withdraw or not to withdraw from being a candidate at the  
election;  
(ii) with a view to inducing any elector to give or to refrain  from giving a vote in favour of 
any candidate, or to inducing  any person to stand or not to stand as, or to withdraw or not  to 
withdraw from being a candidate at the election, offers  or gives any money. or valuable 
consideration, or any place  or employment, or holds out any promise of individual  advantage or 
profit to any person;  
(iii) abets (within the meaning of the Indian Penal Code) the  doing of any of the acts 
specified in clauses (i) and (ii); 
(iv) induces or attempts to induce ti candidate or elector to  believe that he, or any person in 
whom he is interested, will  become or will De rendered an object of divine displeasure  or 
spiritual censure;  
(v) canvasses on grounds of caste, community,  sect or religion;  
(vi) commits , Lich other practice as the State Government may  prescribe to be a corrupt 
practice.  
Explanation II.—A promise of individual advantage or profit to  a person includes a promise for 
the benefit of the person himself, or of  anyone in whom he is interested.  
Explanation III.— The State Government may prescribe the procedure  for hearing and decision of 
doubts or disputes in respect of such  elections and make provision in respect of any other matter 
relating  to such elections for  which insufficient provision exists in this Act or  in the rules of the 
society.   
(2) Where by an order made under sub -section (1) , an election is set aside or an office -bearer is 
held no longer entitled to continue in  office or where the Registrar is sat isfied that any election of 
office  bearers  of a society has not been held *faun the time specifi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 27]
 isfied that any election of 
office  bearers  of a society has not been held *faun the time specified in the  rules of that society, he 
may call a meeting of the gener al body of  such society for electing such office bearer or                     
office -bearers , and such  meeting shal1 be presided ov er and be conducted by the Registrar or  the 
society relating to meetings and elections shall apply  to such meeting and election with necessary 
modifications.  
(3) Where a meeting is called by the Registrar under sub -section  (2), no other meeting shall be 
called for the purpose of election by  any other authority or by any person claiming to be an office -
bearer  of the society.  
Explanat ion.—For the purposes of this section, the expression  'prescribed authority' mean, an 
officer or court authorized in this  behalf by the State Government by notification published in the  
Official Gazette . 
25. Terms of gift to be observed .—Where a society accepts a gift or  donation of money or 
property of any other kind from any person for a specific purpose, it shall not use the money or other 
property gifted or donated or any part thereof for any other purpo se except for the promotion of the 
activities of the society.  
26. Penalties. —Any society which – 
(a) fails to furnish the list of managing body or other information required to be furnished 
under section 22 or wilfully makes or causes to be made a false entry in, or any omission from, 
the list or any statement or copy of rules or of alteration in rule s or other information sent to the 
Registrar under the said section:  
(b) wilfully fails, neglects or refuses to maintain, balance and audit accounts as referred to in 
section 12C, wilfully fails to produce any books of accounts or other records as require d by           
sub-section (2) of section 23;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 28]
28 (d) wilfully fails to appear before the Registrar or other person authorised by him or 
otherwise contravenes the provisions of sub -section (3) of section 23;  
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand  rupees.  
27. Compounding of offences .—(1) The Registrar may accept from  any person against whom a 
reasonable suspicion exists that he has  committed any offence punishable under section 26 or against 
whom  a prosecution under that s ection has b een instituted, a sum of money  by way of composition 
fee for the offence which such person is  suspect" or .1ccused to have committed.  
(2) On the payment of such composition fee the suspected  person shall be discharged and no 
further proceedings shall be ta ken and  the composition shall have the effect of his acquittal.  
28. Manner of payment of fees. —Fees payable under the provisions  of this Act shall be paid in 
such  manner as may be prescribed.  
29. Mode of service of notice by Registrar. —(1) Any notice, or der or requisition meant for a 
society or for the governing body thereof to  be issued by the Registrar may be served on the Secretary 
of the  society, and service on the Secretary shall be as effectual as if the  same had been served on 
every member of the s ociety or, as the case  may be, on every member of the governing body thereof, 
unless the  Registrar otherwise directs.   
(2) The sending of such notice, order or requisition to the  Secretary of the society by registered 
post at its registered office  shall am ount to sufficient service ther eof on the society.  
30. Appointment of Administrator .—(I) Where on receipt of a  complaint from three                 
office -bearers of a society or three affected  persons or on inspection of records, the Registrar is 
satisfie d,— 
(i) that the society is working against the objectives and  ideals as per sections 1 and 20 on the 
basis of which the  society was granted certificate;   
(ii) that the society is not workin
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 28]
 on the 
basis of which the  society was granted certificate;   
(ii) that the society is not working democratically or the  elections have not taken place within 
the speci fied tune or the election have taken place fraudulently or against t he clauses of 
memorandum of association;  
(iii)  the office -bearers have been nominated against the  clauses of memorandum of 
association ; 
(iv) that the number of members  in a trustee m andal has been  purposely kept below seven, 
the Registrar may recommend  to the State Govern ment to appoint an Administrator :  
Provided that no adverse order s hall be passed unless an  opportunity of being heard has been 
given to the conceined society:  
Provid ed further that the action of the Registrar in this behalf  shall be final and no appeal shall lie 
in any court against such action.  
(2) The State Government may, by order published in the Official  Gazette, shall appoint an 
Administrator of such society who  shall not  be below the rank of Deputy Secretary for such period, 
not exceeding  six months. as may be specified in the order to manage the affairs of  the society :  
Provided that for reasons to be recorded in writing, the State  Government may, by like order , 
extend the said period for a furthe r duration of six months.  
(3) On the appointment of the Administrat ion under sub -section  (2), the governing body of the 
society shall cease to exercise any  powers and perform and discharge any functions or duties 
conferred  or imposed on it by this Act, or its memorandum of association or the  rules and regulations 
of any other law and subject to any directions  which the State Government may from time to time 
issue , all such  functions or duties shall be performed or discharged by the  Administrator.  
(4) The Administrator shall, before the expiry of the period of  his appointment, take necessary 
action to convene the general body  meeting of the society and hold election for the constitution of the  
gover
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 28]
nvene the general body  meeting of the society and hold election for the constitution of the  
governing body.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 29]
29 (5) If the Administrator is not, for reasons beyond his controllable  to convene the general body 
meeting or in spite  of such meeting  being convened the general body fails to elect the governing 
body,  the Administrator shall forthwith send a report to the State Go vernment  who may pass such 
orders as are considered necessary, either extending  the period of appointment of the Administrator 
for a further duration  or if satisfied that public interest so requires, for the dissolution of the  society.  
(6) The State Government may, if it thinks fit, appoint a  committee to advise and assist the 
Administrator appointed under  sub-section ( 1) in the exercise of the powers and performance and  
discharge of the duties and functions conferred or imposed on him  under this Act.  The members of 
the committee shall have such  quali fications as may he prescribed and shall hold office during the  
pleasure of the State Government.  
(7) Where an order of dissolution is passed under sub -section  (5), the assets of the society shall 
vest in and the liabilities shall  devolve on the State Government.  
31. indemnity. —No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings  shalt lie in any court against the 
State Government, the Registrar or  against any person appointed for inspection or investigation under  
section 23, for anything in good faith done or intended to be done  under this Act or the rules made 
thereunder.  
32. Power to make rules. —(1) The State Government may,  after previous publication, make rules 
not inconsistent with this Act for  carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the  foregoing power, the State Government 
may make rules — 
(a) prescribing the form of the register of societies and the  mode in which entries relating to 
registratio n are to be  made therein, and the mode in which such entries are to be  amended or notes 
made therein;  
(b) regulating the filing of documents re
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 29]
 such entries are to be  amended or notes 
made therein;  
(b) regulating the filing of documents received by the Registrar;  
(c) prescribing the particulars to be contained in the form of  accounts under sub -sectio n (2) of 
section I2C;  
(d) prescribing the manner in which the accounts shall be  audited under sub -section (4) of section 
12C;  
(e) prescribing the authority before whom and the time within  which an appeal shall be preferred 
under sub -section (2) of section  12E and the manner in which such appeal shall be filed;  
(f) prescribing the duties, functions and powers of  governing body of the society under section 
I6A; 
(g) prescribing conditions for the inspection to original  documents and regulating the grant of 
copies of documents  under section 19;  
(h) prescribing the procedure for hearing and decision of doubts  or disputes in respect of elections 
under sub -section (1) of  section 24;  
(i) prescribing the manner in which fees payable under this  Act shall be paid u nder section 2S;  
(j) prescribing the qualifications of members of society under  sub -section (6 ), of section 30:  
(k) providing for any other matter for which there is no  provision or insufficient provision exists 
in this Act and  for which provision is, in the opinion of the State  Government necessary for giving 
effect to the purposes of  this Act.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may  be, after it is made. before the House 
of the State Legislature, while it  is in session, If the Ho use agrees in making any modification in the  rule 
or the House agrees that the rule should not be made, the rule  shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no  effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or  
annu lment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything  previously done under that rule. ] 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SOCIETIES REGISTRATION ACT, 1860.pdf - page 29]
 ] 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE STAGE-CARRIAGES ACT, 1861.pdf - page 1]
 
1 
  
THE STAGE -CARRIAGES ACT, 1861  
_______  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
 
PREAMBLE  
SECTIONS  
1. Definition of stage -carriage.  
2. Carriages to be licensed.  
3. Power to refuse license.   
Particulars of license.  
4. Charge for and duration of license . 
5. Particulars to be painted on conspicuous part of carriage.  
6. Penalty for letting carriage without having particulars painted.  
7. Penalty for letting for hire unlicensed carriage.    
8.  Penalty for allowing carriage to be drawn by fewer animals or more  passengers, etc., to be 
 carried than provided by license.  
9. Penalty for ill -treating animals.  
10. Revocation of license.  
11. Penalty for not conforming to provisions of section 5.   
12. Penalty for misconduct on part of drivers.  
13. Penalty when recoverable from proprietor . 
 Proviso . 
14.  Issue of summons.  
15.  Adjudication of penalties.  
16.  Recovery of penalties, etc.  
17.  Offender may be apprehended and detained in custody until return of  warrant of distress.  
18. Imprisonment of offender if distress not sufficient.  
19. [Repealed .]. 
20. Jurisdiction.  
20A. Power to make rules.  
21.  Interpretation -clause.  
 “Magistrate ”. 
 Act applicable to all animals used for drawing carriages.  
22.  Extent of Act.  
23.  Power to State Government to exempt.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE STAGE-CARRIAGES ACT, 1861.pdf - page 2]
 
2 
 1[THE STAGE -CARRIAGES ACT, 1861]  
ACT NO. 16 OF 1861  
[7th July , 1861.]  
An Act for licensing and regulating Stage -Carriages.  
Preamble. —WHEREAS  it is expedient to license and to regulate stage -carriages in 2[the 
Provinces ]; It is enacted as follows: — 
1. Definition of stage -carriage. —Every carriage drawn by one or more 3horses which shall 
ordinarily be used for the purpose of conveying passe ngers for hire to or from any place in 4[the 
States ] shall, without regard to the form or construction of such carriage, be deemed to be a stage -
carriage within the meaning of this Act.  
5*   *   *   *   * 
2. Carriages to be licensed. —No carriage shall be u sed as a stage -carriage unless licensed by a 
6Magistrate or by the 7*** Commissioner of Police of a Presidency -town.  
3. Power to refuse license. —The Magistrate or 7*** Commissioner of Police to whom the 
application for a license of a stage -carriage is made  may refuse to license the same, if he shall be of 
opinion that such stage -carriage is unserviceable or is unsafe or unfit for public accommoda tion or 
use. 
Particulars of license. —If a Magistrate or  7*** Commissioner of Police as aforesaid shall grant a 
license, the license shall set forth the number thereof, the name and residence of the pro prietor of the 
stage -carriage, the place at which his head office is held, the largest number of passen gers and the 
greatest weight of luggage to be carried in or on  such carriage, the number of horses by which such 
carriage is to be draw n, and the name of the place at which such carriage is licensed.  
4. Charge for and duration of license. —8[For every such license there shall be paid by the 
proprietor of the stage -carriage the sum of five rupees or such less sum as the 9[State Government ] 
may fix, and such license shall be in force for one year from the date thereof.]  
                                                      
1. Short title given by the Indian Short Titles Act, 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE STAGE-CARRIAGES ACT, 1861.pdf - page 2]
                                              
1. Short title given by the Indian Short Titles Act, 1897 (14 of 1897).  
This Act, as amended by the Stage -Carriages Act (1861) Amendment Act, 1898 (1 of 1898), has been decla red to apply 
to all the States of India, but not so as to supersede or contravene provisions of local laws dealing with the same subject —see 
s. 22. For local laws, see the Bombay Public Conveyance Act, 1920 ( Bom. 7 of 1920), the Madras Hackney Carriage Act, 
1911 (Mad. 5 of 1911), and the Calcutta Hackney Carriage Act, 1919 (Ben. 1 of 1919), cf. also the Hackney Carriage Act, 
1879 (14 of 1879).  
It has been declared, by notification under s. 3( a) of the Schedule d Districts Act, 1874 (14 of 1874), to be in force in the 
following Scheduled Districts, namely: —  
The Districts of Hazaribagh, Lohardaga (now the Ranchi  
District, see Calcutta Gazette, 1899, Pt. I, p. 44) and Manbhum,  
and Pargana Dhalbhum and the Kolhan  in the District of  
Singh bhum    .   .    .   .   .    .   .    .     .   .    .   .   .    .   .    .     See Gazette of India  1881, Pt. I, p. 504.  
The Tarai of the Province of Agra .  .   .   .   .   .   .  .  Ditto          1876, Pt. I, p. 505.  
It has be en declared, by notification under s.3( a) of the S anthal Parganas Justice and Laws Regulation, 1899                          
(3 of 1899) , to be in force in the S anthal Parganas, see Calcutta Gazette, 1901, Pt. I, p. 301.  
The Act has been amended in Himachal  Pradesh by Himachal Pradesh Act 3 of 1974.  
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1948 , for “British India”.  
3. All expressions and provisions in this Act applied to horses, also apply to all other animals employed in dra wing stage -     
carriages, see s. 21, infra.  
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1950 , for “the Provinces” which ha d been subs. by the A.O. 1948 , for “British India”.  
5. Proviso to s. 1 which read: “Provided that this Act shall not apply to carriages not ordinarily used for journey s of a greater  
dist
<|CHUNK|>
[THE STAGE-CARRIAGES ACT, 1861.pdf - page 2]
ded that this Act shall not apply to carriages not ordinarily used for journey s of a greater  
distance than twenty miles ” rep. by Act 1 of 1898, s. 2.  
6. For definition of “Magistrate ”, see s. 21, infra . 
7. The word “Chief” rep. by Act 10 of 1914, s. 3 and the Second Schedule.  
8. Subs. by Act 1 of 1898, s. 3, for  the original paragraph.  
9. Subs. by the A.O. 1950 , for “Provincial Government” which ha d been subs. by the A.O. 1937 , for “L.G.”    
<|CHUNK|>
[THE STAGE-CARRIAGES ACT, 1861.pdf - page 3]
 
3 
 When a lice nsed stage -carriage is transferred to a new proprietor within the year, the name of such 
new proprietor shall, on application to that effect, be substituted in the license for the name of the 
former proprietor without any further payment for that year; and  every person who appears by the 
license to be the proprietor, shall be deemed to be such proprietor for all the purposes of this Act.  
5. Particulars to be painted on conspicuous part of carriage. —On any stage -carriage 
being licen sed, the proprietor there of shall cause the number of the license and all the other particulars 
of the license to be distinctly painted in the English language and character upon a conspicuous part of 
such stage -carriage.  
6. Penalty for letting carriage without having particulars painted. —The proprietor of 
any licen sed stage -carriage who shall let such stage -carriage for hire without the particulars specified 
in section 3 being painted on such carriage in the manner directed in the last preceding section, shall 
be liable to a fine  not exceeding one hu ndred rupees.  
7. Penalty for letting for hire unlicensed carriage. —Whoever lets for hire any stage -
carriage without the same being licensed as provided by this Act, shall be liable, on a first conviction, 
to a fine not exceeding one hu ndred rupees, and on any subsequent conviction, to a fine which may 
extend to five hundred rupees . 
8. Penalty for allowing carriage to be drawn by  fewer animals or more passengers, 
etc., to be car ried than provided by license. —Any proprietor, or agent of  a proprietor, or any 
driver of a licen sed stage -carriage, who knowingly permits such carriage to be drawn by a less 
number of horses, or who knowingly permits a larger number of passengers, or a greater weight of 
luggage, to be carried by such stage -carriage than shall be provided by the license, shall be liable on a 
first convic tion to a fine not exceeding one hundred rupees, and on any subsequen
<|CHUNK|>
[THE STAGE-CARRIAGES ACT, 1861.pdf - page 3]
l be liable on a 
first convic tion to a fine not exceeding one hundred rupees, and on any subsequent conviction, to a 
fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.  
In every case where such stage -carriage shal l be proved to have been drawn by a less number of 
horses, or to have carried a larger number of passengers or a greater weight of luggage, than shall be 
provided by the license, the proprietor of such carriage shall be held to have knowingly permitted 
such offence, unless he shall prove that the offence was not committed with his connivance, and that 
he had taken every reasonable precaution and had made reasonable provision to prevent the 
commission of the offence.  
9. Penalty for ill -treating animals. —Any person who shall cruelly beat, ill -treat, over -drive, 
abuse, torture or cause or procure to be cruelly beaten, ill -treated, over -driven, abused or tortured, any 
horse employed in drawing or harnessed to any stage -carriage, or who shall harness to or drive in any 
stage -carriage any horse which from sickness, age, wounds or other cause is unfit to be driven in such 
stage -carriage, shall for every such offence be liable to a fine not exceeding one hundred rupees.  
10. Revocation of license. —Any Magistrate or  1*** Commissioner of Police within the local 
limits of whose jurisdiction any stage -carriage shall ply, or who has granted the license of any stage -
carriage, may cancel the license of such stage -carriage if it shall appear to him that such stage -
carriage or any horse or any harness used with such carriage is unserviceable or unsafe or otherwise 
unfit for public accommodation or use.  
11. Penalty for not conforming to provisions of section 5 .—In any station or place in 
which a Magistrate shall reside and be, an y police -officer may, in any place within two miles of the 
office of such Magistrate, seize any stage -carriage with the horse harnessed thereto, if the full                 
particulars of the license of such s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE STAGE-CARRIAGES ACT, 1861.pdf - page 3]
 with the horse harnessed thereto, if the full                 
particulars of the license of such stage -carriage be not distinctly painted on suc h stage -carriage in the 
manner provided in section 5 of this Act . 
Such carriage with the horse harnessed thereto sh all be taken without delay by such police -officer 
before such Magistrate, who shall forthwith proceed to hear and determine the complaint of such 
police -officer; and, if thereupon any fine is imposed by such Magistrate and such fine is paid, such 
stage -carriage and horse shall be immediately released; and if such fine be not paid, such stage -
                                                      
1. The word “Chief” rep. by Act 10 of 1914, s. 3 and the Second Schedule.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE STAGE-CARRIAGES ACT, 1861.pdf - page 4]
 
4 
 carriage and horse may be detained for twenty days as  security for the payment thereof; and if the        
fine be not sooner paid, they may be sold and the proceeds applied (so far as they extend) to the 
payment of the said fine, and all costs and charges incurred on account of the detention and sale;     
and the surplus (if any), when claimed, shall be paid to the proprietor of such carriage and horse;  and 
if such surplus be not claimed within a further period of two months from such sale, the same shall be 
forfeited to the State.  
If the proceeds of such sa le do not fully pay the fine and costs and charges aforesaid, the balance 
may be recovered as hereinafter provided.  
12. Penalty for misconduct on part of drivers. —If any driver of any stage -carriage, or any other 
person having the care thereof, shall, through intoxication, neglect, or by wanton or furious driving, or 
by any other misconduct, endanger the safety of any passenger or other person, or shall injure or 
endanger the property of the proprietor of such stage -carriage or of any other person, ever y such 
person so offending shall be liable to a fine not exceeding one hundred rupees.  
13. Penalty when recoverable from proprietor. —Whenever the driver of any stage -carriage or 
the owner of any horse employed in drawing any stage -carriage shall have commi tted any offence 
against this Act for the commission whereof any penalty is by this Act imposed, other than an offence 
specified in section 8, and such driver or owner shall not be known, or being known cannot be found, 
or if the penalty cannot be recovere d from such driver or owner, the proprietor of such carriage shall 
be liable to every such penalty as if he had been the driver of such carriage or owner of such horse at 
the time when such offence was committed:  
Proviso. —Provided that if any such propriet or shall make out, to the satisfaction of the Magis trate 
before whom any complaint or information shall be heard, 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE STAGE-CARRIAGES ACT, 1861.pdf - page 4]
t, to the satisfaction of the Magis trate 
before whom any complaint or information shall be heard, by sufficient evidence, that the offence was 
committed by such driver or owner without the privity or knowledge of such pro prietor, and that  no 
profit, advantage, or benefit, either directly or indirectly, has accrued or can accrue to such proprietor 
therefrom, and that he has used his endeavour to find out such driver or owner, and has done all that 
was in his power to recover the amount of t he penalty from him, the Magistrate may discharge the 
proprietor from such penalty, and shall levy the same upon such driver or owner when found.  
14. Issue of summons. —Whenever any charge is made before any Magistrate of any offence 
under this Act on which  it is necessary to issue a summons to the proprietor of a stage -carriage, the 
Magistrate shall issue such summons directed to such proprietor or his nearest agent, and may 
transmit such summons by letter -post, which shall be deemed to be good service ther eof. 
The letter shall be registered at the post -office, and the cost of the registration shall be borne by the 
Government in the first instance, but may be charged as costs in the case.  
The summons shall allow a reasonable time, in reference to the distanc e to which the summons is 
sent, for the appearance of such pro prietor or his agent as aforesaid.  
15. Adjudication of penalties. —All penalties incurred under this Act shall be adjudged by a 
Magistrate or 1*** Commissioner of Police as aforesaid, and all ord ers made under this Act by such 
Magistrate or 1*** Commissioner of Police shall be final.  
16. Recovery of penalties, etc. —All penalties imposed under this Act, or any balance of any fine, 
costs, or charges as mentioned in section 11 of this Act, may in cas e of non -payment or non -recovery 
thereof be levied by distress and sale of the movable property of the offender by warrant under the 
hand of the Magistrate who imposed the same.  
17.
<|CHUNK|>
[THE STAGE-CARRIAGES ACT, 1861.pdf - page 4]
le property of the offender by warrant under the 
hand of the Magistrate who imposed the same.  
17. Offender may be apprehended and detained in custody until return of warran t of 
distress. —In case any such penalties shall not be forthwith paid, such Magistrate may order the 
offender to be apprehended and detained in safe custody until the return can be conveniently made to 
such warrant of distress, unless the offender shall gi ve security to the satisfaction of such Magistrate 
for his appearance at such place and time as shall be appointed for the return of the warrant of 
distress.  
                                                      
1. The word “Chief” rep. by Act 10 of 1914, s. 3 and the Second Schedule.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE STAGE-CARRIAGES ACT, 1861.pdf - page 5]
 
5 
 18. Imprisonment of offender if distress not sufficient. —If upon the return of such warrant it 
shall appear that no sufficient distress can be had whereon to levy such penalty, and the same shall not 
be forthwith paid, or in case it shall appear to the satisfaction of such Magistrate by the confession of 
the offender or otherwise that he has not suffic ient goods and chattels whereupon such penalty could 
be levied if warrant of distress were issued, such Magistrate may, by warrant  under his hand, commit 
the offender  1*** to prison, there to be imprisoned, according to the discretion of such officer, for any 
term not exceeding two calendar months when the amount of penalty shall not exceed fifty rupees, 
and for any term not exceeding four calendar months when the amount shall not exceed one hundred 
rupees, and for any term not exceeding six calendar months  in any other case, the commitment to be 
determinable in each of the cases aforesaid on payment of the amount.  
19. [Recovery of penalty and costs from European British subjects .] Rep. by the A. O. 1950.  
20. Jurisdiction. —On complaint made before any Magistr ate of any offence committed under this 
Act, it shall not be necessary to prove that the offence was committed within the local limits of such 
Magistrate or other officer.  
2[20A. Power to make rules .—(1) The 3[State Government ] may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes and objects of this Act in the territories under its 
administration or any part of the said territories.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the fo regoing power, such rules may —  
(a) prescribe forms for licenses under this Act, the sums payable for the same and the 
conditions on which they may be granted, and the cases in which they may be revoked;  
(b) provide for the inspection of stage -carriages, and of the animals employed in drawing them; 
and 
(c) regulate the number and length of the st
<|CHUNK|>
[THE STAGE-CARRIAGES ACT, 1861.pdf - page 5]
ges, and of the animals employed in drawing them; 
and 
(c) regulate the number and length of the stages for which animals may be driven in stage -
carriages, and the manner in which they shall be harnessed and yoked.  
(3) In making any rule under this section the 3[State Government ] may direct that a breach thereof 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees.]  
21. Interpretation -clause.  “Magistrate. ”—The term “Magistrate ” in this Act shall include all 
Magistrates and other persons exercising  the powers of a Magistrate:  
4*   *   *   *   * 
Act applicable to all animals used for drawing carriages. —5[All expressions and provisions 
which in this Act are applied to horses shall also apply to all other animals employed in drawing any 
carriage ordinarily used for the purpose of conveying passengers for hire to or from any place in the 
States:]  
6*   *   *   *   * 
7[22. Extent of Act. —This A ct, as amended by subsequent Acts, extends to the whole of India 
except 8[the territories which, immediately before the 1st November, 1956, were comprised in Part B 
States]; but it shall not apply to carriages ordinarily plying for hire within the limits of any 
municipality or cantonment or other place in which any law for the regulation of carriages is for the 
time being in force.  
                                                      
1. The words “provided he is not a European British subject”  omitted by the A.O. 1950.  
2. Added by Act 1 of 1898, s. 4.  
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1950 , for “Provincial Government” which ha d been subs. by the A.O. 1937 , for “L.G.”   
4. The definition of “ British India” omitted by the A.O . 1937.  
5. Subs. by Act 16 of 1876, s. 1, for the third sentence of section 21.  
6. The definitions relating to “number” and “gender” rep. by Act 10 of 1914, s. 3 and  the Second Schedule.  
7. Sections 22 and 23 added by Act 1 of 1898, s. 5. The original section 22 regarding the commencement of this Act as 
origi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE STAGE-CARRIAGES ACT, 1861.pdf - page 5]
ded by Act 1 of 1898, s. 5. The original section 22 regarding the commencement of this Act as 
originally passed had been rep. by Act 14 of 1870, s. 1 and the Schedule Part II.   
8. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956, for “Part B States”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE STAGE-CARRIAGES ACT, 1861.pdf - page 6]
 
6 
 23. Power to State Government to exempt. —The 1[State Government ] may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, exempt any carriage s or class of carriages from all or any of the provisions of 
this Act.]  
________  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950 , for “Provincial Government” which ha d been subs. by the A.O. 1937 , for “L.G.”   
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SUITS VALUATION ACT, 1887.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE SUITS VALUATION ACT, 1887  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Title . 
PART I 
SUITS  RELATING  TO LAND  
2. Extent and commencement of Part I.  
3. Power of State Government to make rules determining value of land for jurisdictional purposes.  
4. Valuation of relief in certain suits relating to land not to exceed the value of the land.  
5. Making and enforcement of rules.  
6. Repeal of section 14 of the Madras Civil Courts Act, 1873.  
PART II 
OTHER SUITS  
7. Extent and commencement of Part II.  
8. Court -fee value and jurisdictional value to be the same in certain suits.  
9. Determination of value of certain suits by High Court.  
10. [Repealed .]. 
PART III 
SUPPLEMENTAL  PROVISIONS   
11. Procedure where objection is taken on appeal or revision that a suit or appeal was not prope rly 
valued for jurisdictional purposes.  
12. Proceedings pending at commencement of Part I or Part II.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SUITS VALUATION ACT, 1887.pdf - page 2]
2 
 THE SUITS VALUATION ACT, 1887  
ACT NO. 7 OF 18871 
[11th February , 1887 .] 
An Act to prescribe the mode of valuing certain suits for the purpose of 
determining the jurisdiction of Courts with respect thereto.  
WHEREAS  it is expedient to prescribe the mode of valuing certain suits for the purpose of determining 
the jurisdiction of Courts with respect thereto; I t is hereby enacted as follows: — 
1. Title.—This Act may be called the Suits Valuation Act, 1887 2[and it extends3 to the 
whole of India except the territories which, immediately before the 1st November, 1956, 
were comprised in Part B States.]  
PART I 
SUITS RELATING TO  LAND 
2. Extent and commencement of Part I.—This Part shall extend to such local areas, and 
come into force therein on such dates as the 4[State Government], by notification in the Official 
Gazette , directs.5  
3. Power for State Government to make rules determining  value of land for 
jurisdictional purposes. —(1) The State Government may 6*** make rules for determining 
the value of land for purposes of jurisdiction in the suits mentioned in the Court -fees                      
Act, 1870 (7 of 1870), section 7, paragrap hs v and vi, and paragraph x, clause ( d). 
(2) The rules may determine the value of any class of land, or of any interest in land, in the 
whole or any part of a local area, and may prescribe different values for different places within 
the same local area.  
4. Valuation of relief in certain suits relating to land not to exceed the value of the 
land.—Where a suit mentioned in the Court -fees Act, 1870 (7 of 1870), section 7, paragraph 
iv, or Schedule II, article 17, relates to land or an interest in land of whi ch the value has 
been determined by rules under the last foregoing section, the amount at which for purposes 
of jurisdiction the relief sought in the suit is valued shall not exceed the value of the land or 
interest as determined by those rules.  
5. Making and enforcement of rules. —(1) The 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SUITS VALUATION ACT, 1887.pdf - page 2]
 the land or 
interest as determined by those rules.  
5. Making and enforcement of rules. —(1) The State Government shall, before making rules under 
section 3, consult the High Court with respect thereto.  
(2) A rule under that section shall not take effect till the expiration of one month after 
the rule has been publish ed in the Official Gazette.  
6. Repeal of section 14 of the Madras Civil Courts Act, 1873. —On and from the date 
on which rules under section 3 take effect in any part of the territories under the 
administration of the Governor of Fort Saint George in Council to which the Madras Civil 
                                                      
1. This Act has been amended in the Punjab by Punjab Acts 1 of 1938 and 13 of 1942, in U. P. by U. P. Act 7 of 1939, 
in Maharashtra by Maharashtra Act 4 of 1960 and 9 of 1970 and in Himachal Pradesh by H.P. Act 30 of 1969.  
The Act has been ext ended to the Union territory of Manipur from 1 -1-1957 vide Act 68 of 1956, to the whole of 
Madhya Pradesh by M.P. Act 23 of 1958 (when notified), to the transferred territory of Punjab by Punjab Act 43 of 
1960, to Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and the First Schedule  (w.e.f. 1 -7-1965), to the whole of 
the Union territory of Lakshadweep by Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 and  the Schedule  (w.e.f. 1 -10-1967) and to the Union 
territory of Pondicherry by Act 26 of 1968, s. 3 and Sch.  
The Act has been repeal ed in its application to Bellary District by Mysore Act 14 of 1955, to Andhra by Andhra Act 7 of 
1956, to Bombay area and Coorg district of Mysore by Mysore Act 16 of 1958 and to Rajasthan by Rajasthan Act 3 of 1958.  
2. Added by the Adaptat ion of Laws (No.  2) Order, 1956.  
3. Extended to the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir and Union territory of Ladakh by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and Fifth 
Schedule (w.e.f. 31 -10-2019).  
4. Subs.  by the Adaption of Laws (No. 2) order , 1956 , for “Government of a Part A State or a Part C State ”. 
5. Part 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SUITS VALUATION ACT, 1887.pdf - page 2]
tion of Laws (No. 2) order , 1956 , for “Government of a Part A State or a Part C State ”. 
5. Part I of the Act has, under s. 2, been declared to extend to the Punjab, and to come into force therein on the 1st day of                    
March, 1889, see Gazette of India, 1889, Pt.  I, p. 107.  
6. The wor ds “subject to the control of the G. G. in C.” rep. by the A.O. 1937 . 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SUITS VALUATION ACT, 1887.pdf - page 3]
3 
 Courts Act , 1873, (3 of 1873),  extends, section 14 of that Act  shall be repealed as regards 
that part of those territories.  
PART II  
OTHER  SUITS 
7. Extent and commencement of Part II. —This Part 1*** shall come into force on the first day of 
July, 1887.  
8. Court -fee value and jurisdictional value to be the same in cer tain suits. —Where in 
suits other than those referred to in the Co urt-fees Act, 1870 (7 of 1870),                            
section 7, paragraphs v, vi and ix, and paragraph x, clause (d), court -fees are payable ad 
valorem under the Court -fees Act, 1870, the value as determinable for the computation of 
court -fees and the value for purposes of jurisdiction shall be the same.  
9. Determination of value of certain suits by High Court. —When the subject -matter of 
suits of any class, other than suits mentioned in  the Court -fees Act, 1870 (7 of 1870),   
section 7, paragraphs v and vi, and paragraph x, clause (d), is such that in the opinion of the 
High Court it does not admit of being satisfactorily valued, the High Court may, with the 
previous sanction of the State Government, direct that suits of that class shall, for the 
purposes of  the Court -fees Act, 1870, and of this Act and any other enactment for the time 
being in force, be treated as if their subject -matter were of such value as the High Court 
thinks fi t to specify in this behalf.  
10. [Repeal of s. 32 of the Punjab Courts Act, 1884 (18 of 1884).] Rep. by the Repealing 
and Amending Act, 1891 (12 of 1891), s. 2 and the First Schedule . 
PART III  
SUPPLEMENTAL  PROVISIONS  
11. Procedure where objection is taken on appeal or revision that a suit or appeal 
was not properly valued for jurisdictional purposes. —(1) Notwithstanding anything                     
in 2section 578 of the Code of Civil Procedure (14 of 1882), an objection that by reason of 
the over -valuation or under -valuation of a suit or appeal a Court of first instance or lower 
Appellate Cour
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SUITS VALUATION ACT, 1887.pdf - page 3]
valuation or under -valuation of a suit or appeal a Court of first instance or lower 
Appellate Court which had not jurisdiction with respect to the suit or appeal exercised 
jurisdiction with respect thereto shall not be entertained by an Appellate Court unless —  
(a) the objection was taken in the Court of first instance at or before the 
hearing at which issues were first framed and recorded, or in the lower Appellate 
Court in the memorandum of appeal to that Court, or  
(b) the Appellate Court is satisfied, for reasons to be recorded by it in writing, that 
the suit or appeal was over -valued or under -valued, an t hat the over -valuation or                    
under -valuation thereof has prejudicially affected the disposal of the s uit or appeal on its 
merits.  
(2) If the objection was taken in the manner mentioned in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1), 
but the Appellate Court is not satisfied as to both the matters mentioned in clause ( b) of that 
sub-section and has before it the materia ls necessary for the determination of the other 
grounds of  appeal to itself, it shall dispose of the appeal as if there had been no defect of jurisdiction in 
the Court of first instance or lower Appellate Court.  
(3) If the objection was taken in that manne r and the Appellate Court is satisfied as to both 
those matters and has not those materials before it, it shall proceed to deal with the appeal under 
the rules applicable to the Court with respect to the hearing of appeals; but if it remands the suit or 
appeal, or frames and refers issues for trial, or requires additional evidence to be taken, it shall 
direct its order to a Court competent to entertain the suit or appeal.  
                                                      
1.  The words "extends to the whole of India except Part B States and" omitted by the Adaptation of Laws   
(No. 2) Order, 1956.  
2.  See now s. 99 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act  5 of 1908).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SUITS VALUATION ACT, 1887.pdf - page 3]
ee now s. 99 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act  5 of 1908).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE SUITS VALUATION ACT, 1887.pdf - page 4]
4 
 (4) The provisions of this section with respect to an Appellate Court shall, so far as  they can 
be made applicable, apply to a Court exercising  revisional jurisdiction under 1section 622 of the 
Code of Civil Procedure (14 of 1882) or other enactment for the time being in force.  
(5) This section 2*** shall come into force on the first day of  July, 1887.  
12. Proceedings pending at commencement of Part I or Part II. —Nothing in Part I or Part II shall 
be construed to affect the jurisdiction of any Court —  
(a) with respect to any suit instituted before rules under Part I applicable to the 
valuati on of the suit take effect, or Part II has come into force, as the case may be, or  
(b) with respect to any appeal arising out of any such suit.  
___________  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
1.  See now  s. 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908).  
2. The words "extends to the whole of India except Part B States and" omitted by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) 
Order, 1956.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TOBACCO DUTY (TOWN OF BOMBAY) ACT, 1857.pdf - page 1]
 
1 
 THE TOBACCO   DUTY (TOWN OF BOMBAY) ACT, 1857  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
 
SECTIONS.  
1.   Laws Repealed.  
2.   Municipal Duty on Tobacco intended for consumption in Bombay.  
3.   Municipal  when payable.  
4.   Duty if not paid on importation, to be  paid on removal from warehouse for consumption.  
      Remission of Mun icipal Duty on re -exportation.  
5.   Bombay a warehousing port for Tobacco.  
6.   Power for collection and enforcing payment of the Municipal Duty.  
7.   Tobacco not to be imported otherwi se than by Sea. Landing places to be prescribed.  
8.   Exemption from Duty.  
9.   Permit necessary for removal of Tobacco. Proviso.  
10.  No Permit for removal from warehouse of less than a bale.  Proviso.  
11.  License for retail sale of Tobacco.  
12.  What to  be deemed a retail sale.  
13.  Retail sale to be only at the place mentioned in the license. Name of licensed dealer to be          
 affixed to shop.  
14.  Monthly returns of stock to be made by retail dealers.  
15.  Retail dealer to made entry in a book, of  weight, &c., of all  Tobacco received.  Inspection of      
book.  
16.  Search -warrant.  
17.  Power to arrest and detain.  To search vehicles,  &c., 
18.  Confiscation of Tobacco illegally imported, removed, & e.  Mitigation of penalty.  
19.   Penalty for illegal  importation, removal, sale, or possession. Revocation of license.  
20.   Levy of fines, adjudication,  and sale of confiscations.  
21.   Interpretation.  
 
SCHEDULE A.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TOBACCO DUTY (TOWN OF BOMBAY) ACT, 1857.pdf - page 2]
 
2 
 THE TOBACCO DUTY (TOWN OF B OMBAY) ACT, 1857.  
_________  
ACT NO. 4 OF 1857.  
_________  
 
 
   PASSED BY THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL OF INDIA.  
 
            (Received the assent of the Governor General on the 9th of February 1857.)  
 
AN ACT to amend the law relating to the duties payable on Tobacco, and the retail sale and warehousing 
thereof in the Town  of Bombay.  
Preamble. —  WHEREAS it is expedient to amend the Law relating to the duties payable on Tobacco 
and the retail sale and warehousing of that article in the Town of Bombay: It is hereby Preamble. enacted 
as follows  : — 
I. Laws repealed . —  Chapter s V, VI, VII and VIII of Regulation XXI. 1827 of the Bombay Code, and 
Act XXIV of 1850, are hereby repealed, but not so as to revive any other Regulation or Act thereby repealed.  
II. Municipal Duty on Tobacco intended for consumption in Bombay . — All Tobacco (except such 
small quantities as are hereinafter men tioned) imported from any place into the Town of Bombay and 
intended  for consumption therein shall be liable to a duty of seven Rupees and eight annas per maund of 
forty seers of eighty tolas  to the seer, which duty is hereinafter called the Municipal Duty; and such duty 
shall be leviable in addition to any Customs Duty prescribed by Law.  
III. Municipal Duty  when payable.  —The said Municipal Duty may be paid at the option of the 
importer, eith er on the importation of the Tobacco, or after it has been warehoused as hereinafter provided.  
IV. Duty if not paid on importation, to be paid on removal from warehouse for consumption.  
Remission of Municipal Duty on re -exportation. — If the said Municipa l Duty is not paid  on importation, 
the Tobacco shall be warehoused in a public of  licensed warehouse within the meaning of  Act XXV of 
1836; and the importer shall pay such duty on the said Tobacco on its removal from the warehouse for 
consumption in the said Town. When Tobacco so warehoused is re -exported to any place bey
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TOBACCO DUTY (TOWN OF BOMBAY) ACT, 1857.pdf - page 2]
house for 
consumption in the said Town. When Tobacco so warehoused is re -exported to any place beyond the limits 
of the said Town, the whole of the said Municipal Duty shall be  remitted.  
V. Bombay a warehousing port for Tobacco . — The Port of Bombay shall, after the passing of this 
Act, be held  to be a warehousing port within the meaning of Act. XXV of 1836, so far as regards the 
warehousing of Tobacco; an d the provisions of the said Act, so far as the same are applicable, shall be 
applied to the warehousing of Tobacco in the said Town. The Import Duty in the said Act mentioned shall, 
as to Tobacco, include the Municipal Duty leviable under this Act.  
VI. Powers for collection and enforcing payment of the Municipal Duty . —The Commissioner of 
Customs, Salt, and Opium, and Officers of Customs, shall  have all the same powers and authorities  for 
collecting and enforcing payment of the said Munici pal Duty  in addit ion to the powers and authorities 
specified  in this Act, as they now have or shall have in respect of duties of Customs.   
VII. Tobacco not to be imported otherwise than by Sea.  Landing places to be prescribed . —It 
shall not be lawful, without the permission of the Commissioner  of Customs, Salt, and Opium, or other 
Officer empowered by Government  to grant  such permission, to bring any Tobacco or any preparation 
thereof into Bombay otherwise than by sea, nor to land the same at any other landing plac es than  such as 
may from time to time be prescribed by the Government of Bombay.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TOBACCO DUTY (TOWN OF BOMBAY) ACT, 1857.pdf - page 3]
 
3 
 VIII. Exemption from Duty.  —The foregoing provisions of this Act shall not be applicable to such 
small quantities of Tobacco (not exceeding in weight four seers of eighty tola s to the seer) as are intended 
for the pri vate consumption of the importer.  
IX.  Permit necessary for removal of Tobacco.  Proviso . — It shall not be lawful to remove any 
Tobacco from one place to another within the said Town, not to carry or convey the sa me on any  
thoroughfare in the said Town, not to carry the same in any vessel or boat of less than forty candies burthen 
in any of the creeks or  waters adjacent to the said Town, without a Permit from the Commissioner of 
Customs Salt and Opium, which Permi t shall be in the form of Schedule A to this Act annexed, or to the 
like effect :any such Permit shall be in force only between sunrise and sunset of the day for which it is 
granted.  Provided always, that it shall be lawful to convey without a Permit any Tobacco so far as may be 
necessary for the lawful importation thereof according to the provisions of this Act, and also small quantities     
of Tobacco, not exceeding in weight four seers of eighty tolas to the ser, for personal or domestic use.  
X.   No Pe rmit for removal from warehouse of less than a bale.  Proviso.  —No Permit shall be 
granted for the removal from warehouse of any quantity of Tobacco less than an entire bale or package.  
Provided that, when Tobacco is to be removed for  con sumption in the said Town, the  Commissioner of 
Customs, salt and Opium may give permission to open any bale or package previous to removal, and to set 
aside such portion thereof as may be refuse or waste ; and the said refuse or waste may be re -exported, 
under the rules for the re -export of Tobacco, at any time within one month from the date of such permission, 
or, if it be not so re -exported, may be destroyed by order of the Commissioner.  
XI.  License for retail sale of Tobac co. —It shall not be lawful fo r  any
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TOBACCO DUTY (TOWN OF BOMBAY) ACT, 1857.pdf - page 3]
r of the Commissioner.  
XI.  License for retail sale of Tobac co. —It shall not be lawful fo r  any person to sell or offer for sale 
by retail any Tobacco in the said town without a license from the Commissioner of Customs, Salt and 
Opium or other Officer duly empowered by Government in that behalf, which license shall be in force for 
a period of twelve Calendar months from the date thereof, unless the person to  whom the license is granted 
shall be deprived thereof u nder the provisions of  this  Act.  A fee of one  Rupee shall be paid for every such 
license.  
XII.  What to be deems retail sale. —Any sale of Tobacco not exceeding in weight fourteen seers of 
eighty tolas to the seer shall be deemed to be a retail sale within the meaning of this Act.  
XIII.  Retail sale to be only at the place mentioned in the license.  Nam e of licensed dealer to be 
affixed to shop.  — It shall not be lawful for any licensed  retail dealer in Tobacco to carry on the retail sale 
of the same, or to keep any store of the same, except at  such shop or other premises as may be specified in  
his license ; and the  name of every retail dealer in Tobacco, together with the number of his license, shall 
be written or  painted in English, Guzerati, and  Maharatti, in plain and legible characters of not less than 
one inch in  height, on a board to be affixed in a conspicuous manner in the front of the shop or premises 
where such retail sale is carried on.  
XIV. Monthly returns of stock to be made by retail dealers.  — Every retail dealer in Tobacco shall, 
on or before the tenth  day a  of each month, make to the Commissioner of Customs, Sal t, and Opium, or 
other Officers as aforesaid, a separate  return for each shop or place of sale for which he  holds a  license, 
showing the quantity of Tobacco on hand therein at the begi nning  of the preceding month, the quantity 
received during such month, and the persons from whom, and the dates on which, he received it, and the 
stoc
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TOBACCO DUTY (TOWN OF BOMBAY) ACT, 1857.pdf - page 3]
 during such month, and the persons from whom, and the dates on which, he received it, and the 
stock remaining at the close of such month; and any retail dealer who r efuses  or neglects to make such 
return, or makes a false return, shall be liable be deprived of his license by  the said Commissioner or other 
Officer aforesaid, and to pay a fine not exceeding two hundred Rupees.  
XV. Retail dealer to make entry in a book, of weight, &c., of all Tobacco received.  Inspection of 
book.  —Every retail dealer in Tobacco shall, on the sa me d ay on which he shall receive any Tobacco into 
any such shop or place of sale, enter  in a book to be kept for that purpose, the weight of such Tobacco, the 
day on which he  receives the same, and the name of the person  from whom, and the place from which, he 
receives it ; and such book shall be open to the inspection of the Commissioner of Customs, Salt, and 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TOBACCO DUTY (TOWN OF BOMBAY) ACT, 1857.pdf - page 4]
 
4 
 Opium, or  other Officer as aforesaid, o r of any person authorized  by the Commissioner or such Officer  to 
inspect  the same; and the Commis sioner or other Off icer or person as afore said inspecting the said book 
may make any minute therein , or any extract therefrom, which he shall think fit ;  and any retai l dealer who 
neglec ts or refuses to comply with the provisio ns of this Section, shall for every offence be liable to be 
deprived of his license by the said Commissi oner or other Officer as  aforesaid, and to pay a fine not  
exceeding two hundred Rupees.  
XVI.  Search -warrant.  —The Commissioner of Customs, Salt, and Opium , or other Officer as 
aforesaid, may issue a warrant under his hand and seal to any public Officer, commanding him to enter and 
search between sunrise and sunset any building or place to be specified in the warrant in which Tobacco 
may be deposited under t he provisions of this Act, or in which the Commissioner or other  Officers aforesaid 
has been credibly in formed, which information shall be taken down in writing that Tobacco is deposited 
contrary to the provisions of this Act, and to seize and take away f rom thence any Tobacco or other articles 
subject to confiscation under this Act.  
XVII. Power to arrest and detain.  To search vehicles, &c. —The Commissioner of Customs, Salt, 
and Opium, or other Officer as aforesaid, or any public Officer authorized by th e Commissioner or such 
Officer, may arrest and detain any person carrying or having charge of any Tobacco liable to confiscation 
under this Act, and may detain and search any vessel or package, and any boat or vehicle, containing or 
conveying, or supposed to contain or convey, any such Tobacco.  
XVIII. Confiscation of Tobacco illegally imported, removed, &c. Mitigation of penalty.  —All 
Tobacco imported into the said Town or removed from one place to another or kept within the said Town , 
or found in the possession of any person in the said Town sellin
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TOBACCO DUTY (TOWN OF BOMBAY) ACT, 1857.pdf - page 4]
her or kept within the said Town , 
or found in the possession of any person in the said Town selling or offering any portion thereof for sale, 
contrary to the provisions of this Act, and every vessel in which such Tobacco is contained, and every 
vehicle, boat, or animal employed with the consent and knowledge of the owner or his servant in conveying 
the same—shall be liable to confiscation. Provided always, that it shall be lawful for the adjudicating Officer 
to mitigate the penalty of confiscation herein provided, by commuting the same to  the payment of any fine 
not exceeding the value of the goods liable to confiscation; and every such fine may be enforced, if 
necessary, by the sale of the goods liable to confiscation.  
XIX.  Penalty for illegal importation, removal, sale, or possession. R evocation of license. —Any 
person, who shall illegally import, remove, or sell in the said Town, any Tobacco, or who shall knowingly 
have in his possession any Tobacco subject to confiscation under this Act, shall be liable to a fine not 
exceeding ten time s the value of such Tobacco; and if the offend er is a licensed retail dealer,  he shall be 
liable to be deprived of his license by the Commissioner of Customs, Salt, and Opium, or othe r Officer as 
aforesaid.  
XX. Levy of fines and adjudication and sale of co nfiscations.  —All confiscations and fines under 
this Act may be adjudicate and levied by any Magistrate of Police for the Town of Bombay. Goods adjudged 
liable to confiscation shall b e sold under warrant of the Magistrate.  
XXI. Interpretation.  —The following words and expressions in this Act shall have the  meanings 
hereby assigned to them, unless there be something in the context repugnant to such   construction:  — 
The words “Town of Bombay ” shall include all places within the Islands of Bombay and C olaba.  
Words importing the singular number shall include the plural number, and words importing the plural 
number shall include the singular nu
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TOBACCO DUTY (TOWN OF BOMBAY) ACT, 1857.pdf - page 4]
hall include the plural number, and words importing the plural 
number shall include the singular number . 
Words importing the masculine gender shall include female s. 
 
      __________      
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TOBACCO DUTY (TOWN OF BOMBAY) ACT, 1857.pdf - page 5]
 
5 
 SCHEDULE A.  
 
      Form of Permit.  
No. 
 
A. B. has  been permitted to remove from (Custom House or licensed warehouse or shop No.  situated 
in Kabadavie street to warehouse or shop No.    in Bazar street)  the under -mentioned quantity of Tobacco 
between sunrise and sunset on th e          day of                                                             in the year.  
 
         (Signed)      ---------------  
 
       Commissioner of Customs, Salt, and Opium.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRADE UNIONS ACT, 1926.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE TRADE UNIONS ACT, 1926  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
CHAPTER  I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
REGISTRATION OF TRADE  UNIONS  
3. Appointment of Registrars.  
4. Mode of registration.  
5. Application for registration.  
6. Provisions to be contained in the rules of a Trade Union.  
7. Power to call for further particulars and to require alteration of name.  
8. Registration.  
9. Certificate of registration.  
9A. Minimum requirement about membership of a Trade Union.  
10. Cancellation of registration.  
11. Appeal.  
12. Registered office.  
13. Incorporation of registered Trade Unions.  
14. Certain Acts not to apply to registered Trade Unions.  
CHAPTER III  
RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES OF REGISTERED  TRADE UNIONS  
15. Objects on which general funds may  be spent.  
16. Constitution of a separate fund for political purposes.  
17. Criminal conspiracy in trade disputes.  
18. Immunity from civil suit in certain cases.  
19. Enforceability of agreements.  
20. Right to inspect books of Trade Union.  
21. Rights of minors to membership of Trad e Unions.  
21A. Disqualifications of office -bearers of Trade Unions.  
22. Proportion of office -bearers to be connected with the industry.  
23. Change of name.  
24. Amalgamation of Trade Unions.  
25. Notice of change of name or amalgamation.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRADE UNIONS ACT, 1926.pdf - page 2]
2 
 SECTIONS  
26. Effects of change of name and of amalgamation.  
27. Dissolution.  
28. Returns.  
CHAPTER IV  
REGULATIONS  
29. Power to make regulations.  
30. Publication of regulations.  
CHAPTER V  
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE  
31. Failure to submit returns.  
32. Supplying false information regarding Trade Unions.  
33. Cognizance of offences.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRADE UNIONS ACT, 1926.pdf - page 3]
3 
 THE TRADE UNIONS ACT, 1926  
ACT NO. 16 OF 19261 
[25th March, 1926 .] 
An Act to provide for the registration of Trade Unions and in certain respects to 
define the law relating to registered Trade Unions 2***. 
WHEREAS  it is expedient to provide for the registration of Trade Unions and in certain respects to 
define the law rel ating to registered Trade Unions 2***; It is hereby enacted as follows: —  
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the 3*** Trade Unions 
Act, 1926.  
4[(2) It extends to the whole of India 5***.] 
(3) It shall come into force on such date6 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, 7[“the appropriate Government ” means, in relation to Trade Unions 
whose objects are not confined to one State, the Central Government, and in relation to other Trade 
Unions, the State Government, and] unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context, —  
(a) “executive ” means the body, by whatever name called, to which the management of the 
affairs of a Trade Union is entrusted;  
(b) “8[office -bearer] ”, in the case of a Trade Union, includes any member of the executive 
thereof, but does not include an auditor;  
(c) “prescr ibed ” means prescribed by regulations made under this Act;  
(d) “registered office ” means that office of a Trade Union which is registered under this Act as 
the head office thereof;  
(e) “registered Trade Union ” means a Trade  Union registered under this Act;  
9[(f) “Registrar ” means —  
(i) a Registrar of Trade Unions appointed by the appropriate Government under section 3, 
and includes any Additional or Deputy Registrar of Trade Unions; and  
(ii) in relation to any Trade Union, t he Registrar appointed for the State in which 
the head or registered office, as the case may be, of the Trade Union is situated;]  
                                                      
1. This Act has b
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRADE UNIONS ACT, 1926.pdf - page 3]
Trade Union is situated;]  
                                                      
1. This Act has been extended to Goa, Daman and  Diu by Reg. 12 of 1962; to Pondicherry by Reg. 7 of 1963 (w.e.f. 1 -101963) 
and to Lakshadweep by Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 and Sch.  
The Act has been amended in its application to Maharashtra by Maharashtra Act 3 of 1968 and to Madhya Pradesh by Madhya 
Pradesh  Acts 28 of 1960 and 16 of 1968 . 
2. The words “in the Provinces of India ” omitted by Act 42 of 1960, s. 2.  
3. The word “Indian ” omitted by Act  38 of 1964, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1965).  
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for sub -section ( 2). 
5.The words “except the State  of Jammu and Kashmir ” omitted by Act 51 of 1970, s. 2 and the Sch.                 
(w.e.f. 1 -9-1971).  
6. 1st June, 1927, sec Gazette of India, 1927, Pt. I, p. 467.  
7. Ins. by the A.O. 1937.  
8. Subs. by Act 38 of 1964, s. 2, for “officer ” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1965) . 
9. Subs. by Act 42 of 1960, s. 3, for cl. ( f). 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRADE UNIONS ACT, 1926.pdf - page 4]
4 
 (g) “trade dispute ” means any dispute between employers and workmen or between 
workmen and workmen, or between employers and employers which is connected with the 
employment or non -employment, or the terms of employment or the conditions of labour, of 
any person, and “workme n” means all persons employed in trade or industry whether or not 
in the employment of the employer with whom the trade dispute arises; and  
(h) “Trade Union ” means any combination, whether temporary or permanent, formed 
primarily for the purpose of regulat ing the relations between workmen and employers or between 
workmen and workmen, or between employers and employers, or for imposing restrictive 
conditions on the conduct of any trade or business, and includes any federation of two or more 
Trade Unions:  
Provided that this Act shall not affect — 
(i) any agreement between partners as to their own business;  
(ii) any agreement between an employer and those employed by him as to such 
employment; or  
(iii) any agreement in consideration of the sale of the goodwill of a business or of 
instruction in any profession, trade or handicraft.  
CHAPTER II  
REGISTRATION OF TRADE UNIONS  
3. Appointment of Registrars .—1[(1)]  2[The appropriate Government] shall appoint a person to be 
the Registrar of Trade Unions for 3[each State].  
4[(2) The approp riate Government may appoint as many Additional and Deputy Registrars of 
Trade Unions as it thinks fit for the purpose of exercising and discharging, under the 
superintendence and direction of the Registrar, such powers and function s of the Registrar under 
this Act as it may, by order, specify and define the local limits within which any such Additional or 
Deputy Registrar shall exercise and discharge the po wers and functions so specified. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of any order u nder sub -section ( 2), where an Additional or Deputy 
Registrar exercises and discharges the powers and functions of a Registrar in an area within 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRADE UNIONS ACT, 1926.pdf - page 4]
eputy 
Registrar exercises and discharges the powers and functions of a Registrar in an area within which the 
registered office of a Trade Union is situated, the Additional or Deputy Registrar shall be deemed to  be 
the Registrar in relation to the Trade Union for the purposes of this Act.]  
4. Mode of registration .—5[(1)] Any seven or more members of a Trade Union may, by 
subscribing their names to the rules of the Trade Union and by otherwise complying with the 
provisions of this Act with respect to registration, apply for registration of the Trade Union under 
this Act.  
6[Provided that no Trade Union of workmen shall be register ed unless at least ten per cent.  or one hundred of 
the workmen, whichever is less, eng aged or employed in the establishment or industry with which it is connected 
are the members of such Trade Union on the date of making of application for registration:  
Provided further that no Trade Union of workmen shall be registered unless it has on the  date of making 
application not less than seven persons as its members, who are workmen engaged or employed in the 
establishment or industry with which it is connected.]  
7[(2) Where an application has been made under sub -section ( 1) for the registration of  a Trade 
Union, such application shall not be deemed to have become invalid merely by reason of the fact 
                                                      
1. Section 3 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 42 of 1960, s. 4.   
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “Each L.G. ”. 
3. Subs., ibid., for “the Province ”. 
4. Ins. by Act 42 of 1960, s. 4.  
5. Section  4 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by s. 5, ibid. 
6. The Proviso s ins. by Act 31 of 2001, s. 2 (w.e.f. 9 -1-2002).  
7. Ins. by  Act 42 of 1960, s. 5. 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRADE UNIONS ACT, 1926.pdf - page 5]
5 
 that, at any time after the date of the application, but before the registration of the Trade Union, 
some of the applicants, but not exceeding half of the total number of persons who made the 
application, have ceased to be members of the Trade Union or have given notice in writing to the 
Registrar dissociating themselves from the applications.]  
5. Application for registration .—(1) Every application for registration of a Trade Union 
shall be made to the Registrar, and shall be accompanied by a copy of the rules of the Trade 
Union and a statement of the following particular ’s, namely: — 
(a) the names, occupations and addresses of the members making the application;  
1[(aa) in the case of a Trade Union of workmen, the names, occupations and addresses of the 
place of work of the members of the Trade Union making the application;]  
(b) the name of the Trade Union and the address of its head office; and  
(c) the titles, names, ages, addresses and occupations of the 2[office -bearers] of the Trade 
Union.  
(2) Where a Trade Union has been in existence for more than one year before the making of 
an application for its registration, there shall be delivered to the R egistrar, together with the 
application, a general statement of the assets and liabilities of the Trade Union prepared in 
such form and containing such particulars as may be prescribed.  
6. Provisions to be contained in the rules of a Trade Union. —A Trade U nion shall not 
be entitled to registration under this Act, unless the executive thereof is constituted in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act, and the rules thereof provide for the following 
matters, namely: —  
(a) the name of the Trade Union;  
(b) the whole of the objects for which the Trade Union has been established;  
(c) the whole of the purposes for which the general funds of the Trade Union shall be 
applicable, all of which purposes shall be purposes to which such funds are lawfully 
applicable u nder this Act;  
(d)
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRADE UNIONS ACT, 1926.pdf - page 5]
which purposes shall be purposes to which such funds are lawfully 
applicable u nder this Act;  
(d) the maintenance of a list of the members of the Trade Union and adequate facilities for the 
inspection thereof by the 2[office -bearers] and members of the Trade Union;  
(e) the admission of ordinary members who shall be persons actually e ngaged or 
employed in an industry with which the Trade Union is connected, and also the admission of 
the number of honorary or temporary members as 2[office -bearers] required under section 22 
to form the executive of the Trade Union;  
3[(ee) the payment of a minimum subscription by members of the Trade Union which shall not 
be less than — 
(i) one rupee per annum for rural workers;  
(ii) three rupees per annum for workers in other unorganised sectors; and  
(iii) twelve rupees per annum for workers  in any other case;] 
(f) the conditions under which any member shall be entitled to any benefit assured by 
the rules and under which any fine or forfeiture may be imposed on the members;  
(g) the manner in which the rules shall be amended, varied or rescind ed; 
(h) the manner in which the members of the executive and the other 1[office -bearers] of the 
Trade Union shall be 2[elected ] and removed;  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 31 of 2001, s. 3 (w.e.f. 9 -1-2002).  
2. Subs. by Act 38 of 1964, s. 2, for “officers ” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1965).  
3. Subs.  by Act 31 of 2001, s. 4 (w.e.f. 9 -1-2002) . 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRADE UNIONS ACT, 1926.pdf - page 6]
6 
 3[(hh) the duration of period being not more than three years, for which the members of the executive 
and other office -bearers of the Trade Union shall be elected;]  
(i) the safe custody of the funds of the Trade Union, an annual audit, in such manner as 
may be prescribed, of the accounts thereof, and adequate facilities for the inspection of the 
account books by the  1[office -bearers] and members of the Trade Union; and  
(j) the manner in which the Trade Union may be dissolved.  
7. Power to call for further particulars and to require alteration of name .—(1) The 
Registrar may call for further information for the purpose of satisfying himself that any application 
complies with the provisions of section 5, or that the Trade Union is entitled to registration under 
section 6, and may refuse to register the Trade U nion until such information is supplied.  
(2) If the name under which a Trade Union is proposed to be registered is identical with that 
by which any other existing Trade Union has been registered or, in the opinion of the Registrar, 
so nearly resembles such  name as to be likely to deceive the public or the members of either 
Trade Union, the Registrar shall require the persons applying for registration to alter the name of 
the Trade Union stated in the application, and shall refuse to register the Union until  such 
alteration has been made.  
8. Registration .—The Registrar, on being satisfied that the Trade Union has complied with all the 
requirements of this Act in regard to  registration, shall register the Trade Union by entering in a 
register, to be maintained in such form as may be prescribed, the particulars relating to the Trade Union 
contained in the statement accompanying the application for registration.  
9. Certificat e of registration .—The Registrar, on registering a Trade Union under section 8, shall issue a 
certificate of registration in the prescribed form which shall be conclusive evidence that the Trade Union has 

<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRADE UNIONS ACT, 1926.pdf - page 6]
of registration in the prescribed form which shall be conclusive evidence that the Trade Union has 
been duly registered under this Act.  
STATE AMENDMEN T 
Ladakh (UT ).— 
Section 9. —After “certificate of registration ”, “insert with in a period not exceeding thirty days subject to 
the fulfillment of other provisions of this Act ”. 
[Vide Union Territory of Ladakh Reorganisation  (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, notification No. 
S.O. 3774(E), dated (23 -10-2020).]  
Jammu and Kashmir (UT).— 
Substitution of section  9-For section 9, substitute — 
9. Certificate of registration. —The Registrar, on registering a Trade Union under s ection 8, shall issue a 
certificate of registration within a period not exceeding thirty days subject to the fulfillment of other provisions 
of this Act in the prescribed for m which shall be conclusive evidence that the Trade Union has been duly 
registered  under this Act”.  
[Vide Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, 
notification No. S.O. 3465(E), dated (5 -10-2020).]  
4[9A. Minimum requirement about membership of a Trade Union. —A registered Trade Union of 
workmen shall at all times continue to have not less than ten per cent.  or one hundred of the workmen, 
whichever is less, subject to a minimum of seven, engaged or employed in an establishment or industry with 
which it is connec ted, as its members.]  
10. Cancellation of registration .—A certificate of registration of a Trade Union may be withdrawn or 
cancelled by the Registrar —  
(a) on the application of the Trade Union to be verified in such manner as may be prescribed, or  
(b) if the Registrar is satisfied that the certificate has been obtained by fraud or mistake, or 
that the Trade Union has ceased to exist or has wilfully and after notice from the Registrar 
contravened any provision of this Act or allowed any rule to continue in force which is  
inconsistent with any such provision, or has rescin
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRADE UNIONS ACT, 1926.pdf - page 6]
allowed any rule to continue in force which is  
inconsistent with any such provision, or has rescinded any rule providing for any matter 
provision for which is required by section 6:  
5[(c) if the Registrar is satisfied that a registered Trade Union of workmen ceases to have the 
requisi te number of members:]  
                                                                                                                                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 1964, s. 2, for “officers ” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1965).  
2. Subs. by Act 31 of 2001, s. 4, for “appointed” (w.e.f. 9 -1-2002).  
3. Ins. by s. 4, ibid.,  (w.e.f. 9 -1-2002).  
4. Ins. by s. 5,  ibid., (w.e.f. 9 -1-2002).  
5. Ins. by s. 6, ibid., (w.e.f. 9 -1-2002).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRADE UNIONS ACT, 1926.pdf - page 7]
7 
 Provided  that not less than two months previous notice in writing specifying the ground on which it 
is proposed to withdraw or cancel the certificate shall be given by the Registrar to the Trade Union 
before the certificate is withdr awn or cancelled otherwise than on the application of the Trade Union.  
1[11. Appeal .—(1) Any person aggrieved by any refusal of the Registrar to register a 
Trade Union or by the withdrawal or cancellation of a certificate of registration may, within 
such period as may be  prescribed, appeal, —  
(a) where the head office of the Trade Union is situated within the limits of a Presidency -town  
2***, to the High Court, or  
3[(aa) where the head office is situated in an area, falling within the jurisdiction of a Lab our 
Court or an Industrial Tribunal, to that Court or Tribunal, as the case may be;]  
(b) where the head  office is situated in any other area, to such Court, not inferior to the 
Court of an additional or assistant Judge of a principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction, 
as the 4[appropriate Government] may appoint in this behalf for that area.  
(2) The appel late Court may dismiss the appeal, or pass an order directing the Registrar to 
register the Union and to issue a certificate of registration under the provisions of section 9 or 
setting aside the order for withdrawal or cancellation of the certificate, as the case may be, and 
the Registrar shall comply with such order.  
(3) For the purpose of an appeal under sub -section ( 1) an appellate Court shall, so far as may 
be, follow the same procedure and have the same powers as it follows and has when trying a suit 
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), and may direct by whom the whole or any 
part of the costs of the appeal shall be paid, and such costs shall be recovered as if they had 
been awarded in a suit under the said Code.  
(4) In the event of the  dismissal of an appeal by any Court appointed under clause ( b) of 
sub-section ( 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRADE UNIONS ACT, 1926.pdf - page 7]
the event of the  dismissal of an appeal by any Court appointed under clause ( b) of 
sub-section ( 1), the person aggrieved shall have a right of appeal to the High Court, and the 
High Court shall, for the purpose, of such appeal, have all the powers of an appellate Court 
under sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3), and the provisions of those sub -sections shall apply 
accordingly.]  
12. Registered office. —All communications and notices to a registered Trade Union may 
be addressed to its registered office. Notice of any change in the address of the head office 
shall be given within fourteen days of such change to the Registrar in writing, and the changed 
address shall be recorded in the register referred to in section 8.  
13. Incorporation of registered Trade Unions. —Every  registered Trade Union shall be  a 
corporate by the name under which it is registered, and shall have perpetual succession and 
a body  common seal with power to acquire and hold both movable and immovable property 
and to contract, and shall by the said name sue and be sued.  
14. Certain Acts not to apply  to registered Trade Unions. —The following Acts, 
namely: —  
(a) The Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860),  
(b) The Co-operative  Societies  Act, 1912  (2 of 1912),  
5*   *   *   *  * 
6[(c) The Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956),]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 1928, s. 2, for section 11.  
2. The words “or of Rangoon ” omitted by the A.O . 1937.  
3. Ins. by Act 31 of 2001, s. 7 (w.e.f. 9 -1-2002).  
4. Subs.,  ibid., for “L.G.”. 
5. Clauses ( c) and ( d) rep. by Act 25 of 1942, s. 2 and the First Schedule.  
6. Subs. by Act 42 of 1960, s. 7, for clause ( e). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRADE UNIONS ACT, 1926.pdf - page 8]
8 
 shall not apply to any registered Trade Union, and the registration of any such Trade Union under any 
such Act shall be void.  
CHAPTER II I 
RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES OF REGISTERED  TRADE  UNIONS  
15. Objects on which general funds may be spent .—The general funds of a 
registered Trade Union shall not be spent on any other objects than the following, 
namely: —  
(a) the payment of salaries, allowances and expenses to 1[office -bearers] of the Trade 
Union;  
(b) the payment of expenses for the administration  of the Trade Union, including 
audit of the accounts of the general funds of the Trade Union;  
(c) the prosecution or defence of any legal proceeding to which the Trade Union or 
any member thereof is a party, when such prosecution or defence is undertaken f or the 
purpose of securing or protecting any rights of the Trade Union as such or any rights 
arising out of the relations of any member with his employer or with a person whom the 
member employs;  
(d) the conduct of trade disputes on behalf of the Trade Union or any member 
thereof;  
(e) the compensation of members for loss arising out of trade disputes;  
(f) allowances to members or their dependant on account of death, old age, sickness, accidents 
or unemployment of such members;  
(g) the issue of, or the un dertaking of liability under, policies of assurance on the lives 
of members, or under policies insuring members against sickness, accident or 
unemployment;  
(h) the provision of educational, social or religious benefits for members (including 
the payment of  the expenses of funeral or religious ceremonies for deceased members) 
or for the dependants of members;  
(i) the upkeep of a periodical published mainly for the purpose of discussing questions affecting 
employers or workmen as such;  
(j) the payment, in furtherance of any of the objects on which the general funds of the 
Trade Union may be spent, of contributions to any cause intended to benefit workmen in 
general, provided 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRADE UNIONS ACT, 1926.pdf - page 8]
Union may be spent, of contributions to any cause intended to benefit workmen in 
general, provided that the expenditure in respect of such contributions in any financial year 
shall n ot at any time during that year be in excess of one -fourth of the combined total of the 
gross income which has up to that time accrued to the general funds of the Trade Union 
during that year and of the balance at the credit of those funds at the commencem ent of that 
year; and  
(k) subject to any conditions contained in the notification, any other object notified by the 
2[appropriate Government] in the Official Gazette.  
  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 1964, s. 2, for “officers ” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1965).  
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “G.G in C.”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRADE UNIONS ACT, 1926.pdf - page 9]
9 
 STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of heading of Chapter III of Act XVI of 1926 .—In Chapter III of the Trade Unions 
Act, 1926, in its application to the State of Maharashtra (hereinafter referred to as “the principal Act”), 
in the heading after the words “Trade Unions” the words “and Settlement of Certain Disp utes” shall be 
added.  
[Vide Maharashtra Act III of 1968, s. 2]  
16. Constitution of  a separate fund for political purposes .—(1) A registered Trade 
Union may constitute a separate fund, from contributions separately levied for or made to that 
fund, from which payments may be made, for the promotion of the civic and political interests 
of its members, in furtherance of any of the objects specified in sub -section ( 2). 
(2) The objects referred to in sub -section ( 1) are: —  
(a) the payment of any expenses incurred, either directly or indirec tly, by a candidate or 
prospective candidate for election as a member of any legislative body constituted under 1[the 
Constitution] or of any local authority, before, during, or after the election in connection with his 
candidature or election; or  
(b) the holding of any meeting or the distribution of any literature or documents in support of 
any such candidate or prospective candidate; or  
(c) the maintenance of any person who is a member of any legislative body constituted under 
1[the Constitution] or of an y local authority; or  
(d) the registration of electors or the selection of a candidate for any legislative body constituted 
under 1[the Constitution] or for any local authority; or  
(e) the holding of political meetings of any kind, or the distribution of p olitical literature or 
political documents of any kind.  
2[(2A) In its application to the State of Jammu and Kashmir, references in sub -section (2) to any 
legislative body constituted under the Constitution shall be construed as including references to the 
Legislature of that State.] 
(3) No member shall be compelled to contr
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRADE UNIONS ACT, 1926.pdf - page 9]
 including references to the 
Legislature of that State.] 
(3) No member shall be compelled to contribute to the fund constituted under sub -section ( 1); 
and a member who does not contribute to the said fund shall not be excluded from any benefits of 
the Trade Union, or placed in any res pect either directly or indirectly under any disability or at 
any disadvantage as compared with other members of the Trade Union (except in relation to the 
control or management of the said fund) by reason of his not contributing to the said fund; and 
contribution to the said fund shall not be made a condition for Admission to the Trade Union.  
17. Criminal  conspiracy in trade disputes .—No 3[office -bearer] or member of a registered 
Trade Union shall be liable to punishment under sub -section (2) of section 120B of the Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 1860), in respect of any agreement made between the members for the purpose of 
furthering any such object of the Trade Union as is specified in section 15, unless the agreement is 
an agreement to commit an offence.  
18. Immunity from civil suit in certain cases .—(1) No suit or other legal proceeding shall be 
maintainable in any Civil Court against any registered Trade Union or any 3[office -bearer] or 
member thereof in respect of any act done in contemplation or furtheranc e of a trade dispute to 
which a member of the Trade Union is a party on the ground only that such act induces some other 
person to break a contract of employment, or that it is in interference with the trade, business or 
                                                      
1. The  words “the Government of India Act” have been successively amended by the A.O. 1937, the A.O. 1950 and Act 42 of 
1960 to read as above.  
2. Ins. by Act 51 of 1970, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 1 -9-1971).  
3. Subs. by Act 38 of 1964, s. 2, for “officer ” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1965).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRADE UNIONS ACT, 1926.pdf - page 9]
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRADE UNIONS ACT, 1926.pdf - page 10]
10 
 employment of some other person or with the right of some other person to dispose of his capital 
or of his labour as he wills.  
(2) A registered Trade Union shall not be liable in any suit or other legal proceeding in any Civil 
Court in respect of any tortious act done in contemplation or furtherance of a trade dispute by an agent 
of the Trade Union if it is proved that such person acted without the knowledge of, or contrary to 
express instructions given by, the executive of the Trade Union.  
19. Enforceability of agreements. —Notwithstanding  anything contained in any other law for 
the time being in force, an agreement between the members of a registered Trade Union shall not 
be void or voidable merely by reason of the fact that any of the objects of the agreement are in 
restraint of trade:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall enable any Civil Court to entertain any legal 
proceeding instituted for the express purpose of enforcing or recovering damages for the breach 
of any agreement concerning the conditions on which any members of a Tra de Union shall or 
shall not sell their goods, transact business, work, employ or be employed.  
20. Right to inspect books of Trade Union .—The account books of a registered Trade 
Union and the list of members thereof sha ll be open to inspection by an 1[office -bearer] or 
member of the Trade Union at such times as may be provided for in the rules of the Trade Union.  
21. Rights of minors to membership of Trade Unions .—Any person who has attained the 
age of fifteen years may be a member of a registered Trad e Union subject to any rules of the 
Trade Union to the contrary, and may, subject as aforesaid, enjoy all the rights of a member and 
execute all instruments and give all acquittances necessary to be executed or given under the 
rules.  
2*   *   *   *   * 
3[21A. Disqualifications of office -bearers of Trade Unions .—(1) A person shall be disqualified 
for being chosen as, and for being, a member
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRADE UNIONS ACT, 1926.pdf - page 10]
s of Trade Unions .—(1) A person shall be disqualified 
for being chosen as, and for being, a member of the executive or any other office -bearer of a registered 
Trade Union if —  
(i) he has not attained the age of eighteen years;  
(ii) he has been convicted by a Court in India of any offence involving moral turpitude and 
sentenced to imprisonment, unless a period o f five years has elapsed since his release.  
(2) Any member of the executive or other office -bearer of a registered Trade Union who,  before the 
commencement of the  Indian Trade Unions (Amendment) Act, 1964 (38 of 1964), has been convicted 
of any offence involving moral turpitude and sentenced to imprisonment, shall on the date of such 
commencement cease to be  such member or office-bearer unless a period of five years has elapsed since 
his release before that date.]  
4[(3) In its application to the State of Jam mu and Kashmir, reference in sub -section ( 2) to the 
commencement of the Indian Trade Unions (Amendment)  Act, 1964 (38 of 1964), shall be construed as 
reference to the commencement of this Act in the said State.] 
5[22. Proportion of office -bearers to be connected with the industry .—(1) Not less than one -half 
of the total number of the office -bearers of every  registered Trade Union in an unor ganised sector shall be 
persons actually engaged or employed in an industry with which the Trade Union is connected:  
Provided that the appropriate Government may, by special or general order, declare that the 
provisions of  this section shall not apply to any Trade Union or class of Trade Unions specified in the 
order.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 1964, s. 2, for “officer” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1965).  
2. The proviso omitted by  s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1965).  
3. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -4-1965).  
4. Ins. by Act 51 of 1970, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 1 -9-1971).  
5. Subs. by Act 31 of 2001, s. 8, for section 22 (w.e.f. 9 -1-200
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRADE UNIONS ACT, 1926.pdf - page 10]
the Schedule (w.e.f. 1 -9-1971).  
5. Subs. by Act 31 of 2001, s. 8, for section 22 (w.e.f. 9 -1-2002).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRADE UNIONS ACT, 1926.pdf - page 11]
11 
 Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, "unorganised sector" means any sector which the 
appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gaz ette, specify.  
(2) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 1), all office -bearers of a registered Trade Union, 
except not more than one -third of the total number of the office -bearers or five, whichever is less, shall be 
persons actually engaged  or employed in the establishment or industry with which the Trade Union is 
connected.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub -section, an employee who has retired or has been 
retrenched shall not be construed as outsider for the purpose of holding an of fice in a Trade Union.  
(3) No member of the Council of Ministers or a person holding an office of profit (not being an 
engagement or employment in an establishment or industry with which the Trade Union is connected), in 
the Union or a State, shall be a member of the executive or other office -bearer of a registered Trade 
Union.]  
 23. Change of name .—Any registered Trade Union may, with the consent of not less than two -
thirds of the total number of its members and subject to the provisions of section 25, c hange its name.  
24. Amalgamation of Trade Unions .—Any two or more registered Trade Unions may become 
amalgamated together as one Trade Union with or without dissolution or division of the funds of such 
Trade Unions or either or any of them, provided that t he votes of at least one -half of the members of each 
or every such Trade Union entitled to vote are recorded, and that at least sixty per cent. of the votes 
recorded are in favour of the proposal.  
25. Notice of change of name or amalgamation .—(1) Notice in  writing of every change of 
name and of every amalgamation, signed, in the case of a change of name, by the Secretary and by 
seven members of the Trade Union changing its name, and, in the case of an amalgamation, by the 
Secretary and by seven members of e ach an
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRADE UNIONS ACT, 1926.pdf - page 11]
ng its name, and, in the case of an amalgamation, by the 
Secretary and by seven members of e ach and every Trade Union which is a party thereto, shall be  
sent to the Registrar, and where the head office of the amalgamated Trade Union is situated in a different 
State, to the Registrar of such State.  
(2) If the proposed name is identical with that b y which any other existing Trade Union has been 
registered or, in the opinion of the Registrar, so nearly resembles such name as to be likely to deceive 
the public or the members of either Trade Union, the Registrar shall refuse to register the change of 
name.  
(3) Save as provided in sub -section ( 2), the Registrar shall, if he is satisfied that the provisions of 
this Act in respect of change of name have been complied with, register the change of name in the 
register referred to in section 8, and the change  of name sha ll have  effect from the date of such 
registration.  
(4) The Registrar of the State in which the head office of the amalgamated Trade Union is 
situated shall, if he is satisfied that the provisions of this Act in respect of amalgamation have been  
complied with and that the Trade Union formed thereby is entitled to registration under section 6, 
register the Trade Union in the manner provided in section 8, and the amalgamation shall have 
effect from the date of such registration.  
26. Effects of chan ge of name and of amalgamation .—(1) The change in the name of a 
registered Trade Union shall not affect any rights or obligations of the Trade Union or render 
defective any legal proceeding by or against the Trade Union, and any legal proceeding which 
might have been continued or commenced by or against it by its former name may be continued 
or commenced by or against it by its new name.  
(2) An amalgamation of two or more registered Trade Unions shall not prejudice any right of any of 
such Trade Unions or any right of a creditor of any of them.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRADE UNIONS ACT, 1926.pdf - page 11]

such Trade Unions or any right of a creditor of any of them.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRADE UNIONS ACT, 1926.pdf - page 12]
12 
 27. Dissolution .—(1) When a registered Trade Union is dissolved, notice of the dissolution 
signed by seven members and by the Secretary of the Trade Union shall, within fourteen days of 
the dissolution, he sent to the Registrar, and shall be registered by him if he is satisfied that the 
dissolution has been effected in accordance with the rules of the Trade Union, and the 
dissolution shall have effect from the date of such registration.  
(2) Where the dissolution of a registered Trade Union has been registered and the rules of 
the Trade Union do not provide for the distribution of funds of the Trade Union on dissolution, 
the Registrar shall divide the funds amongst the members in such manner as may be prescribed.  
28. Returns .—(1) There shall be sent annually to the Registrar, on or before such date as may 
be prescribed, a general statement, audited in the prescribed manner, of all receipts and expenditure 
of every registered Trade Union during the year ending on the 31st day of 1[December] next 
preceding such prescribed date, and of the assets and liabilities of the Trade Union existing on such 
31st day of 1[December]. The statement shall be prepared in such form and shall comprise such 
particulars as may be prescribed.  
(2) Togeth er with the general statement there shall be sent to the Registrar a statement 
showing all changes of 2[office -bearers] made by the Trade Union during the year to which the 
general statement refers, together also with a copy of the rules of the Trade Union  corrected up to 
the date of the despatch thereof to the Registrar.  
(3) A copy of every alteration made in the rules of a registered Trade Union shall be sent to the 
Registrar within fifteen days of the making of the alteration.  
3[(4) For the purpose of examining the documents referred to in sub -sections ( 1), (2) and ( 3), the 
Registrar, or any officer authorised  by him, by general or special order, may at all reasonable times 
inspect the certificate 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRADE UNIONS ACT, 1926.pdf - page 12]
thorised  by him, by general or special order, may at all reasonable times 
inspect the certificate of registration, account books, registers, and other documents, relating to a  Trade 
Union, at its registered office or may require their production at such place as h e may specify 
in this behalf, but no such place shall be at a distance of more than ten miles from the 
registered office of a Trade Union.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Insertion of new section 28 -IA in Chapter III of Act XVI of 1926 .—In chapter III of the 
principal Act, after section 28, the following new section shall be inserted, namely: -- 
“28-1A. Power of Industrial Court to decide certain disputes. --(1) Where there is a dispute as 
respects whether or not any person is an office -bearer or a member of a r egistered Trade Union 
including any dispute relating to wrongful expulsion of any such office -bearer or member), or where 
there is any dispute relating to the property (including the account books) of any registered Trade 
Union, any member of such register ed Trade Union for a period of not less than six months may, with 
the consent of the Registrar, and in such manner as may be prescribed, refer the dispute to the 
Industrial Court constituted under the Bombay Industrial Relations Act, 1946, for decision.  
(2) The Industrial Court shall, after hearing the parties to the dispute, decide the dispute; and may 
require an office -bearer or member of the Registered Trade Union to be appointed whether by 
election or otherwise under the supervision of such person as th e Industrial Court may appoint in this 
behalf or removed, in accordance with the rules of the Trade Union:  
Provided that the Industrial Court may, pending the decision of the dispute, make an interim order 
specifying or appointing any person or appointing a Committee of Administration for any purpose 
under the Act including the purpose of taking possession or control of the property in dispute and 
managing it fo
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRADE UNIONS ACT, 1926.pdf - page 12]
including the purpose of taking possession or control of the property in dispute and 
managing it for the purposes of the Union pending the decision.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 1964, s. 6, for “March ” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1965).  
2. Subs. by  s. 2, ibid., for “officer s” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1965).  
3. Ins. by Act 42 of 1960, s. 9.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRADE UNIONS ACT, 1926.pdf - page 13]
13 
 (3) The decision of the Industrial Court shall be final and binding on the parties and shall not be 
called in question in any Civil Court.  
(4) No Civil Court shall entertain any suit or other proceedings in relation to the dispute referred 
to the Industrial Court as aforesaid, and if any suit or procee ding is pending in any such Court, the 
Civil Court shall, on receipt of an intimation from the Industrial Court that it is seized of the question, 
cease to exercise jurisdiction in respect thereof.  
(5) Save as aforesaid, the Industrial Court may, in decidi ng disputes under this section, exercise 
the same powers and follow the same procedure as it exercises or follows for the purpose of deciding 
industrial disputes under the Bombay Industrial Relations Act, 1946. ” 
[Vide Maharashtra Act III of 1968, s. 3]  
CHAPTER IV  
REGULATIONS  
29. Power to make regulations .—(1) 1*** the 2[appropriate Government] may make regulations for 
the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and  without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: —  
(a) the manner in which Trade Unions and the rules of Trade Unions shall be registered and the 
fees payable on regi stration;  
(b) the transfer of registration in the case of any registered Trade Union which has changed its 
head office from one State to another;  
(c) the manner in which, and the qualifications of persons by whom, the accounts of registered 
Trade Unions or  of any class of such Unions shall be audited;  
(d) the conditions subject to which inspection of documents kept by Registrars shall 
be allowed and the fees which shall be chargeable in respect of such inspections; and  
(e) any matte  which is to be or may be prescribed.  
3[(3) Every notification made by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) of section 22, and 
every regulation made by it under sub -section ( 1) sh
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRADE UNIONS ACT, 1926.pdf - page 13]
t under sub -section ( 1) of section 22, and 
every regulation made by it under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of  Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions afores aid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the notification or regulation, or both Houses agree that the notification or regulation should not be 
made, the notification or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be o f no 
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that notification or regulation.  
(4) Every notification made by the State Government under su b-section ( 1) of section 22 and every 
regulation made by it under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before the 
State Legislature.]  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 29 of Act XVI of 1926. — In section 29, in sub-section (2), in clause 
(d), delete the word 'and' appearing at the end and insert thereafter the following clause, namely: - 
"(dd) The manner in which the dispute may be referred to the Industrial Court under section 28 -1A."  
[Vide  Maharashtra Act III of  1968, s. 4]  
                                                      
1. The words “Subject to the control of the G.G. in C. ” omitted by the A.O. 1937.  
2. Subs. ibid., for “L.G. ”. 
3. Ins. by Act 31 of 2001, s. 9 (w.e.f. 9 -1-2002).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRADE UNIONS ACT, 1926.pdf - page 14]
14 
 30. Publication of regulations .—(1) The power to make regulations conferred by 
section 29 is subject to the condition of the regulations being made after previous 
publication.  
(2) The date to be specified in accordance with clause ( 3) of secti on 23 of the General 
Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), as that after which a draft of regulations proposed to be 
made will be taken into consideration shall not be less than three months from the date on 
which the draft of the prop osed regulations was published for general information.  
(3) Regulations so made shall be published in the Official Gazette, and on such publication shall 
have effect as if enacted in this Act.  
CHAPTER V  
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE  
31. Failure to submit returns .—(1) If default is made on the part of any regiatared 
Trade Union in giving any notice or sending any statement or other document as required by 
or under any provision of this Act, every 1[office -bearer] or other person bound by the rules 
of the Trade Uni on to give or send the same, or, if there is no such 1[office -bearer] or person, 
every member of the executive of the Trade Union, shall be punishable with fine which may 
extend to five rupees and, in the case of a continuing default, with an additional fi ne which 
may extend to five rupees for each week after the first during which the default continues:  
Provided that the aggregate fine shall not exceed fifty rupees.  
(2) Any person who wilfully  makes, or causes to be made, any false entry in, or any 
omission from, the general statement required by section 28, or in or from any copy of rules 
or of alterations of rules sent to the Registrar under that section, shall be punishable with 
fine which m ay extend to five hundred rupees.  
32. Supplying false information regarding Trade Unions .—Any person who, with 
intent to deceive, gives to any member of a registered Trade Union  or to any person intending 
or applying to become a member of such Trade Union any d
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRADE UNIONS ACT, 1926.pdf - page 14]
ed Trade Union  or to any person intending 
or applying to become a member of such Trade Union any document purporting to  be a copy 
of the rules of the  Trade Union or of any alterations to the same which he knows, or has reason to 
believe, is not a correct copy of such rules or alterations as are for the time being in force, or any 
person who, with the like intent, gives a copy of any rules of any unregistered Trade Union to any 
person on the pretence that such rules are the rules of a registered Trade Union, shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees.  
33. Cognizance of offences .—(1) No Court inferior to that of a Presidency Magistrate or a 
Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence under this Act.  
(2) No Court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act, unless complaint thereof 
has been made by, or with the previous sanction of, the Registrar or, in the case of an offence 
under section 32, by the person to whom the copy was given, within six months of the date on 
which the offence is alleged to have been committed.  
STATE AMENDMENT  
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 33 of Act XVI of 1926. —In section 33 of the Indian Trade Union 
Act, 1926, to sub -section (2) the following shall be added, namely: -- 
“and in the case of an offence under sub -section (2) of section 31, within six months next 
after the alleged offence came to the knowledge of the Registrar.”  
[Vide Bombay Act XXXII of 1956, s. 2]  
_______  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 1964, s. 2, for “officer ” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1965).  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
PREAMBLE  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
Commencement.  
Extent. 
2. Repeal of Acts.  
Saving of certain enactments, incidents, rights, liabilities, etc.  
3. Interpretation -clause.  
4. Enactments relating to contracts to be taken as part of Contract Act and 
supplemental to the Registration Act.  
CHAPTER II 
OF TRANSFERS OF PROPERTY BY ACT OF PARTIES  
(A) Transfe r of Property, whether moveable or immoveable  
5. “Transfer of property ” defined.  
6. What may be transferred.  
7. Persons competent to transfer.  
8. Operation of transfer.  
9. Oral transfer.  
10. Condition restraining alienation.  
11. Restriction repugnant to interest cleated.  
12. Condition making interest determinable on insolvency or attempted aliena tion. 
13. Transfer for benefit of unborn person.  
14. Rule against perpetuity.  
15. Transfer to class some of whom come under sections 13 and 14.  
16. Transfer to take  effect on failure of prior interes t. 
17. Direction for accumulation.  
18. Transfer in perpetuity for benefit of public.  
19. Vested interest.   
20. When unborn person acquires vested interest on transfer for his benefit.  
21. Conting ent interest.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 2]
2 
 SECTIONS  
22. Transfer to members of a class who attain a particular age.  
23. Transfer contingent on happening of specified uncertain event.  
24. Transfer to such of certain persons as survive at some period not specified.  
25. Conditional transfer.  
26. Fulfilment of condition precedent.  
27. Conditional transfer to one person coupled with transfer to another on failure of prior 
disposition.  
28. Ulterior transfer conditional on happening or not happening of specified event.  
29. Fulfilment of condition subsequent.  
30. Prior disposition not affected by inva lidity of ulterior disp osition.  
31. Condition that transfer shall cease to have effect in case specified uncertain event 
happens or does not happen.  
32. Such condition must not be invalid.  
33. Transfer conditional on performance of act, no time being specified for per formance.  
34. Transfer conditional on performance of act, time being specified.  
Election  
35. Election when necessary.  
Apportionment  
36. Apportionment of periodical payments on determination of interest of person entitled.  
37. Apportionment of benefit of obligation on severance.  
(B) Transfer of Immoveable Property  
38. Transfer by person authori sed only under certain circumstances to transfer.  
39. Transfer where third person is entitled to maintenance.  
40. Burden of obligation imposing restriction on use of land  or of obligation annexed to 
ownership but not amounting to interest or easement.  
41. Transfer by ostensible owner.  
42. Transfer by person having authority to revoke former transfer.  
43. Transfer by unauthori sed person who subsequently acquires interest in property 
transferred.  
44. Transfe r by one co -owner.  
45. Joint transfer for consideration.  
46. Transfer for consideration by persons having distinct interests.  
47. Transfer by co -owners of share in common property.  
48. Priority of rights created by transfer.  
49. Transferee's right under policy.  
50. Rent bona fide paid to 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 2]
 of rights created by transfer.  
49. Transferee's right under policy.  
50. Rent bona fide paid to holder under defective title.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 3]
3 
 SECTIONS  
51. Improvements made by bona fide holders under defective titles.  
52. Transfer of property pending suit relating thereto.  
53. Fraudulent transfer.  
53A. Part performance.  
CHAPTER III  
OF SALES OF IMMOVEABLE PROPERTY  
54. “Sale” defined.  
Sale how made.  
Contract for sale.  
55. Rights and liabilities of buyer and seller.  
56. Marshalling by subsequent purchaser.  
Discharge of   Incumbrances on  Sale 
57. Provision by Court for incumbranc es and sale freed therefrom.  
CHAPTER  IV 
OF MORTGA GES OF IMMOVEABLE PROPERTY AND  CHARGES  
58. “Mortgage ”, “mortgagor ”, “mortgagee ”, “mortgage -money ”and “mortgage -
deed ”defined.  
Simple mortgage.  
Mortgage by conditional sale.  
Usufructuary mortgage.  
English mortgage.  
Mortgage by deposit of title -deeds.  
Anomalous mortgage.  
59. Mortgage when to be by assurance.  
59A. References to mortgagors and mortgagees to include persons deriving title from 
them.  
Rights and Liabilities of Mortgagor  
60. Right of mortgagor to redeem.  
Redemption of portion of mortgaged property.  
60A. Obligation to transfer to third party instead of re -tran sference to mortgagor.  
60B. Right to inspection and production of documents.  
61. Right to redeem separately or simultaneously.  
62. Right of usufructuary mortgagor to recover possession.  
63. Accession to mortgaged property.  
Accession acquired in virtue of transferred ownership.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 4]
4 
 SECTIONS  
63A. Improvements to mortgaged property.  
64. Renewal of mortgaged lease.  
65. Implied contracts  by mortgagor.  
65A. Mortgagor’ s power to lease.  
66. Waste by mortgagor in possession.  
Rights and liabilities of Mortgagee  
67. Right to foreclosure or sale.  
67A. Mortgagee when bound to bring one suit on several mortgages.  
68. Right to sue for mortgage -money.  
69. Power of sale when valid.  
69A. Appointment of receiver.  
70. Accession to mortgaged property.  
71. Renewal of mortgaged lease.  
72. Rights of mortgagee in possession.  
73. Right to proceeds of revenue sale or compensation on acquisition.  
74. [Repealed .]. 
75. [Repealed .]. 
76. Liabilities of mortgagee in possession.  
Loss occasioned by his defa ult. 
77. Receipts in lieu of interests.  
Priority  
78. Postponement of prior mortgagee.  
79. Mortgage to secure uncertain amount when maximum is expressed.  
80. [Repealed. ]. 
Marshalling and Contribution  
81. Marshalling securities.  
82. Contribution to mortgage -debt.  
Deposit in Court  
83. Power to deposit in Court money due on mortgage.  
Right to money deposited by mortgagor.  
84. Cessation of interest.   
Suits for Foreclosure, Sale or Redemption  
85. [Repealed. ]. 
 
Foreclosure and Sale 
86. [Repealed .]. 
87. [Repealed .]. 
88. [Repealed .]. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 5]
5 
 SECTIONS  
89. [Repealed .]. 
90. [Repealed .]. 
Redemption  
91. Persons who may sue for redemption.  
92. Subrogation.  
93. Prohibition of tacking . 
94. Right s of mesne  mortgagee . 
95. Right of redeeming co -mortgagor to expenses.  
96. Mortgage by deposit of title -deeds.  
97. [Repealed .]. 
Anomalous Mortgages  
98. Rights and liabilities of parties to anomalous mortgages.  
99. [Repealed .]. 
Charges  
100. Charges.  
101. No merger in case of subsequent encumbrance.  
Notice and Tender  
102. Service or tender on or to agent.  
103. Notice, etc., to or by person incompetent to contract.  
104. Power to make rules.  
CHAPTER V  
OF LEASES OF IMMOVEABLE PROPERTY  
105. Lease defined.  
Lessor, lessee, premium and rent defined.  
106. Duration of certain leases in absence of written contract or  local usage.  
107. Leases how made.  
108. Rights and liabilities of lessor and lessee.  
A.—Rights and liabilities of the lessor.  
B.—Rights and liabilities of the lessee.  
109. Rights of lessor ’s transferee.  
110. Exclusion of day on which term commences.  
Duration of lease for a year.  
Option to determine lease.  
111. Determination of lease.  
112. Waiver of forfeiture.  
113. Waiver of notice to quit.  
114. Relief against forfeiture for non -payment of rent.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 6]
6 
 SECTIONS  
114A. Relief against forfeiture in certain other cases.  
115. Effect of surrender and forfeiture on under -leases.  
116. Effect of holding over.  
117. Exemption of leases for agricultural purposes.  
CHAPTER VI  
OF EXCHANGES  
118. “Exchange ” defined.  
119. Right of party deprived of thing received in exchange.  
120. Rights and liabilities of parties.  
121. Exchange of money.  
CHAPTER VII  
OF GIFTS  
122. “Gift” defined.  
Acceptance when to be made.  
123. Transfer how effected.  
124. Gift of existing and future property.  
125. Gift to several, of whom one does not accept.  
126. When gift may be suspended or revoked.  
127. Onerous gifts.  
Onerous gift to disqualified person.  
128. Universal donee.  
129. Saving of donations mortis causa and Muhammadan law.  
CHAPTER VIII  
OF TRANSFERS OF ACTIONABLE CLAIMS  
130. Transfer of actionable claim.  
130A . [Repealed. ]. 
131. Notice to be in writing, signed.  
132. Liability of transferee of actionable claim.  
133. Warranty of solvency of debtor.  
134. Mortgaged debt.  
135. Assignment of rights under policy of insuran ce aga inst fire.  
135A. [ Repealed. ]. 
136. Incapacity of officers connected with Courts of Justi ce. 
137. Saving of negotiable instruments, etc.  
THE SCHEDULE.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 7]
7 
 THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882  
ACT NO. 4 OF 1882  
[17th February, 1882.]  
An Act to amend the law  relating to the Transfer of Property by act of Parties.  
Preamble .—WHEREAS  it is expedient to define and amend certain parts of the law 
relating to the transfer  of property by act of parties; It is hereby enacted  as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title. —This Act may be  called the Transfer of Property Act,  1882. 
Commencement. —It shall  come into force on the first day of July, 1882.  
Extent .—1[It extends2 in the first instance to the whole of India. except 3[the 
territories which, immediately before the 1st November, 1956, were comprised in Part B 
States or in the States of], Bombay, Punjab and Delhi.]  
4[But this Act or any part thereof may by 5notification in the Official Gazette be 
extended to the whole or any part of  6[the said territories] by the State Government 
concerned.] 
7[And any State Government may 8*** from time to time, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, exempt, either retrospectively or prospectively,  any part of the territories 
administere d by such State Government from all or any of the following provisions, 
namely: — 
Sections 54, paragraphs 2 and 3, 59, 107 and 123.]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for the third paragraph.  
2. The application of this Act was barred in the Naga Hills District, including the Mokokchung Sub -division, the 
Dibrugarh Frontier Tract, the North Cachar  Hills, the Garo Hills, the Khasi and Jantia Hills and the Mikir hills 
Tract, by notification under s. 2 of the Assa m Frontier Tracts Regulation, 1880 ( Reg. 2 of 1880).  
Partially extended to Berar by Act 4 of 1941. Extended to Manipur by Act 68 of 1956; to  Dadra and Nagar Haveli 
by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 and Sch. I; to Goa, Daman and Diu by Reg. 11 of 1963, s. 3 and Sch.; to Lakshadweep by 
Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 and Sch., to Pondicherry by Act 26 of 1 968, s. 3 a
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 7]
nd Sch.; to Lakshadweep by 
Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 and Sch., to Pondicherry by Act 26 of 1 968, s. 3 and Sch.  
It has been amended to Bombay by Bombay Act 14 of 1939, 57 of 1959, in U.P. by U.P. Act 24 of 1954, 14 of 1970 and 57 
of 1976.  
Extended to the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir and Union territory of Ladakh by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and Fifth 
Schedule (w .e.f. 31 -10-2019).  
3. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956, for “Part B States ”. 
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for the original paragraph.  
5. The Act has been extended to — 
The Presidency of Bombay (except Scheduled Districts) w.e.f. 1 -1-1893; to Mehwassi Estate by Born. Reg. 1  
of 1949; and to former princely area w.e.f. 1 -4-1951; now applicable to whole of Maharashtra;  
Gujarat (Saurashtra area) by Saurashtra Ordinance 25 of 1949, and to Kutch area w.e.f. 1-1-1950.  
Madhya Pradesh:  
Mysore, w.e.f. 1 -4-1951;  
Rajasthan, w.e.f. 1 -7-1952;  
the former State of Travancore -Cochin, w.e.f. 1 -5-1952, now applicable to whole of Kerala.  
The provisions o( sections 54, 107 and 123 were extended  to— 
Delhi, w.e.f. 30 -5-1939. Section 129 was extended to certain areas of Delhi w.e.f. 16 -11-1940 and to  
the remaining areas w.e.f. 1 -12-1962. the remaining provisions were also extended to the Union  
territory of  Delhi w.e.f. 1 -12-1962;  
Himachal Pradesh, w.e.f. 7 -12-1970:  
Punjab, w.e.f. 1 -4-1955 and to former princely area w.e.f. 15 -5-1957. (Section 59 was enforced in  
Haryana area, w.e.f. 5 -8-1967).  
The Act has been declared in force in the Pargana of Manpur by the Manpur Law Regulation, 1926 ( Reg. 2 of 
1926), in  Panth  Piploda by the Panth  Piploda Laws Regulation, 1929 ( Reg. 1 of 1929) , and in the State of 
Sikkim on 1.9.1984 vide Notification No. S.O. 643(E), dated 24 -8-1984, Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Pt. II, sec. 3(0. 
The Act has been repealed as to  Government Grants by the Government Grants Act, 1895 (15 of 1895).  
The Act has been repealed or m
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 7]
 Government Grants by the Government Grants Act, 1895 (15 of 1895).  
The Act has been repealed or modified to the extent necessary to give effect to the provisions of Madras Act 3 
of 1922, in the City of Madras see s. 13 of Madras Act 3 of 1922.  
6. Subs. by  the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956, for “said States ”. 
7. Subs. by Act 3 of 1885, s. 1, for the original paragraph.  
8. The words  “with the previous sanction of the Governor General in Council ” omitted by Act 38 of 1920, s. 2 and the 
Schedule . 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 8]
8 
 1[Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing part of this section, sections 54, paragraphs 2 
and 3, 59, 107 and 123 shall not  extend or be extended to any district or tract of country for the 
time being excluded from the operation of the Indian Registration Act, 2[1908 (16 of 1908)], 
under the power conferred by the first section of that Act or otherwise.] 
2. Repeal of Acts. Saving of certain enactments, incidents, rights,  liabilities, etc. —
In the territories to which this Act extends for the time being the enactments specified in 
the Schedule hereto annexed shall be repealed to the extent therein mentioned. But nothing 
herein  contained shall be deemed to affect — 
(a) the provisions of any enactment not he reby expressly r epeal ed: 
(b) any terms or incidents of any contract or constitution of property which ar e consistent 
with the provisions of this Act, and ar e allowed by the law  for the time being in force : 
(c) any right or liability arising out of a legal relation constituted before this Act comes into force, 
or any relief in respect of any such right or liability : or 
(d) save as provided by section 57 and Chapter IV of this Act, any transfer by operation 
of law or b y, or in execution of, a decree or  order of a Court of competent jurisdiction : 
and nothing in the second chapter of this Act shall be deemed to affect any rule of 3*** Muhammadan 
4*** law. 
3. Interpretation -clause .—In this Act, unless there is something repugnant in the subject or 
context, — 
“immoveable property ” does not include standing timber, growing crops or grass :                    
“instrument ”, means a non -testamentary instrument : 
5[“attested ”, in relation t o an instrument, means and shall be deemed always to have 
meant attested by two or more witnesses each of whom has seen the executant sign or affix 
his mark to the instrument, or has seen some other person sign the instrument in the 
presence and by the dir ection of the executant, or has rece
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 8]
ther person sign the instrument in the 
presence and by the dir ection of the executant, or has received from the executant a personal 
acknowledgement of his signature or mark, or of the signature of such other person, and 
each of whom has signed the instrument in the presence of the executant; but it shall not be 
nece ssary that more than one of such witnesses shall have been present at the same time, and 
no particular form of attestation shall be necessary :] 
“registered ” means registered in 6[7[any part of the territories] to which this Act extends] 
under the law8 for the time being in force regulating the registration of documents : 
“attached to the earth ” means — 
(a) rooted in the earth, as in the case of trees and shrubs;  
(b) imbedded in the  earth, as in the case of walls  or buildings; or  
(c) attached to what is so imbedded for the permanent beneficial enjoyment of that to which it 
is attached : 
9[“actionable claim ” means a claim to any debt, other than a debt secured by mortgage 
of 
                                                      
1. Added by Act  3 of 1885, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -7-1882).  
2. Subs. by Act 20 of 1929, s. 2, for “1877”.  
3. The word “Hindu” omitted by s. 3, ibid.  
4. The words “or Buddhist” omitted by s. 3, ibid.  
5. Ins. by Act 27 of 1926, s. 2, as amended by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and Sch. I. 
6. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule, for “a Part A State or a Part C State” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1951).  
7. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order 1956, for “any State”.  
8. See the Indian Registration Act,  1908 (16 of 1908).  
9. Ins. by Act 2 of 1900 , s. 2. 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 9]
9 
 immoveable property or by hypothecation or pledge of moveable property, or to any benefic ial 
interest in moveable property not in the possession, either actual or constructive, of the claimant, 
which the Civil Courts recognise as affording grounds for relief, whether such debt or beneficial 
interest be existent, accuring, conditional or  contingent :] 
1[“a person is said to have notice ”] of a fact when he actually knows that fact, or when, but for wilful 
abstention from an enquiry or search which he ought to have made, or gross negligence, he would  have 
known it. 
Explanation  I.—Where  any transaction relating to immovable property is required by law to be 
and has been effected by a registered instrument, any person acquiring such property or any part of, 
or share or interest in, such property shall be deemed to have notice of such instr ument as from the 
date of registration or, 2[where the property is not all situated in one sub -district, or where the 
registered instrument has been registered under sub -section ( 2) of section 30 of the Indian 
Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908), from the earliest date on which any memorandum of such 
registered instrument has been filed by any Sub -Registrar within whose sub -district any part of the 
property which is being acquired, or of the property wherein a share or interest is being acquired, is 
situate d]: 
Provided that — 
(1) the instrument has been registered and its registration completed in the manner 
prescribed by the Indian Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908) and the rules made thereunder,  
(2) the instrument 3[or memorandum] has been duly entered or filed, as the case may be, in 
books kept under section 51 of that Act, and  
(3) the particulars regarding the transaction to which the instrument relates have been correctly 
entered in the indexes kept under section 55 of that Act.  
Explanation II.—Any person acquiring any immoveable property or any share or interest in 
any such property sha
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 9]
 II.—Any person acquiring any immoveable property or any share or interest in 
any such property shall be deemed to have notice of the title, if any, of any person who is for the 
time being in actual possession thereof.  
Explanation III.—A person shall be deemed to h ave had notice of any fact if his agent acquires 
notice thereof whilst acting on his behalf in the course of business to which that fact is material:  
Provided that, if the agent fraudulently conceals the fact, the principal shall not be charged 
with notice  thereof as against any person who was a party to or otherwise cognizant of the fraud.]  
4. Enactments relating to contracts to be taken as part of Contract Act and supplemental to the 
Registration Act. —The chapters and sections of this Act which relate to contracts shall be taken as part 
of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 (9 of 1872) . 
4[And sections 54, paragraphs  2 and 3, 59, 107 and 123  shall be read as supplemental to the Indian 
Registration Act , 5[1908 (16 of 1908 )].] 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 20 of 1929, s. 4, for certain words.  
2. Subs. by Act 5 of 1930, s. 2, for certain words.  
3. Ins. by s. 2, ibid.  
4. Added by Act 3 of 1885, s. 3.  
5. Subs. by Act 20 of 1929, s. 5, for “1877” . 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 10]
10 
 CHAPTER II1 
OF  TRANSFERS  OF  PROPERTY   BY ACT OF PARTIES  
(A) Transfer of Property, whether moveable or immoveable  
5. “Transfer of property” defined .—In the following sections “transfer of property ” means an act 
by which a liv ing person conveys property, in  present or in future, to one or more other living persons, or 
to himself, 2[or to himself] and one or more other living persons; and “to transfer property ” is to perform 
such act.  
3[In this section “living person ” includes a company or association or body  of individuals, 
whether incorporated or not, but nothing herein contained shall affect any law for the time being in 
force relating to transfer of property to or by companies, associations or bodies of individuals.] 
6. What may be transferred .—Property of  any kind may be transferred, except as otherwise 
provided by this Act or by any other law for the time being in force . 
(a) The chance of an heir -apparent succeeding to an estate, the chance of a relation obtaining a 
legac y on the death of a kinsman, or any other mere possibility of a like nature, cannot be transferred.  
(b) A mere right of re -entry for breach of a condition subsequent cannot be transferred 
to any one except the owner of the property affected thereby.  
(c) An easement cannot be transferred apart from the dominant heritage.  
(d) An interest in property restricted in its enjoyment to the owner personally cannot be 
transferred by him.  
4[(dd) A right to future maintenance, in whatsoever manner arising, secured or determined, cannot 
be transferred .] 
(e) A mere right to sue 5***cannot be transferred.  
(f) A public office cannot be transferred, nor can the salary of a public officer, whether before or 
after it has become payable.  
(g) Stipends allowed to military 6[,naval], 7[air-force] and civil pensioners of 8[Government] and 
political pensions cannot be transferred.  
(h) No transfer can be made ( 1) in so far as it is opposed to the nature of the in
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 10]
e transferred.  
(h) No transfer can be made ( 1) in so far as it is opposed to the nature of the interest 
affected thereby, or (2) 9[for an unlawful object or consideration within the meaning of 
section 23 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 (9 of 1872), or (3) to a person legally 
disqualified to be transferee].  
10[(i) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to authori se a tenant having an untr ansferable 
right of occupancy, the farmer of an estate in respect of which default has been made in paying 
revenue, or the lessee of an estate under the management of a Court of Wards, to assign his interest 
as such tenant, farmer or lessee.]  
7. Persons competent to transfer. —Every person competent to contract and entitled to transferable 
property, or authori sed to dispose of transferable property not his own, is  competent to transfer such 
property either wholly or in part and either absolutely or conditi onally, in the circumstances, to the extent 
and in the manner, allowed and prescribed by any law for the time being in force.  
                                                      
1. Nothing in Chapter II is to be deemed to affect any rule of Muhammadan Law—see s. 2, supra  
2. Ins. by Act 20 of 1929, s. 6.  
3. Added by s. 6, ibid. 
4. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. 
5. The words “for compensation for a fraud or for harm illegally caused” omitted by Act 2 of 1900, s. 3.  
6. Ins. by Act 35 of 1934, s. 2 and the Schedule . 
7. Ins. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and the First Schedule.  
8. The word “Government” successively adapted by the A.O. 1937 and A.O. 1950 to re ad as above.  
9. Subs. by Act 2 of 1900, s. 3, for “for an illegal purpose”.  
10. Added by Act 3 of 1885, s. 4.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 11]
11 
 8. Operation of  transfer. —Unless a different intention is expressed or necessarily 
implied, a transfer of property passes forthwith  to the transferee all the interest which the 
transferor is then capable of passing in the property, and in the legal incidents thereof.  
Such incidents include, where the property is land, the easements annexed thereto, the rents and 
profits there of accruing after the transfer, and all things attached to the earth;  
and, where the property is machinery attached to the earth, the moveable parts 
thereof;  
and, where the property is a house, the easements annexed thereto, the rent thereof 
accruing after  the transfer, and the locks, keys, bars, doors, windows and all other things 
provided for permanent use therewith;  
and, where the property is a debt or other actionable claim, the securities therefor 
(except where they are also for other debts or claims n ot transferred to the transferee), but 
not arrears of interest accrued  before the transfer;  
and, where the property is money or other property yielding income, the interest or income thereof 
accruing after the transfer takes effect.  
9. Oral transfer. —A transfer of property may be made without writing in every case 
in which a writing is not expressly required by law.  
10. Condition restraining alienation .—Where property is transferred subject to a 
condition or limitation absolutely restraining the transfer ee or any person claiming under him 
from parting with or disposing of his interest in the property, the condition or limitation is 
void, except in the case of a lease where the condition is for the benefit of the lessor or those 
claiming under him: provide d that property may be transferred to or for the benefit of a 
woman (not being a Hindu, Muhammadan or Buddhist), so that she shall not have power 
during her marriage to transfer or charge the same or her beneficial interest therein.  
11. Restriction repugna nt to interest created. —Where, on a tra
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 11]
 her beneficial interest therein.  
11. Restriction repugna nt to interest created. —Where, on a transfer of property, an 
interest ther ein is created absolutely in favour of any person, but the terms of the transfer 
direct that such interest shall be applied or enjoyed by him in a particular manner, he shall be 
entitled to receive and dispose of such interest as if there were no such direction.  
1[Where any such direction has been made in respect of one piece of immoveable property 
for the purpose of securing the beneficial enjoyment of another piece of such property,  
nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect any right which the transferor may have to 
enforce such direction or any remedy which he may have in respect of a breach thereof.]  
12. Conditi on making interest determinable  on insolvency or attempted alie nation.—
Where property is transferred subject to a condition or limitation making any interest therein, 
reserved or given to or for the benefit of any person, to cease on his becoming insolvent or 
endeavouring to transfer or dispose of the same, such cond ition or limitation is void.  
Nothing in this section applies to a condition in a lease for the benefit of the lessor or those claiming 
under him.  
13. Transfer for benefit of unborn person. —Where,  on a transfer of property, an 
interest therein is created for the benefit of a person not in existence at the date of the 
transfer, subject to a prior interest created by the same transfer, the interest created for the 
benefit of such person shall not take effect, unless it extends to the whole of the remaining 
interest of the transferor in the property.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 20 of 1929, s. 8, for the second paragraph.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 12]
12 
 Illustration  
A transfers property of which he is the owner to B in trust for A and his intended wife succesively for their lives, and, aft er 
the death of the survivor for the eldest son of the intended marriage fo r life, and after his death for A's second son. The interest so 
created for the benefit of the eldest son does not take effect, because it does not extend to the whole of A's remaining inte rest in 
the property.  
14. Rule against perpetuity .—No transfer of p roperty can operate to create an interest which is to 
take effect after the lifetime of one or more persons living at the date of such transfer, and the 
minority of some person who shall be in existence at the expiration of that period, and to whom, if he 
attains full age, the interest created is to belong.  
15. Transfer to class some of whom come under sections 13 and 14. —If, on a transfer of property, 
an interest therein is created for the benefit of a class of persons with regard to some of whom such 
interest fails by reason of any of the rules contained in sections 13 and 14; such  interest fails 1[in regard 
to those persons only and not in regard to the whole class].  
2[16. Transfer to take effect on failure of prior interest. —Where, by reason of any of the 
rules contained in sections 13 and 14, an interest created for the benefit of a person or of a class 
of persons fails in regard to such person or the whole of such class, any interest created in the 
same transaction and intended to take effect after or  upon failure of such prior interest also fails. 
17. Direction for accumulation .—(1) Where the terms of a transfer of property direct that the 
income arising from the property shall be accumulated either wholly or in part during a period longer 
than—  
(a) the life of the transferor, or  
(b) a period of eighteen years from the date of the transfer,  
such direction shall, save as hereinafter provided, be void to the extent to which the period during 
which the accum
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 12]
all, save as hereinafter provided, be void to the extent to which the period during 
which the accumulation is directed exceeds the longer of the aforesaid periods, and at the end of 
such last -mentioned period the property and the income thereof shall be disposed of as if the 
period during which the accumulation has been directed to be made had elapsed.  
(2) This section shall not affect any directio n for accumulation for the purpose of — 
(i) the payment of the debts of the transferor or any other person taking any interest under the 
transfer, or  
(ii) the provision of portions for children or remoter issue of the transferor or of any other person 
takin g any interest under the transfer, or  
(iii) the preservation or maintenance of the property transferred;  
and such direction may be made accordingly.  
18. Transfer in perpetuity for benefit of public .—The restrictions in sections 14, 16 and                     
17 shall not apply in the case of a transfer of property for the benefit of the public in the 
advancement of religion, knowledge, commerce, health, safety, or any other object beneficial to 
mankind.]  
19. Vested interest .—Where, on a transfer of property, an interest therein is created in favour 
of a person without specifying the time when it is to take effect, or in terms specifying that it is to 
take effect forthwith or on the happening of an event which must happen, su ch interest is vested, 
unless a contrary intention appears from the terms of the transfer.  
A vested interest is not defeated by the death of the transferee before he obtains possession.  
Explanation. —An intention that an interest shall not be vested is not to be inferred merely -from 
a provision whereby the enjoyment thereof is postponed, or whereby a prior interest in the same 
property is given or reserved to some other person, or whereby income arising from the property is 
                                                      
1. Subs. b y Act 20 of 1929, s. 9, f
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 12]
erty is 
                                                      
1. Subs. b y Act 20 of 1929, s. 9, for “as regards the whole class”.  
2. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for s . 16, 17 and 18.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 13]
13 
 directed to be accumulated until t he time of enjoyment arrives, or from a provision that if a 
particular event shall happen the interest shall pass to another person.  
20. When unborn person acquires vested interest on transfer for his benefit .—Where, on 
a transfer of property, an interest therein is created for the benefit of a person not then living, he 
acquires upon his birth, unless a contrary intention appear from the terms of the transfer, a vested 
interest, although he may not be entitled to the enjoyment thereof immediately on his bi rth. 
21. Contingent interest. —Where , on a transfer of property, an interest therein is created in 
favour of a person to take effect only on the happening of a specified uncertain event, or if a 
specified uncertain event shall not happen, such person thereb y acquires a contingent interest in 
the property. Such interest becomes a vested interest, in the former case, on the happening of the 
event, in the latter, when the happening of the event becomes impossible.  
Exception. —Where, under a transfer of property,  a person becomes entitled to an interest 
therein upon attaining a particular age, and the transferor also gives to him absolutely the income 
to arise from such interest before he reaches that age, or directs the income or so much thereof as 
may be necessa ry to be applied for his benefit, such interest is not contingent.  
22. Transfer to members of a class who attain a particular age. —Where, on a transfer  of 
property, an interest therein is created in favour of such members only of a class as shall attain a 
particular age, such interest does not vest in any member of the class who has not attained that age.  
23. Transfer contingent on happening of specified uncertain event. —Where, on a transfer  of 
property, an interest therein is to accrue to a specified perso n if a specified uncertain event shall 
happen, and no time is mentioned for the occurrence of that event, the interest fails unless
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 13]
 shall 
happen, and no time is mentioned for the occurrence of that event, the interest fails unless such 
event happens before, or at the same time as, the intermediate or precedent interest ceases to exist.  
24. Transfer to such of certain persons as survive at some period not specified .—Where , on 
a transfer of property, an interest therein is to accrue to such of certain persons as shall be surviving 
at some period, but the exact period is not specified, the interest shall go  to such of them as shall be 
alive when the intermediate or precedent interest ceases to exist, unless a contrary intention appears 
from the terms of the transfer.  
Illustration  
A transfers property to B for life, and after his death to C and D, equally to be divided between them, or to the 
survivor of them. C dies during the life of B. D survives B . At B's death the property passes to D.  
25. Conditional transfer. —An interest created on a transfer of property and dependent upon a 
condition fails if the fulfilment of the condition is impossible, or is forbidden by law, or is of such a 
nature that, if permitted, it would defeat the provisions of any law, or is fraudulent, or involves or 
implies injury to the person or property of another, or the Court rega rds it as immoral or opposed to 
public policy.  
Illustrations  
(a) A lets a farm to B on condition that he shall walk a hundred miles in an hour. The lease is void.  
(b) A gives Rs. 500 to B on condition that he shall marry A's daughter C. At the d ate of the transfer C was dead. The 
transfer is void.  
(c) A transfers Rs. 500 to B or condition that she shall murder C. The transfer is void.  
(d) A transfer s Rs. 500 to his n iece C if she will desert her husband. The transfer is void.  
26. Fulfilment of condition precedent. —Where the terms of a transfer of property impose a  
condition to be fulfilled before a person can take an interest in the property, the condition shall be deemed 
to have been fulfilled if it ha
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 13]
can take an interest in the property, the condition shall be deemed 
to have been fulfilled if it has been substantially complied with.  
Illustr ations  
(a) A transfers Rs. 5,000 to B on condition that he shall marry with the consent of C, D, and E. E dies. B marries with 
the consent of C and D. B is deemed to have fulfilled the condition.  
(b) A transfers Rs. 5,000 to B on condition that he shall ma rry with the consent of C, D and E.  B marries without the 
consent of C, D and E, but obtains their consent after the marriage. B has not fulfilled the condition.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 14]
14 
 27. Conditional transfer to one person coupled with transfer to another on failure of prior 
disposition .—Where, on a transfer of property, an interest therein is created in favour of one person, and 
by the same transaction an ulterior disposition of the same interest is made in favour of another, if the 
prior disposition under the transfer shall fail, the ulterior disposition shall take effect upon the failure of 
the prior disposition, although the failure may not have occurred in the manner contemplated by the 
transferor.  
But, where the intention of the parties to the transaction is that the ulterior disposition shall take effect 
only in the event of the prior disposition failing in a particular manner, the ulterior disposition shall not 
take effect unless the prior disposi tion fails in that manner.  
Illustrations  
(a) A transfers Rs. 500 to B on condition that he shall execute a certain lease within three months after A ’s death, and, 
if he should neglect to do so, to C. B dies in A's life -time. The disposition in favour of C takes effect.  
(b) A transfers property to his wife; but, in case she should die in his life -time, transfers to B that which he had 
transferred to her. A and his wife perish together, under circumstances which make it impossible to prove that she died 
befor e him. The disposition in favour of B does not take effect.  
28. Ulterior transfer conditional on happening or not happening of specified event .—On a 
transfer of property an interest therein may be created to accrue to any person with the condition 
superadd ed that in case a specified uncertain event shall happen such interest shall pass to another person, 
or that in case a specified uncertain event shall not happen such interest shall pass to another person. In 
each case the dispositions are subject to the r ules contained in sections 10, 12, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25 and 27.  
29. Fulfilment of condition subsequent .—An ulterior disposition of the kind contemplated
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 14]
 and 27.  
29. Fulfilment of condition subsequent .—An ulterior disposition of the kind contemplated by the 
last preceding section cannot take effect unless the condition is strictly fulfilled.  
Illustration  
A transfers Rs. 500 to B, to be paid to him on his attaining his majority or marrying, with a proviso that, if B dies a 
minor or marries without C's consent, the Rs. 500 shall go to D. B marries when only 17 years of age, without C's consent. 
The transfer  to D takes effect.  
30. Prior disposition not affected by invalidity of ulterior disposition .—If the ulterior disposition 
is not valid, the prior disposition is  not affected by it.  
Illustration  
A transfers a farm to B for her life, and, if she do not deser t her husband to C. B is entitled to the farm during her life as 
if no condition had been inserted.  
31. Condition that transfer shall cease to have effect in case specified uncertain event happens 
or does not happen .—Subject to the provisions of section 12, on a transfer of property an interest therein 
may be created with the condition superadded that it shall cease to exist in case a specified uncertain 
event shall happen, or in case a specified uncertain event shall not happen.  
Illustrations  
(a) A trans fers a farm to B for his life, with  a proviso that, in case B cuts down a certain wood, the transfer shall cease 
to have any effect. B cuts down the wood. He loses his life -interest in the farm.  
(b) A transfers a farm to B, provided that, if B shall not go  to England within three years after the date of the transfer, 
his interest in the farm shall cease. B does not go to England within the term prescribed. His interest in the farm ceases.  
32. Such condition must not be invalid .—In order that a condition that an interest shall cease to 
exist may be valid, it is necessary that the event to which it relates be one which could legally constitute 
the condition of the creation of an interest.  
33. Transfer conditional on perf
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 14]
legally constitute 
the condition of the creation of an interest.  
33. Transfer conditional on performance of act, no time  being specifi ed for                          
performance .—Where, on a transfer of property, an interest therein is created subject to a condition that 
the person taking it shall perform a certain act, but no time is specified for the performance of the act, the 
conditi on is broken when he renders impossible, permanently or for an indefinite period, the performance 
of the act.  
34. Transfer conditional on performance of act, time being specified .—Where an act is to be 
performed by a person either as a condition to be fulf illed before an interest created on a transfer of 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 15]
15 
 property is enjoyed by him, or as a condition on the non -fulfillment of which the interest is to pass from 
him to another person, and a time is specified for the performance of the act, if such performance within 
the specified time is prevented by the fraud of a person who would be directly benefited by non -fulfilment 
of the condition, such further time shall as against him be allowed for performing the act as shall be 
requisite to make up for the delay caus ed by such fraud. But if no time is specified for the performance of 
the act, then, if its performance is by the fraud of a person interested in the non -fulfilment of the condition 
rendered impossible or indefinitely postponed, the condition shall as again st him be deemed to have been 
fulfilled.  
Election  
35. Election when necessary .—Where a person professes to transfer property which he has no right 
to transfer, and as part of the same transaction confers any benefit on the owner of the property, such 
owner  must elect either to confirm such transfer or to dissent from it; and in the latter case he shall 
relinquish the benefit so conferred, and the benefit so relinquished shall revert to the transferor or his 
representative as if it had not been disposed of,  
subject nevertheless,  
where the transfer is gratuitous, and the transferor has, before the election, died or otherwise become 
incapable of making a fresh transfer,  
and in all cases where the transfer is for consideration,  
to the charge of making good to th e disappointed transferee the amount or value of the property 
attempted to be transferred to him.  
Illustrations  
The farm of Sultanpur is the property of C and worth Rs. 800. A by an instrument of gift professes to transfer it to B, givin g 
by the same instr ument Rs. 1,000 to C. C elects to retain the farm. He forfeits the gift of Rs. 1,000.  
In the same case, A dies before the election. His representative must out of the Rs. 1,000 pay Rs. 800 to B.  
The rule in th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 15]
before the election. His representative must out of the Rs. 1,000 pay Rs. 800 to B.  
The rule in the first paragraph of this section applies whether the transferor does or does not believe 
that which he professes to transfer to be his own.  
A person taking no benefit directly under a transaction, but deriving a benefit under it indirectly, need 
not elect.  
A person who in his one capacity takes a  benefit under the transaction may in another dissent 
therefrom.  
Exception to the last preceding four rules. —Where a particular benefit is expressed to be conferred 
on the owner of the property which the transferor professes to transfer, and such benefit i s expressed to be 
in lieu of that property, if such owner claim the property, he must relinquish the particular benefit, but he 
is not bound to relinquish any other benefit conferred upon him by the same transaction.  
Acceptance of the benefit by the person  on whom it is conferred constitutes an election by him to 
confirm the transfer, if he is aware of his duty to elect and of those circumstances which would influence 
the judgment of a reasonable man in making an election, or if he waives enquiry into the c ircumstances.  
Such knowledge or waiver shall, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, be presumed, if the 
person on whom the benefit has been conferred has enjoyed it for two years without doing any act to 
express dissent.  
Such knowledge of waiver may be inferred from any act of his which renders it impossible to place 
the persons interested in the property professed to be transferred in the same condition as if such act had 
not been done.  
Illustration  
A transfers to B an estate to which C is entitled, and as part of the same transaction gives C a coal -mine. C takes possession 
of the mine and exhausts it. He has thereby confirmed the transfer of the estate to B.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 16]
16 
 If he does not within one year after the date of the transfer signify to the transferor or hi s 
representatives his intention to confirm or to dissent from the transfer, the transferor or his representative 
may, upon the expiration of that period, require him to make his election; and, if he does not comply with 
such requisition within a reasonable  time after he has received it, he shall be deemed to have elected to 
confirm the transfer.  
In case of disability, the election shall be postponed until the disability ceases, or until the election is 
made by some competent authority.  
Appointment  
36. Appor tionment of periodical payments determination of interest of person entitled .—In the 
absence of a contract or local usage to the contrary, all rents annuities, pensions, dividends and other 
periodical payments in the nature of income shall, upon the transf er of the interest of the person entitled to 
receive such payments, be deemed, as between the transferor and the transferee, to accrue due from day to 
day, and to be apportionable accordingly, but to be payable on the days appointed for the payment 
thereof . 
37. Apportionment of benefit of obligation on severance .—When, in consequence of a transfer, 
property is divided and held in several shares, and thereupon the benefit of any obligation relating to the 
property as a whole passes from one to several owners  of the property, the corresponding duty shall, in 
the absence of a contract to the contrary amongst the owners, be performed in favour of each of such 
owners in proportion to the value of his share in the property, provided that the duty can be severed an d 
that the severance does not substantially increase the burden of the obligation; but if the duty cannot be 
severed, or if the severance would substantially increase the burden of the obligation the duty shall be 
performed for the benefit of such one of t he several owners as they shall jointly designate for that 
purpose:  
Provi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 16]
enefit of such one of t he several owners as they shall jointly designate for that 
purpose:  
Provided that no person on whom the burden of the obligation lies shall be answerable for failure to 
discharge it in manner provided by this section, unless and until he has had reasonable  notice of the 
severance.  
Nothing in this section applies to leases for agricultural purposes unless and until the State 
Government by notification in the Official Gazette so directs.  
Illustrations  
(a) A sells  to B, C and D a house situated in a village and leased to E at an annual rent of Rs. 30 and delivery of one fat 
sheep, B having provided half the purchase -money and C and D one quarter each. E, having notice of this, must pay Rs. 15 to B, 
Rs. 7½ to C, and  Rs. 7½ to D, and must deliver the sheep according to the Joint direction of B, C and D.  
(b) In the same case, each house in the village being bound to provide ten days' labour each year on a d yke to prevent 
inundation , E had agreed as a term of his lease to perform this work for A. B, C and D severally require E to perform the ten 
days' work due on account of the house of each. E is not bound to do more than ten days' work in all, according to such direc tions 
as B, C and D may join in giving.  
(B) Transfer of Immovable property  
38. Transfer by person authorised only under certain circumstances to transfer .—Where any 
person, authori sed only under circumstances in their nature variable to dispose of immoveable property, 
transfers such property for consideratio n, alleging the existence of such circumstances, they shall, as 
between the transferee on the one part and the transferor and other persons (if any) affected by the transfer 
on the other part, be deemed to have existed, if the transferee, after using reaso nable care to ascertain the 
existence of such circumstances, has acted in good faith.  
Illustration  
A, a Hindu widow, whose husband has left collateral heirs, alleging that the property hel
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 16]
stration  
A, a Hindu widow, whose husband has left collateral heirs, alleging that the property held by her as such is insufficient for  
her maintenance, agrees, for pu rposes neither religious nor charitable, to sell a field, part of such property, to B. B satisfies 
himself by reasonable enquiry that the income of the property is insufficient for A's maintenance, and that the sale of the f ield is 
necessary, and acting in  good faith, buys the field from A. As between B on the one part and A and the collateral heirs on the 
other part, a necessity for the sale shall be deemed to have existed.  
39. Transfer where third person is entitled to maintenance .—Where a third person has a right to receive 
maintenance, or a provision for advancement or marriage, from the profits of immoveable property, and such 
property is transferred  1*** the right may be enforced against the transferee, if he has notice  2[thereof] or if the 
                                                      
1. The words “with the intention of defeating such right” omitted by Act 20 of 1929, s. 11.  
2. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for “of such intention”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 17]
17 
 transfer is gratuitous; but not against a transferee for consideration and without notice of the right, nor against such 
property in his hands.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
40. Burden of obligation imposing restriction on use of land .—Where, for the more beneficial 
enjoyment  of his own immoveable property, a third person has, independently of any interest in the 
immoveable property of another or of any easement thereon, a right to restrain the enjoyment2 [in a 
particular manner of the latter property], or  
or of obligation annexed to ownership but not amounting to interest or easement .—where a third 
person is entitled to the benefit of an obligation arising out of contract and annexed to the ownership of 
immoveable property, but not amounting to an interest therein or easeme nt thereon,  
such right or obligation may be enforced against a transferee with notice thereof or a gratuitous 
transferee of the property affected thereby, but not against a transferee for consideration and without 
notice of the right or obligation, nor aga inst such property in his hands.  
Illustration  
A contracts to sell Sultanpur to B. While the contract is still in force he sells Sultanpur to C, who has notice of the contr act. 
B may enforce the contract against C t o the same extent as against A.  
41. Transf er by ostensible owner .—Where, with the consent, express or implied, of the persons 
interested in immoveable property, a person is the ostensible owner of such property and transfers the 
same for consideration, the transfer shall not be violable on the gro und that the transferor was not 
authorised to make it:  
Provided that the transferee, after taking reasonable care to ascertain that the transferor had power to 
make the transfer, has acted in good faith.  
42. Transfer by person having authority to revoke fo rmer transfer .—Where a person transfers 
any immoveable property, reserving power to revoke the transfer, and subsequently transfers the property 
for cons
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 17]
 property, reserving power to revoke the transfer, and subsequently transfers the property 
for consideration to another transferee, such transfer operates in favour of such transferee (subject to any 
condition attached to the exercise of the power) as a revocation of the former transfer to the extent of the 
power.  
Illustration  
A lets a house to B, and reserves power to revoke the lease if, in the opinion of a specified surveyor, B should make a use of 
it detrimental to its value. Afterwards A, thinking that such a use has been made, lets the house to C. This operates as a 
revocati on of B's lease subject to the opinion of the surveyor as to B's use of the house having been detrimental to its value . 
43. Transfer by unauthori sed person who subsequently acquires interest in property 
transferred .—Where a person  3[fraudulently or] errone ously represents that he is authori sed to transfer 
certain immovable property and professes to transfer such property for consideration, such transfer shall, 
at the option of the transferee, operate on any interest which the transferor may acquire in such property at 
any time during which the contract of transfer subsists.  
Nothing in this section shall impair the right of transferees in good faith for consideration without 
notice of the existence of the said option.  
Illustration  
A, a Hindu who has separated from his father B, sells to C three fields, X, Y and Z, representing that A is authori sed to 
transfer the same. Of these fields Z does not belong to A, it having been retained by B on the partition; but on B's dying A as heir 
obtains Z.C, not having rescinded the contract of sale, may require A to deliver Z to him .  
44. Transfer by one co -owner .—Where one of two or more co -owners of immoveable property 
legally competent in that behalf transfers his share of such property or any interest therein, the transferee 
acquires as to such share or interest, and so far as is necessary to give effect to the tr
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 17]
ansferee 
acquires as to such share or interest, and so far as is necessary to give effect to the transfer, the transferor's 
                                                      
1. The Illustrations omitted by Act 20 of 1929, s. 11.  
2. Subs. by s. 12, ibid.,  for “of the latter property or to compel its enjoyment in a particular manner”.  
3. Ins. by s. 13, ibid. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 18]
18 
 right to joint possession or other common or part enjoyment of the property, and to enforce a partition of 
the same, but subject to the conditions and liabilities affecting, at the date of the transfer, the share or 
interest so t ransferred.  
Where the transferee of a share of a dwelling -house belonging to an undivided family is not a 
member of the family, nothing in this section shall be deemed to entitle him to joint possession or other 
common or part enjoyment of the house.  
45. Joint transfer for consideration .—Where immoveable property is transferred for consideration 
to two or more persons and such consideration is paid out of a fund belonging to them in common, they 
are, in the absence of a contract to the contrary, respectivel y entitled to interests in such property 
identical, as nearly as may be, with the interests to which they were respectively entitled in the fund; and, 
where such consideration is paid out of separate funds belonging to them respectively, they are, in the 
absence of a contract to the contrary, respectively entitled to interests in such property in proportion to the 
shares of the consideration which they respectively advanced.  
In the absence of evidence as to the interests in the fund to which they were respe ctively entitled, or 
as to the shares which they respectively advanced, such persons shall be presumed to be equally interested 
in the property.  
46. Transfer for consideration by persons having distinct interests .—Where immoveable property 
is transferred f or consideration by persons having distinct interests therein, the transferors are, in the 
absence of a contract to the contrary, entitled to share in the consideration equally, where their interests in 
the property were of equal value, and, where such int erests were of unequal value, proportionately to the 
value of their respective interests.  
Illustration  
(a) A, owing a moiety, and B and C, each a quarter share, of mauza  Sultanpur, exchange an 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 18]
ration  
(a) A, owing a moiety, and B and C, each a quarter share, of mauza  Sultanpur, exchange an eighth share of that mauza for a 
quarter share of mauza  Lalpura . There being no agreement to the contrary, A is entitled to an eighth share in Lalpura, and B and 
C each to a sixteenth share in that mauza.  
(b) A, being entitled to a life -interest in mauza  Atrali and B and C to the reversion, sell the mauza for Rs. 1,00 0. A's                    
life-interest is ascertained to be worth Rs. 600, the reversion Rs. 400 . A is entitled to receive Rs. 600 out of the purchase -money. 
B and C to receive Rs. 400 0. 
47. Transfer by co -owners of share in common property .—Where several  co-owners of 
immoveable property transfer a share therein without specifying that the transfer is to take effect on 
any particular share or shares of the transferors, the transfer, as among such transferors, takes effect 
on such shares equally where the s hares were equal, and , where they were unequal, proprotionately to 
the extent of such shares.  
Illustration  
A, the owner of an eight -anna share, and B and C, each the owner of a four -anna share, in mauza  Sultanpur, transfer a 
two-anna share in the mauza to D, without specifying from which of their several shares the transfer is made. To give 
effect to the transfer one -anna share is taken from the share of A, and half -an-anna share from each of the shares of                          
B and C.  
48. Priority of ri ghts created by transfer. —Where a person purports to create by transfer at 
different times rights in or over the same immoveable property, and such rights cannot all exist or be 
exercised to their full extent together, each later created right shall, in th e absence of a special contract or 
reservation binding the earlier transferees, be subject to the rights previously created.  
49. Transferee ’s right under policy. —Where immoveable property is transferred for consideration, 
and such property or any part
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 18]
 policy. —Where immoveable property is transferred for consideration, 
and such property or any part thereof is at the date of the transfer insured against loss or damage by fire, 
the transferee, in case of such loss or damage, may, in the absence of a contract to the contrary, require 
any money which the transferor actually receives under the policy, or so much thereof as may be 
necessary, to be applied in reinstating the property.  
50. Rent bona fide paid to holder under defective title. —No person shall be chargeable with 
any rents or profits of any immoveable property, which he has in good faith paid or delivered to any 
person of whom he in good faith held such property, notwithstanding it may afterwards appear that the 
person to whom such payment or delivery was made had no right to receive such rents or profits.  
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 19]
19 
 Illustration  
A lets a field to B at a r ent of Rs. 50, and then transfers the field to C. B, having no notice of the transfer, in good faith pays 
the rent to A. B is not chargeable with the rent so paid.  
51. Improvements made by bona fide  holders under defective titles .—When the transferee of 
immoveable property makes any improvement on the property, believing in good faith that he is  
absolutely entitled thereto, and he is subsequently evicted there  from by any person having a  better 
title, the transferee has a right to require the person causing  the eviction either to have the value of the 
improvement estimated and paid or secured to the transferee, or to sell his  interest in the property to the 
transferee at the then market value thereof , irrespective of the value of such improvement.  
The amount  to be paid or secured in respect of such imp rovement shall be the estimated 
value thereof at the time of the eviction.  
When, under the circumstances aforesaid, the transferee has planted or sown on the property 
crops which ar e growing when he is evicted t herefrom, he is entitled to such crops and to free 
ingress and egress to gather and carry them.  
52. Transfer of property pending suit relating thereto .—During the 1[pendency] in any 
Court having authority 2[3[within the limits of India excluding the State of Jammu and Kashmir] 
or established beyond such limits] by 4[the Central Government  5***] , of 6[any] suit or 
proceeding 7[which is not collusive and] in. which any right to immoveable property is directly 
and specifically in question, the property cannot be transferred or otherwise dealt with by any 
party to the suit or proceeding so as to affect the rights of any other party thereto under any 
decree or or der which may be made therein, except under the authority of the Court and on such 
terms as it may impose.  
7[Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, the pendency of a suit or proceeding shall be 
deemed to commenc
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 19]
 —For the purposes of this section, the pendency of a suit or proceeding shall be 
deemed to commence from the date of the presentation o f the plaint or the institution of the 
proceeding in a Court of competent jurisdiction, and to continue until the suit or proceeding has 
been disposed of by a final decree or order and complete satisfaction or discharge of such decree 
or order , has been ob tained, or has become unobtainable by reason of the expiration of any period 
of limitation prescribed for the execution thereof by any law for the time being in force.]  
8[53. Fraudulent transfer .—(1) Every transfer of immoveable property made with intent to 
defeat or delay the creditors of the transferor shall be voidable at the option of any creditor so 
defeated or delayed. 
Nothing in this sub -section shall impair the rights of a transferee in good faith and for 
consideration.  
Nothing in this sub -section shall affect any law for the time being in force relating to 
insolvency.  
A suit instituted by a creditor (which term includes a decree -holder whether he has or has 
not applied for execution of his decree) to avoid a transfer on the ground that  it has been made 
with intent to defeat or delay the creditors of the transferor, shall be instituted on behalf of, or 
for the benefit of, all the creditors.  
(2) Every transfer of immoveable property made without consideration with intent to defraud a 
subsequent transferee shall be voidable at the option of such transferee.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 20 of 1929, s.14, for “active prosecution”.  
2. Subs. by A.O. 1950, for “in the Provinces or established beyond  the limits of the Provinces”.  
3. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Schedule, for “within the limits of Part A States and Part C States”              
(w.e.f. 1 -4-1951).  
4. Subs. by A.O. 1937, for “the Governor General in Council”.  
5. The words “or the C rown Representative”  Rep.  by the A.O. 1948.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 19]
vernor General in Council”.  
5. The words “or the C rown Representative”  Rep.  by the A.O. 1948.  
6. Subs. by Act 20 of 1929, s. 14, for “a contentious ”. 
7. Ins. by s. 14, ibid 
8. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for s . 53. 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 20]
20 
 For the purposes of this sub -section, no  transfer made without consideration shall be deemed to have 
been made with intent to defraud by reason only that a subsequent transfer for consid eration was made.]  
1[53A. Part performance .—Where any person contracts to transfer for consideration any 
immoveable property by writing signed by him or on his behalf from which the terms necessary to 
constitute the transfer can be ascertained with reasona ble certainty, 
and the transferee has , in part performance of the contract, taken possession of the property or any 
part thereof, or the transferee, being already in possession, continues in possession in part performance of 
the contract and has done some act in furtherance of the contract,  
and the transferee has performed or is willing to perform his part of the contract,  
then, notwithstanding that  2***, or, where there is an instrument of transfer, that the transfer has not 
been completed in the manner prescribed therefor by the law for the t ime being in force, the transferor or 
any person claiming under him shall be debarred from enforcing against the transferee and persons 
claiming under him any right in respect of the property of which the transferee has taken or continued in 
possession, ot her than a right expressly provided by the terms of the contract : 
Provided that nothing in this section sh all affect the  rights of a transferee for consideration who has 
no notice of the contract or of the part performance thereof.]  
CHAPTER III  
OF SALES OF  IMMOVEABLE PROPERTY  
54. “Sale” defined .—“Sale” is a transfer of ownership in exchange for a price paid or promised 
or part -paid and part -promised.  
Sale how made .—Such transfer, in the case of tangible immoveable property of the value of one 
hundred rupees  and upwards, or in the case of a reversion or other intangible thing, can be made only by a 
registered instrument.  
In the case of tangible immoveable property of a value less than one h
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 20]
y a 
registered instrument.  
In the case of tangible immoveable property of a value less than one hundred rupees, such transfer 
may be made either by a registered instru ment or by delivery of the property.  
Delivery of tangible immoveable property takes place when the seller places the buyer, or such person 
as he directs, in possession of the property.  
Contract for sale .—A contract for the sale of immoveable property is a contract that a sale of 
such property shall take place on terms settled between the parties . 
It does not, of itself, create any interest in or charge on such property.  
STATE AMENDMENTS  
Assam.  
Amendment of section 54 of the Central Act 4 of 1882. —In Section  54 of the principal Act, in     
para 2, for the expression “by a registered instrument” the following expression shall be substituted,               
namely:  — 
“by an instrument registered in the State of Assam, notwithstanding anything contained in the India 
Registration Act, 1908 (Act 16 of 1908) to the contrary. ” 
[Vide Assam Act 10 of 1976, s.  2.] 
55. Rights and liabilities of buyer and seller .—In the absence o f a contract to the contrary, 
the buyer and the seller of immoveable property respectively are subject to the liabilities, and have the 
rights, mentioned in the rules next following, or such of them as are applicable to the property sold:  
(1) The seller is  bound — 
(a) to disclose to the buyer any material defect in the property  3[or in the seller ’s title thereto] of 
which the seller is, and the buyer is not, aware, and which the buyer could not with ordinary care 
discover ; 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 20 of 1929, s. 16.  
2. The words “the contract though required to be registered, has not been registered, or” omitted by Act 48 of 2001, s. 10 (w.e.f. 
24-9-2001).  
3. Ins. by Act 20 of 1929, s. 17.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 21]
21 
 (b) to produce to the buyer on his request for examination all documents of title relating to the 
property which are in the seller's possession or power;  
(c) to answer to the best of his information all relevant questions put to him by the buyer in 
respect to the property or the title there to; 
(d) on payment or tender of the amount due in respect of the price, to execute a proper 
conveyance of the property when the buyer tenders it to him for execution at a proper time and place;  
(e) between the date of the contract of sale and the delivery of the property, to take as much care 
of the property and all documents of title relating thereto which  are in his possession as an owner of 
ordinary prudence would take of such property and documents;  
(f) to give, on being so required, the buyer, or such person as he directs, such possession of the 
property as its nature admits;  
(g) to pay all public charges and rent accrued due in respect of the property up to the 
date of the sale, the interest on all incumbrances on such property due on such date, and, 
except where the property is sold subject to incumbrances, to discharge all incumbrances 
on the property then existing.  
(2) The seller shall be deemed to contract with the buyer that the interest which the seller 
professes to transfer to the buyer subsists and that he has power to transfer the same : 
Provided that, where the sale is made by a person in  a fiduciary character, he shall be 
deemed to contract with the buyer that the seller has done no act whereby the property is 
incumbered or whereby he is hindered from transferring it.  
The benefit of the contract mentioned in this rule shall be annexed to, and shall go 
with, the interest of the transferee as such, and may be enforced by every person in whom 
that interest is for the whole or any part thereof  from time to time vested.  
(3) Where the whole of the purchase -money has been paid to the seller, he is also bound to 
deliver to the buye
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 21]
e whole of the purchase -money has been paid to the seller, he is also bound to 
deliver to the buyer all documents of title relating to the property which are in the seller ’s 
possession or power:  
Provided that, ( a) whe re the seller retains any part of the property comprised in such 
documents, he is entitled to retain them all, and, ( b) where the whole of such property is sold 
to different buyers the buyers, of the lot of greatest value is entitled to such documents. But  in 
case ( a) the seller, and in case ( b) the buyer , of the lot of greatest value, is bound, upon every 
reasonable request by the buyer, or by any of the other buyers, as the case may be, and at the 
cost of the person making the request, to produce the said  documents and furnish such true 
copies thereof or extracts therefrom as he may require; and in the meantime, the seller, or the 
buyer of the lot of greatest value, as the case may be, shall keep the said documents safe, 
uncancelled and undefaced, unless p revented from so doing by fire or other inevitable accident.  
(4) The seller is entitled — 
(a) to the rents and profits of the property till the ownership thereof passes to the 
buyer;  
(b) where the ownership of the property has passed to the buyer before payment of the 
whole of the purchase -money, to a charge upon the property in the hands of the buyer, 
1[any transferee without consideration or any transferee  with notice of the non -paymen t,] 
for the amount of the purchase -money, or any part thereof remaining unpaid, and for 
interest on such amount or part 1[from the date on which possession has been delivered].  
(5) The buyer is bound — 
(a) to disclose to the seller any fact as to the nature  or extent of the seller ’s interest in the 
property of which the buyer is aware, but of which he has reason to believe that the seller is 
not aware, and which materially increases the value of such interest;  
                                                      
1. Ins.
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 21]
creases the value of such interest;  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 20 of 1929, s. 17.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 22]
22 
 (b) to pay or tender, at the time and place of completing the sale, the purchase -money to 
the seller or such person, as he directs: provided that, where the property is sold free from 
incumbrances, the buyer may retain out of the purchase -money the amount of any 
incumbrances on the property existing at  the date of the sale, and shall pay the amount so retained to 
the persons entitled thereto;  
(c) where the ownership of the property has passed to the buyer, to bear any loss arising from the 
destruction, injury or decrease in value of the property not cau sed by the seller;  
(d) where the ownership of the property has passed to the buyer, as between himself and the 
seller, to pay all public charges and rent which may become payable in respect of the property, 
the principal moneys due on any incumbrances subj ect to which the property is sold, and the 
interest thereon afterwards accruing due.  
(6) The buyer is entitled — 
(a) where the ownership of the property has passed to him, to the benefit of any improvement 
in, or increase in value of, the property, and to the rents and profits thereof;  
(b) unless he has improperly declined to accept delivery of the property, to a charge on the 
property, as against the seller and all persons claiming under him 1*** to the extent of the 
seller's interest in the property, for the amount of any purchase -money properly paid by the 
buyer in anticipation of the delivery and for interest on such amount; and, when he properly 
declines to accept the delivery, also for the earnest (if any) and for the costs (if any) awarded to 
him of a  suit to compel specific performance of the contract or to obtain a decree for its 
rescission.  
An omission to make such disclosures as are mentioned in this section, paragraph ( 1), clause ( a), and 
paragraph ( 5), clause ( a), is fraudulent.  
2[56. Marshalling  by subsequent purchaser .—If the owner of two or more properties 
mortgages them to one person and then sells one 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 22]
purchaser .—If the owner of two or more properties 
mortgages them to one person and then sells one or more of the properties to another person, the 
buyer is, in the absence of a contract to the contrary, entitled to have the mortgage -debt sat isfied 
out of the property or properties not sold to him, so far as the same will extend, but not so as to 
prejudice the rights of the mortgagee or p ersons claiming under him or any other person who has 
for consideration acquired an interest in any of the properties.] 
Discharge of Incumbrances on Sale 
57. P rovision by Court for incumbrances and sale freed therefrom .—(a) Where immoveable 
property subject to any incumbrance, whether immediately payable or not, is sold by the Court or in 
execution of a decree,  or out of Court, the Court may, if it thinks fit, on the application of any party 
to the sale, direct or allow payment into Court, — 
(1) in case of an annual or monthly sum charged on the property, or of a capital sum charged on a 
determinable interest in the property —of such amount as, when invested in securities of the Central 
Government, the Court considers will be sufficient, by means of the interest thereof, to keep down or 
otherwise provide for that charge, and  
(2) in any other case of a capital sum c harged on the property —of the amount sufficient to meet 
the incumbrance and an interest due thereon.  
But in either case there shall also be paid into Court such additional amount as the Court 
considers will be sufficient to meet the contingency of further costs, expenses and interest, and any 
other contingency, except depreciation of investments, not exceeding one -tenth part of the original 
amount to be paid in, unless the Court for special reasons (which it shall record) thinks fit to 
require a larger addi tional amount.  
(b) Thereupon the Court may, if it thinks fit, and after notice to the incumbrance r, unless  the 
Court, for reasons to be recorded in writing, thinks fit to dispense wi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 22]
 incumbrance r, unless  the 
Court, for reasons to be recorded in writing, thinks fit to dispense with such notice, declare the 
property to be freed from the incumbrance, and make any order for conveyance, or vesting order, 
                                                      
1. The words “with notice of the payment ” omitted by  Act 20 of 1929, s. 17 . 
2. Subs. by s. 18, ibid., for s. 56. 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 23]
23 
 proper for giving effect to the sale, and give directions  for the retention and investment of the 
money in Court.  
(c) After notice served on the persons interested in or entitled to the money or fund in 
Court , the Court may direct payment or transfer thereof to the persons entitled to receive or 
give a discharge  for the same, and generally may give directions respecting the application or 
distribution of the capital or income thereof.  
(d) An appeal shall lie from any declaration, order or direction under this section as if the same were 
a decree.  
(e) In this sect ion “Court ” means ( 1) a High Court in the exercise of its ordinary or 
extraordinary original civil jurisdiction, ( 2) the Court of a District Judge within the local limits 
of whose jurisdiction the property or any part thereof is situate, ( 3) any other Court which the 
State Government may, from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be 
competent to exercise the jurisdiction conferred by this section.  
CHAPTER IV  
OF MORTGAGES OF IMMOVEABLE  PROPERTY AND CHARGES  
58. “Mortgage ”, “mortgagor ”, “mortgagee ”, “mortgage -money” and “mortgage -deed” 
defined .—(a) A mortgage is the transfer of an interest in specific immoveable property for the 
purpose of securing the payment of money advanced or to be advanced by way of loan, an 
existing or future debt, or the performance of an engagement which may give rise to a pecuniary 
liability.  
The transferor is called a mortgagor, the transferee a mortgagee; the principal money and 
interest of which payment is secured for the time being arc called the mortgage -money, and 
the instrument (if  any) by which the transfer is effected is called a mortgage -deed.  
(b) Simple mortgage .—Where, without delivering possession of the mortgaged property, 
the mortgagor binds himself personally to pay the mortgage -money, and agrees, expressly or 
impliedly , that, in the event of his failing to pay according to his cont
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 23]
and agrees, expressly or 
impliedly , that, in the event of his failing to pay according to his contract, the mortgagee shall 
have a right to cause the mortgaged property to be sold and the proceeds of sale to be applied, 
so far as may be necessary, in payme nt of the mortgage -money, the transaction is called a 
simple mortgage and the mortgagee a simple mortgagee.  
(c) Mortgage by conditional sale .—Where the mortgagor ostensibly sells the mortgaged 
property — 
on condition that on default of payment of the mortgage -money on a certain date the sale shall 
become absolute, or  
on condition that on such payment being made the sale shall become void, or  
on condition that on such payment being made the buyer shall transfer the property to 
the seller,  
the transactio n is called a mortgage by conditional sale and the mortgagee a mortgagee by 
conditional sale:  
1[Provided that no such transaction shall be deemed to be a mortgage, unless the condition is 
embodied in the document which effects or  purports to effect  the sale.]  
(d) Usufructuary mortgage .—Where the mortgagor delivers possession 1[or expressly or by 
implication binds himself to deliver possession] of the mortgaged property to the mortgagee, and  
authori ses him to retain such possession until payment of t he mortgage -money, and to receive 
the rents and profits accruing from the property 2[or any part of such rents and profits and to 
appropriate the same] in lieu of interest, or in payment of the mortgage -money, or partly in 
lieu of interest 3[or] partly in payment of the mortgage -money, the transaction is called an 
usufructuary mortgage and the mortgagee an usufructuary mortgagee.  
                                                      
1. Added b y A c t  2 0  o f  1 9 2 9,  s .  1 9 .  
2. Subs. by s. 19, ibid.,  for “and to appropriate them”.  
3. Subs. by s. 19, ibid.,  for “and ”. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 23]
. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 24]
24 
 (e) English mortgage. —Where the  mortgagor binds himself to re -pay the mortgage -money on a 
certain date, and transfers the mortgag ed property absolutely to the mortgagee, but subject to a proviso 
that he will re -transfer it to the mortgagor upon payment of the mortgage -money as agreed, the 
transaction is called an English mortgage.  
1[(f) Mortgage by deposit of title -deeds.—Where a  person in any of the following towns, 
namely, the towns of Calcutta, Madras , 2[and Bombay], 3*** and in any other town which the 
4[State Government concerned] may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, 
delivers to a creditor or his  agent documents of title to immoveable property, with intent to create 
a security thereon, the transaction is called a mortgage by deposit of title -deeds. 
(g) Anomalous mortgage. —A mortgage which is not a simple mortgage, a  mortgage by 
conditional sale, a n usufructuary mortgage, an English mortgage or a mortgage by deposit of 
title-deeds within the meaning of this section is called an anomalous mortgage.]  
59. Mortgage wh en to be by assurance .—Where the principal money secured is one hundred 
rupees or  upwar ds, a mortgage 5[other than a mortgage by deposit of title -deeds] can be effected only 
by a registered instrument signed by the mortgagor and attested  by at least two witnesses.  
Where the principal money secured is less than one hundred rupees, a mortgage may be  
effected either by 6[a registered instrument] signed and attested as aforesaid, or (except in the 
case of a simple mortgage) by delivery of the property.  
7*    *    *    * 
8[59A. References to mortgagors and mortgagees to include persons deriving ti tle from 
them.—Unless otherwise expressly provided, references in  this Chapter to mortgagors and 
mortgagees shall be deemed to include references to persons deriving title from them 
respectively.]  
Rights and Liabilities of Mortgagor  
60. Right of mortgagor to redeem. —At any t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 24]
 
respectively.]  
Rights and Liabilities of Mortgagor  
60. Right of mortgagor to redeem. —At any time after the principal money has become 9[due], 
the mortgagor has a right, on payment or tender, at a proper time and place, of the mortgage -
money, to require the mortgagee  (a) to deliver 10[to the mortgagor the mortgage -deed and all 
documents relating to the mortgaged property which are in the possession or power of the 
mortgagee], ( b) where the mortgagee is in possession of the mortgaged prope rty, to deliver 
possession thereof to the mortgagor, and ( c) at the cost of the mortgagor eithe r to re -transfer the 
mortgaged property to him or to such third person as he may direct, or to execute and (where the 
mortgage has been effected by a registered instrument) to have registered an  acknowledgement in 
writing that any right in derogation of hi s interest transferred to the mortgagee has been extinguished:  
Provided that the right conferred by this section h as not been extinguished by act of the parties or by 
11[decree] of a Court.  
The right conferred by this section is called a right to redeem and  a suit to en force it is called a suit 
for redemption.  
Nothing in this section shall be deemed to render invalid any provision to the effect that, if 
the time fixed for payment of the principal money has been allowed to pass or no such time has 
been fixed , the mortgagee shall be entitled to reasonable notice before payment or tender of 
such money.  
                                                      
1. Added by Act 20 of 1929, s. 19 . 
2. Subs. by A.O. 1948, for “Bombay and Karachi”. The word “and” had been ins. by A.O. 1937.  
3. The words “Rangoon, Moulmein, Bassein and Akyab” omitted by A.O. 1937.  
4. The words “Governor General in Council” successively amended by A.O. 1937 and the A.O. 1950 to read as 
above.  
5. Ins. by Act 20 of 1929, s. 20.  
6. Subs. by Act 6 of 1904, s. 3, for “an instrument”.  
7. Third paragraph omitted by Act 20 o
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 24]
20.  
6. Subs. by Act 6 of 1904, s. 3, for “an instrument”.  
7. Third paragraph omitted by Act 20 of 1929, s. 20.  
8. Ins. by s. 21, ibid. 
9. Subs. by s. 22, ibid., for “payable”.  
10. Subs. by s. 22, ibid., for “the mortgage -deed, if any, to the mortgagor”.  
11. Subs. by Act 20 of 1929, s. 22, for “order”.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 25]
25 
 Redemption of portion of mortgaged property .—Nothing in this section shall entitle a 
person interested in a share only of the mortgaged property to redeem his own  share only, on 
payment of a proportionate part of the amount remaining due on the mortgage, except 1[only] 
where a mortgagee, or, if there are more mortgagees than one, all such mortgagees, has or have 
acquired, in whole or in part, the share of a mortgag er. 
2[60A. Obligation to transfer to third party instead of re -transference to mortgagor .—
(1) Where a mortgagor is entitled to redemption, then, on the fulfilment of any conditions on the 
fulfilment of which he would be entitled to require a re -transfer, he may require the mortgagee, 
instead of re -transferring the property, to assign the mortgage -debt and transfer the mortgaged 
property to such third person as the mortgagor may direct; and the mortgagee shall be bound to 
assign and transfer accordingly.  
(2) The rights conferred by this section belong to and may be enforced by the mortgagor or 
by any encumbrancer notwithstanding an intermediate encumbrance ; but the requisition of any 
encumbrancer shall prevail over a requisition of the mortgagor and, as betw een encumbrancers, 
the requisition of a prior encumbrancer shall prevail over that of a subsequent encumbrancer.  
(3) The provisions of this section do not apply in the case of a mortgagee who is or has been in 
possession.  
60B. Right to inspection and produ ction of documents .—A mortgagor, as long as his right 
of redemption subsists, shall be entitled at all reasonable times, at his request and at his own 
cost, and on payment of the mortgagee ’s costs and expenses in this behalf, to inspect and make 
copies or abstracts of, or extracts from, documents of title relating to the mortgaged property 
which ar e in the custody or power of the mortgagee.]  
3[61. Right to redeem separately or simultaneously .—A mortgagor who has executed two 
or more mortgages in favour  of 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 25]
em separately or simultaneously .—A mortgagor who has executed two 
or more mortgages in favour  of the same mortgagee shall, in the absence of a contract to the 
contrary, when the principal money of any two or more of the mortgages has become due, be 
entitled to redeem any one such mortgage separately, or any two or more of such mortgages 
together.] 
62. Right of usufructuary mortgagor to recover possession. —In the case of a usufructuary 
mortgage, the mortgagor has a right to recover possession of the property 4[together with the mortgage -
deed and all documents relating to the mortgaged property which  are in the possession or power of the 
mortgagee] ,—  
(a) where the mortgagee is authori sed to pay himself the mortgage -money from the 
rents and profits of the property. —when such money is paid:  
(b) where the mortgagee is authori sed to pay himself from such  rents and profits 5[or 
any part thereof a part only of the mortgage -money] ,—when the term (if any), prescribed 
for the payment of the mortgage -money has expired and the mortgagor pays or tenders to 
the mortgagee 6[the mortgage -money or the balance thereof] or deposits it in Court as 
hereinafter provided.  
63. Accession to mortgaged property. —Where mortgaged property in possession of the 
mortgagee has, during the continuance of the mortgage, received any accession, the mort -
gagor, upon redemption, sha ll, in the absence of a contract to the contrary, be entitled as 
against the mortgagee to such accession.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 20 of 1929, s. 22.  
2. S. 60A and 60B ins. by s. 23, ibid.  
3. Subs. by s. 24, ibid., for s. 61.  
4. Ins. by s. 25, ibid.  
5. Subs. by s. 25, ibid., for “the interest of the principal money”.  
6. Subs. by s. 25, ibid., for “the principal money ”. 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 26]
26 
 Accession acquired in virtue of transferred ownership .—Where such accession has 
been acquired at the expense of the mortgagee, and is capable of separ ate possession or 
enjoyment wit hout detriment to the principal  property, the mortgagor desiring to take the 
accession must pay to the mortgagee the expense of acquiring it. If such separate possession 
or enjoyment is not possible, the accession must be del ivered with the property; the 
mortgagor being liable, in the case of an acquisition necessary to preserve the property from 
destruction, forfeiture or sale, or made with his assent, to pay the proper cost thereof, as an 
addition to the principal money, 1[with interest at the same rate as is payable on the 
principal, or, where no such rate is fixed , at the rate of nine per cent. per annum].  
In the case last mentioned the profits, if any, arising from the accession shall be credited to the 
mortgagor.  
Where th e mortgage is usufructuary and the accession has been acquired at the expense 
of the mortgagee, the profits, if any, arising from the accession shall, in the absence of a 
contract to the contrary, be set off against interest, if any, payable on the money s o 
expended.  
2[63A. Improvements to  mortgaged property .—(1) Where mortgaged property in         
posses sion of the mortgagee has, during the continuance of the mortgage, been improved, the 
mortgagor, upon redemption, shall, in the absence of a contract to the contrary, be entitled to 
the improvement; and the mortgagor shall not, save only in cases provided for in                                
sub-section ( 2), be liable to pay the cost thereof. 
(2)Where any such improvement was effected at the cost of the mortgagee and was 
necessary to preserve the property from destruction or deterioration or was necessary  to 
prevent the security from becoming insuffic ient, or was made in compliance with the 
lawful order of any public servant or public authority, the mortgagor shall, in t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 26]
mpliance with the 
lawful order of any public servant or public authority, the mortgagor shall, in the absence 
of a contrac t to the contrary, be liable to , pay the proper cost thereof as an addition to the 
principal money with interest at the same rate as is payable on the principal, or, where no 
such rate is fixed, at the rate of nine per cent. per annum, and the profits, if any, accruing 
by reason of the improvement shall be credited to the mortgagor.]  
64. Renewal of mortgaged lease .—Where the mortgaged property is a lease 3***, and 
the mortgagee obtains a renewal of the lease, the mortgagor, upon redemption, shall, in the 
absence of a contract by him to the contrary, have the benefit of the new lease.  
65. Implied contracts by mortgagor .—In the absence of a contract to the contrary, the 
mortgagor shall be deemed to contract with the mortgagee, — 
(a) that the interest which the mortgagor professes to transfer to the mortgagee 
subsists, and that the mortgagor has power to transfer the same;  
(b) that the mortgagor will defend, or, if the mortgagee be in possession of the 
mortgaged property, enable him to defend, the mortgagor ’s title thereto;  
(c) that the mortgagor will, so long as the mortgag ee is not in possession of the 
mortgaged property, pay all public charges accruing due in respect of the property;  
(d) and, where the mortgaged property is a lease 4***, that the rent payable under the lease, 
the conditions contained therein, and the contracts binding on the lessee have been paid, 
performed and observed down to the commencement of the mortgage; and that the mortgagor 
will, so long as the security exists  and the mortgagee is not in possession of the mortgaged 
property, pay the rent reserved by the lease, or, if the lease be renewed, the renewed lease, 
perform the conditions contained therein and observe the contracts binding on the lessee, and 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 20 of 1929,  s. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 26]
lessee, and 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 20 of 1929,  s. 26, for “ at the  same rate of interest”.  
2. Ins. by  s. 27, ibid.  
3. The words “for a term of years” omitted by s. 28, ibid. 
4. The words “for a term of years” omitted by s. 29 , ibid.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 27]
27 
 indemnify t he mortgagee against all claims sustained by reason of the non -payment of the said 
rent or the a  non-performance or non -observance of the said conditions and contracts;  
(e) and, where the mortgage is a second or subsequent incumbrance on the property, that  
the mortgagor will pay the interest from time to time accruing due on each prior incumbrance 
as and when it becomes due, and will at the proper time discharge the principal money due on 
such prior incumbrance.  
1*   *   *   *   *. 
The benefit of the contra cts mentioned in this section shall be annexed to and shall go with the 
interest of the mortgagee as such, and may be enforced by every person in whom that interest is 
for the whole or any part thereof from time to time vested.  
2[65A. Mortgagor ’s power to lease .—(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), a mortgagor, 
while lawfully in possession of the mortgaged property, shall have power to make leases thereof which 
shall be binding on the mortgagee. 
(2) (a) Every such lease shall be such as would be made in the ordinary course of management of the 
property concerned , and in accordance with any local law, custom or usage.  
(b) Every such lease shall reserve the best rent that can reasonably be obtained, and no premium 
shall be paid or promised and no rent shall be payable in advance.  
(c) No such lease shall contain a covenant for renewal.  
(d) Every such lease shall take effect from a date not later than six months from the date on which it 
is made.  
(e) In the case of a lease of buildings, whether leased it or without the land on which they 
stand, the duration of the lease shall in no case exceed three years, and the lease shall contain a 
covenant for payment of the rent and a condition of re -entry on the rent n ot being paid within a 
time therein specified.  
(3) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) apply only if and as far as a contrary intention is not 
expressed in the mortgage -deed; and the provi
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 27]
ly only if and as far as a contrary intention is not 
expressed in the mortgage -deed; and the provisions of sub -section ( 2) may be varied or extended by 
the mortgage -deed and, as so varied and extended, shall, as far as may be, operate in like manner and 
with all like incidents, effects and consequences, as if such variations or extensions were contained in 
that sub -section.]  
66. Waste by mortgagor in possessi on.—A mortgagor in possession of the mortgaged 
property is not liable to the mortgagee for allowing the property to deteriorate; but he must not 
commit any act which is destructive or permanently injurious thereto, if the security is 
insufficient or will b e rendered insufficient by such act.  
Explanation. —A security is insufficient within the meaning of this section unless the value of  the 
mortgaged property exceeds by one -third, or, if consisting of buildings, exceeds by one -half, the amount 
for the time be ing due on the mortgage.  
Rights and Liabilities of Mortgagee  
67. Right to foreclosure or sale. —In the absence of a contract to the contrary, the mortgagee 
has, at any time after  the mortgage -money has become 3[due] to him, and before a decree has been 
made for the redemption of the mortgaged property, or the mortgage -money has been paid or 
deposited as hereinafter provided, a right to obtain from the Court 4[a decree] that the mortgagor 
shall be absolutely deba rred of his right to redeem the property, or 4[a decree] that the property be 
sold.  
A suit to obtain 4[a decree] that a mortgagor shall be absolutely debarred of his right to redeem the 
mortgaged property is called a suit for foreclosure.  
                                                      
1. Certain words omitted by Act 20 of 1929, s. 29 . 
2. Ins. by s. 30, ibid. 
3. Subs. by s. 31, ibid.,  for “payable”.  
4. Subs. by s. 31, ibid., for “an order”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 28]
28 
 Nothing in this s ection shall be deemed — 
1[(a) to authori se any mortgagee other than a mortgagee by conditional sale or a 
mortgagee under an anomalous mortgage by the terms of which he is entitled to foreclose, to 
institute a suit for foreclosure, or an usufructuary mortga gee as such or a mortgagee by 
conditional sale as such to institute a suit for sale; or]  
(b) to authori se a mortgagor who holds the mortgagee's rights as his trustee or legal 
representative, and who may sue for a sale of the property, to institute a suit for foreclosure; 
or 
(c) to authori se the mortgagee of a railway, canal or other work in the maintenance of  which the 
public are interested, to institute a suit for foreclosure or sale; or  
(d) to authori se a person interested in part only of the mortgage -money to -institute a suit 
relating only to a corresponding part of the mortgaged property, unless the mortga gees have, 
with the consent of the mortgagor, severed their interests under the mortgage.  
2[67A. Mortgagee when  bound to bring one suit on several mortgages. —A mortgagee who 
holds two or more mortgages executed by the same mortgagor in respect of each of which he has a 
right to obtain the same kind of decree under section 67, and who sues to obtain such decree on 
any one of the mortgages, shall, in the absence of a contract to the contrary, be bound to sue on all 
the mortgages in respect of which the mortg age-money has become due.] 
3[68. Right to sue for mortgage -money .—(1) The mortgagee has a right to sue for the mortgage -
money in the following cases and no others, namely: —  
(a) where the mortgagor binds himself to repay the same;  
(b) where by any cause ot her than the wrongful act or default of the mortgagor or 
mortgagee, the mortgaged property is wholly or partially destroyed or the security is rendered 
insufficient within the meaning of section 66, and the mortgagee has given the mortgagor a 
reasonable op portunity of providing further sec
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 28]
on 66, and the mortgagee has given the mortgagor a 
reasonable op portunity of providing further security enough to render the whole security 
sufficient, and the mortgagor has failed to do so;  
(c) where the mortgagee is deprived of the whole or part of his security by or in consequence of 
the wrongful act or default of t he mortgagor;  
(d) where, the mortgagee being entitled to possession of the mortgaged property, the mortgagor 
fails to deliver the same to him, or to secure the possession thereof to him  without disturbance by the 
mortgagor or any person claiming under a title superior to that of the mortgagor:  
Provided that, in the case referred to in clause ( a), a transferee from the mortgagor or from 
his legal repre sentative shall not be liable to be sued for, the mortgage -money.  
(2) Where a suit is brought under clause  (a) or clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1), the Court may, 
at its discretion, stay the suit and all proceedings therein, notwithstanding any contract to the 
contrary, until the mortgagee has exhausted all his available remedies against the mortgaged 
property or  what remains of it, unless the mortgagee abandons his security and, if necessary,              
re-transfers the mortgaged property.]  
69. Power of sale when valid .—4[(1)] 5[6*** A mortgagee , or any person acting on his 
behalf, shall, subject to the provisions of this section, have power to sell or,  concur in selling the 
mortgaged property, or any part thereof, in default of payment of the mortgage -money, without 
the intervention of the Court, in the following cases and in no others, namely: —] 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 20 of 1929, s. 31, for clause ( a). 
2. Ins. by s. 32, ibid. 
3. Subs. by s. 33, ibid., for s . 68. 
4. Section  69 re-numbered as sub -section ( 1) of that section by Act 20 of 1929, s. 34.  
5. Subs. by s. 34, ibid.,  for certain words.  
6. The words  and figures  “Notwithstanding anything contained i
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 28]
s. 34, ibid.,  for certain words.  
6. The words  and figures  “Notwithstanding anything contained in the Trustees’ and Mort gagees’ Powers Act, 18 66 (28 of 1866)” 
omitted by Act 48 of 1952, s. 3 and the Second Schedule . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 29]
29 
 (a) where the mortgage is an English mortgage, and neither the mortgagor nor the 
mortgagee is a Hindu, Muhammadan or Buddhist  1[or a member of any other race, sect, tribe 
or class from time to time specified in this behalf by 2[the State Government], in the Of ficial 
Gazette];  
(b) where 3[a power of sale without the intervention of the Court is expressly conferred 
on the mortgagee by the mortgage -deed and] the mortgagee is 4[the Govern ment];  
(c) where 3[a power of sale without the intervention of the Court is expressly conferred 
on the mortgagee by the mortgage -deed and] the mortgaged property or any part thereof 
5[was, on the date of the execution of the mortgage -deed ], situate within the towns of 
Calcu tta, Madras, Bombay, 6*** 7[or in any other town or area which the State 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf].  
8[(2)] 9*** No such power shal l be exercised unless and until — 
10[(a)] notice in writing requiring payment of the principal money has been served on the 
mortgagor, or, one of several mortgagors, and default has been made in payment of  the principal 
money, or of part thereof, for three months after such service; or  
11[(b)] some interest under the mortgage  amounting at least to five hundred r upees is 
in arrear and unpaid for three months after becoming due. 
12[(3)] When a sale has been made in professed exercise of such a power, the title of the 
purchaser shall not be impeachable on the ground that no case had arisen to authorize the sale,  
or that due notice was not given, or that the power was otherwise improperly or irregularly 
exercised; but any person damnified by an unauthorised or improper or irregular  exercise of the 
power shall have his remedy in dam ages against the person exercising the power.  
13[(4)] The money which is received by the mortgagee, arising from the sale, after discharge of 
prior incumbrances, if any, to which the sale is not made subject, or afte
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 29]
sale, after discharge of 
prior incumbrances, if any, to which the sale is not made subject, or after payment into Court under 
section 57 of a sum to meet any prior incumbrance, shall, in the absence of a contract to the contrary, 
be held by him in trust to be applied by him, first, in payment of all costs, charges and expenses 
properly incurred by him as incident to the sale or any attempted s ale; and, secondly, discharge of the 
mortgage -money and costs and other money, if any, due under the mortgage; and the residue of the 
money so received shall be paid to the person entitled to the mortgaged property, or authori sed to 
give receipts for the p roceeds of the sale thereof.  
14[(5) Nothing in this section or in section 69A applies to powers conferred before  the first day of 
July, 1882.] 
15*   *   *   *   * 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 1885, s. 5.  
2. The words “the L.G., with the previous sanction of the G. G. in C.” successively a mended  by A.O. 1937 and A.O. 1950 to read 
as above.  
3. Ins. by Act 20 of 1929, s.  34. 
4. The words “the Secretary of State for India in Council” successively amended by A.O. 1937 and A.O. 1950 to read 
as above.  
5. Subs. by Act 20 of 1929, s. 34, for “is”.  
6. The  word “Karachi” omitted by A.O. 1948.  
7. The words “or Rangoon” have been successively amended by Acts 6 of 1904, 11 of 1915, 20 of 1929, the A.O. 1937 and the 
A.O. 1950 to read as above.  
8. Second paragraph numbered as sub -section (2) by Act 20 of 1929, s . 34.  
9. The word “'But” omitted by s. 34, ibid.  
10. Clause ( 1) was lettered ( a) by s. 34, ibid. 
11. Clause  (2) was lettered ( b) by s. 34, ibid. 
12. Third paragraph numbered as sub -section ( 3) by s. 34, ibid. 
13. Fourth paragraph numbered as sub -section (4) by Act 20 of 1 929, s. 34.  
14. Subs. by s. 34, ibid., for fifth paragraph.  
15. The last paragraph of this section omitted by s. 34, ibid.   
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 29]
he last paragraph of this section omitted by s. 34, ibid.   
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 30]
30 
 1[69A. Appointment of receiver .—(1) A mortgagee having the right to exercise a power of 
sale under section 69 shall, subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), be entitled to appoint, by 
writing signed by him or on his behalf, a receiver of the income of the mortgaged property or any 
part thereof.  
(2) Any person who has been named in the mortga ge-deed and is willing and able to act as receiver 
may be appointed by the mortgagee.  
If no person has been so named, or if all persons named are unable or unwilling to act, or are 
dead, the mortgagee may appoint any person to whose appointment the mortgag or agrees; failing 
such agreement, the mortgagee shall be entitled to apply to the Court for the appointment of a 
receiver, and any person appointed by the Court shall be deemed to have been duly appointed by 
the mortgagee.  
A receiver may at any time be re moved by writing signed by or on behalf of the mortgagee 
and the mortgagor, or by the Court on application made by either party and on due cause shown.  
A vacancy in the office of receiver may be filled in accorda nce with the provisions of this                    
sub-section.  
(3) A receiver appointed under the powers conferred by this section shall be deemed to be the agent 
of the mortgagor; and the mortgagor shall be solely responsible for the receiver's acts or d efaults, unless 
the mortgage -deed otherwise provides or unless such acts or defaults ar e due to the improper intervention 
of the mortgagee.  
(4) The receiver shall have power to demand and recover all the income of which he is 
appointed receiver, by suit, e xecution or otherwise, in the name either of the mortgagor or of the 
mortgagee to the full extent of the interest which the mortgagor could dispose of, and to give 
valid receipts accordingly for the same, and to exercise any powers which may have been 
delegated to him by the mortgagee in accordance with the provisions of this section.  
(5) A person paying money to th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 30]
y the mortgagee in accordance with the provisions of this section.  
(5) A person paying money to the receiver shall not be concerned to inquire if the appointment of the 
receiver was valid or not.  
(6) The receiver shall be entitled to retain o ut of any money received by him, for his remuneration, 
and in satisfaction of all costs, charges and expenses incurred by him as receiver, a commission at such 
rate not exceeding five per cent. on the gross amount of all money  received as is specified in h is 
appointment, and, if no rate is so specified, then at the rate of five per cent. on that gross 
amount, or at such other rate as the Court thinks fit to allow, on application made by him for 
that purpose.  
(7) The receiver shall, if so directed in writing  by the mortgagee, insure to the extent, if 
any, to which the mortgagee might have insured, and keep insured against loss or damage by 
fire, out of the money received by him, the mortgaged property or any part thereof being of an 
insurable nature.  
(8) Subject to the provisions of this act as to the application of insurance money, the 
receiver shall apply all money received by him as follows, namely ,— 
(i) in discharge of all rents, taxes, land revenue, rates and outgoings whatever affecting the 
mortgaged  property;  
(ii) in keeping down all annual sums or other payments, and the interest on all 
principal sums, having priority to the mortgage in right whereof he is receiver;  
(iii) in payment of his commission, and of the premiums on fire, life or other 
insur ances, if any, properly payable under the mortgage -deed or under this Act, and the 
cost of executing necessary or proper repairs directed in writing by the mortgagee;  
(iv) in payment of the interest falling due under the mortgage;  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 20 of 1929, s. 35.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 31]
31 
 (v) in or towards dischar ge of the principal money, if so directed in writing by the 
mortgagee;  
and shall pay the residue, if any, of the money received by him to the person who, but for the 
possession of the receiver, would have been entitled to receive the income of which he is 
appointed receiver, or who is otherwise entitled to the mortgaged property.  
(9) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) apply only if and as far as a contrary intention is not 
expressed in the mortgage -deed; and the provisions of sub -sections ( 3) to ( 8) inclusive may be 
varied or extended by the mortgage -deed, and, as so varied or extended, shall, as far as may be, 
operate in like manner and with all the like incidents, effects and consequences, as if such 
variations or extensions were contained in the sa id sub -sections.  
(10) Application may be made, without the institution of a suit, to the Court for its opinion, 
advice or direction on any present question respecting the management or administration of the 
mortgaged property, other than questions of diffi culty or importance not proper in the opinion of 
the Court for summary disposal. A copy of such application shall be served upon, and the hearing 
thereof may be attended by, such of the persons interested in the application as the Court may 
think fit.  
The costs of every application under this sub -section shall be in the discretion of the Court.  
(11) In this section, “the Court ” means the Court which would have jurisdiction in a suit to enforce 
the mortgage.]  
70. Accession to mortgaged property .—If, after th e date of a mortgage, any accession is 
made to the mortgaged property, the mortgagee, in the absence of a contract to the contrary, 
shall, for the purposes of the security, be entitled to such accession.  
Illustrations  
(a) A mortgages to B  a certain field bordering on a river. The field is increased by alluvion. For the purposes of his 
security, B is entitled to the increase.  
(b) A mortgage
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 31]
ased by alluvion. For the purposes of his 
security, B is entitled to the increase.  
(b) A mortgages a certain plot of building land to B and afterwards erects a house on the plot. For the purposes of his 
security, B is entitled to the house as well as the plot.  
71. Renewal of mortgaged lease .—When the mortgaged property is a lease 1***, and the  
mortgagor obtains a renewal of the lease, the mortgagee, in the absence of a contract to the 
contrary, shall,  for the purposes of the security, be entitled to the new lease.  
72. Rights of mortgagee in possession .—2[A mortgagee] may s pend such money as is 
necessary — 
3*   *   *   *  * 
(b) for 4[the preservation of the mortgaged property] from destruction, for feiture or 
sale;  
(c) for supporting the mortgagor's title to the property;  
(d) for making his own title thereto good against the mortgagor; and  
(e) when the mortgaged property is a renewable lease -hold, for the renewal of the lease;  
and may, in the absence  of a contract to the  contrary, add such money to the principal 
money, at the rate of interest payable on the principal, and, where no such rate is fixed, at 
the rate of nine per cent. per annum:  
  
                                                      
1. The words “for a term of years” omitted by Act 20 of 1929, s. 36.  
2. Subs. by s. 37, ibid., for certain words.  
3. Clause ( a) omitted by s. 37, ibid. 
4. Subs. by s. 37, ibid., for “its preservation”.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 32]
32 
 1[Provided that the expenditure of money by the mortgagee under clause ( b) or                   
clause ( c) shall not be deemed to be necessary unless the mortgagor has been called upon 
and has failed to take proper and timely steps to preserve the property or to support the 
title.] 
Where the property is by its nature insurable, the mortgagee may also, in the abs ence 
of a contract to the contrary, insure and keep insured against loss or damage by fire the 
whole or any pa rt of such property; and the premiums paid for any such insurance shall be 
2[added to the pri ncipal money with interest at the same rate as is payable on the principal 
money or, where no such rate is fixed, at the rate of nine per cent. per annum]. But the 
amount of such insurance shall not exceed the amount specified in this behalf in the 
mortgag e-deed or (if no such amount is therein specified) two -thirds of the amount that 
would be required in case of total destruction to reinstate the property insured.  
Nothing in this section shall be deemed to authori se the mortgagee to insure when an 
insurance of the property is kept up by or on behalf of the mortgagor to the amount in which 
the mortgagee is hereby authori sed to insure.  
3[73. Right to proceeds of revenue sale or compensation on acquisition .—(1) Where th e 
mortgaged property or any part thereof or any interest therein is sold owing to failure to pay 
arrears of revenue or other charges of a public nature or rent due in respect of such property, 
and such failure did not arise from any default of the mortgage e, the mortgagee shall be 
entitled to claim payment of the mortgage -money, in whole or in part, out of any surplus of 
the sale  proceeds remaining after payment of the arrears and of all charges and deductions 
directed by law.  
(2) Where the mortgaged property or any part thereof or any interest therein is acquired 
under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (1 of 1894), or any other enactment for the time bein
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 32]
acquired 
under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (1 of 1894), or any other enactment for the time being 
in force providing for the compulsory acquisition of immoveable property, the mortgagee 
shall be en titled to claim payment of the mortgage -money, in whole or in part, out of the 
amount due to the mortgagor as compensation.  
(3) Such claims shall prevail against all other claims except those of prior encumbran ces, and 
may be enforced notwithstanding that the principal money on the mortgage has not become due.]  
74. [Right of subsequent mortgagee to pay off prior mortgagee. ] Rep. by the Transfer of 
Property (Amendment) Act, 1929 (20 of 1929), s. 39.  
75. [Rights of mesne mortgagee against and subsequent mortgagees. ] Rep. by s. 39, 
ibid.  
76. Liabilities of mortgagee in possession .—When, during the continuance of the mortgage, the 
mortgagee takes possession of the mortgaged property, —  
(a) he must manage the property as a person of ordinary prudence would ma nage it if it were his 
own;  
(b) he must use his best endeavours to collect the rents and profits thereof;  
(c) he must, in the absence of a contract to the contrary, out of the income of the property, 
pay the Government -revenue, all other charges of a publi c nature 4[and all rent] accruing due in 
respect thereof during such possession, and any arrears of rent in default of payment of which 
the- property may be summarily sold;  
(d) he must, in the absence of a contract to the contrary, make such necessary repairs of the 
property as he can pay for out of the rents and profits thereof after deducting from such rents and 
profits the payments mentioned in clause (c)and the interest on th e principal money;  
(e) he must not commit any act which is destructive or permanently injurious to the property;  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 20 of 1929, s. 37.  
2. Subs. by s. 37, ibid., for certain words.  
3. Subs. by s. 38, ibid.,  for s. 73.  
4. Ins . by 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 32]

2. Subs. by s. 37, ibid., for certain words.  
3. Subs. by s. 38, ibid.,  for s. 73.  
4. Ins . by s. 40, ibid. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 33]
33 
 (f) where he has insured the whole or any part of the property against loss or damage by fire, 
he must, in case of such loss or damage, apply a ny money which he actually receives under the 
policy or so  much thereof as may be necessary, in reinstating the property, or, if the mortgagor so 
directs, in reduction or discharge of the mortgage -money;  
(g) he must keep clear, full and accurate accounts of all sums received and spent by him as 
mortgagee, and, at any time during the continuance of the mortgage, give the mortgagor, at his 
request and cost, true copies of such accounts and of the vouchers by which they are 
supported;  
(h) his receipts from the mortgaged property, or, where such property is personally occupied 
by him a fair occupation -rent in respect thereof shall, after deducting the expenses 1[properly 
incurred for the management of the property and the collection of rents  and profits and the other 
expenses] mentioned in clauses (c) and (d), and interest thereon, be debited against him in 
reduction of the amount (if any) from time to time due  to him on account of interest 2*** and, so 
far as such receipts exceed any interes t due, in reduction or discharge of the mortgage -money; the 
surplus, if any, shall be paid to the mortgagor;  
(i) when the mortgagor tenders, or deposits in manner hereinafter provided, the amount for the 
time being due on the mortgage, the mortgagee must, notwithstanding the  provisions in the other 
clauses o f this section, account for his 3*** receipts from the mortgaged property from the date of 
the tender or from the earliest time when he could  take such amount out of Court, as the case may be 
1[and shall  not be entitled to deduct any amount therefrom on account of any expenses incurred after 
such date or time in connection with the mortgaged property].  
Loss occasioned by his default .—If the mortgagee fail to perform any of the duties imposed  
upon him by t his section, he may, when accounts are t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 33]
e fail to perform any of the duties imposed  
upon him by t his section, he may, when accounts are taken in pursuance of a decree made 
under this Chapter, be debited with the loss, if any, occasioned by such failure.  
77. Receipts in lieu of interest .—Nothing in section 76, clauses ( b), (d), (g) and ( h), applies 
to cases where there is a contract between the mortgagee and the mortgagor that the receipts 
from the mortgaged property shall, so long as the mortgagee is in possession of the property, be 
taken in lieu of interest on the principal money, or in lieu of such interest and defined portions of 
the principal.  
Priority  
78. Postponement of prior mortgagee. —Where,  through the fraud, misrepresentation or 
gross neglect of a prior mortgagee, another person has been induced to advance money on the 
security of the mortgaged property, the prior mortgagee shall be postponed to the subsequent 
mortgagee.  
79. Mortgage to secure uncertain amount when maximum is expressed. —If a mortgage 
made to secure future advances, the performance of an engagement or the balance of a ru nning 
account, expresses the maximum to be secured thereby, a subsequent mortgage of the same 
property shall, if made with notice of the prior mortgage, be postponed to the prior mortgage 
in respect of all advances or de bits not exceeding the maximum,  thou gh made or allowed with 
notice of the subsequent mortgage.  
Illustration  
A mortgages Sultanpur to his bankers, B & Co., to secure the balance of his account with them to the extent 
of Rs. 10,000. A then mortgages Sultanpur to C, to secure Rs. 10,000 , C having notice of the mortgage to B & 
Co., and C gives notice to B & Co. of the second mortgage. At the date of the second mortgage, the balance due to 
B & Co. does not exceed Rs. 5,000. B & Co. subsequently advance to A sums making the balance of the ac count 
against him exceed the sum of Rs. 10,000. B & Co. are entitled , to the extent of Rs. 10,000, to priority over C . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 33]
eed the sum of Rs. 10,000. B & Co. are entitled , to the extent of Rs. 10,000, to priority over C . 
80. [Tacking abolished. ] Rep. by the Transfer of Property (Amendment) Act, 1929 (20 of 
1929) ,  s. 41. 
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 20 of 1929, s. 40.  
2. The words “on the mortgage -money” omitted by s. 40, ibid. 
3. The word “gross” omitted by s. 40, ibid. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 34]
34 
  
Marshalling and Contribution  
1[81. Marshalling securities .—If the owner of two or more properties mortgages them to 
one person and then mortgages one or more of the properties to another person, the subsequent 
mortgagee is, in the absence of a contract to the contrary, entitled to have the  prior mortgage -
debt satisfied out of the property or properties not mortgaged to him, so far as the same will 
extend, but not so as to prejudice the rights of the prior mortgagee or of any  other person who 
has for consideration acquired an int erest in any  of the properties. ] 
82. Contribution to mortgage -debt .—2[Where property subject to a mortgage belongs to 
two or more persons having distinct and separate rights of ownership therein, the different 
shares in or parts of such property owned by such persons are, in the absence of a contract to 
the contrary, liable to contribute rateably to the debt secured by the mortgage, and, for the 
purpose of determining the rate at which each such share or part shall contribute, the value 
thereof shall be deemed to be it s value at the date of the mortgage after deduction of the 
amount of any other mortgage or charge to which it may have been subject on that date.]  
Where, of two properties belonging to the same owner, one is mortgaged to secure one 
debt and then both are m ortgaged to secure another debt, and the former debt is paid out of 
the former property, each property is, in the absence of a contract to the contrary, liable to 
contribute rateably to the latter debt after deducting the amount of the former debt from the  
value of the property out of which it has been paid.  
Nothing in this section applies to a property liable under section 81 to the claim of the 3[subsequent] 
mortgagee.  
Deposit in Court  
83. Power to d eposit in Court money due on mor tgage .—At any time after the principal 
money 4[payable in respect of any mortgage has become due] and before a suit for redemption 
of the mortgaged
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 34]
ayable in respect of any mortgage has become due] and before a suit for redemption 
of the mortgaged property is barred, the mortgagor, or any other person entitled to institute such 
suit, may deposit, in any Court  in which he might have instituted such suit, to the account of the 
mortgagee, the amount remaining due on the mortgage.  
Right to money deposited by mortgagor .—The Court sha ll thereupon cause written notice 
of the deposit to be served on the mortgagee, and  the mortgagee may, on presenting a petition 
(verified in manner prescribed by 5law for the verification of plaints) stating the amount then 
due on the mortgage, and his willingness to accept the money so deposited in full discharge of 
such amount, and -on depositing in the same Court the mortgage -deed 6[and all documents in 
his possession or power relating to the mortgaged property], apply for and receive the money, 
and the mortgage -deed, 7[and all such other documents], so deposited shall be delivered to t he 
mortgagor or such other person as aforesaid.  
7[Where the mortgagee is in possession of the mortgaged. property, the Court shall, before 
paying to him the amount so deposited , direct him to deliver possession thereof to the 
mortgagor and at the cost of the mortgagor either to re -transfer the mortgaged property to the 
mortgagor or to such third person as the mortgagor may direct or to execute and (where the 
mortgage has been eff ected by a registered instrument) have registered an acknowledgment in 
writing that any right in derogation of the mortgagor's interest transferred to the mortgagee has 
been extinguished.]  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 20 of 1929, s. 42, for s. 81.  
2. Subs by s. 43, ibid., for the first paragraph.  
3. Subs . by s. 43, ibid., for “second”.  
4. Subs. by s. 44, ibid., for “has become payable”.  
5. See the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), Sch. I, Order VI, rule 15.  
6. Subs. by Act 20 of 1929, s
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 34]
ode of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), Sch. I, Order VI, rule 15.  
6. Subs. by Act 20 of 1929, s. 44, for “if then in his possession or power ”. 
7. Ins. by s. 44, ibid.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 35]
35 
 84. Cessation of interest .—When the mortgagor or such other person as aforesaid has 
tendered or deposited in Court under section 83 the amount remaining due on the mortgage, 
interest on the principal money shall cease from the date of the tender or 1[in the case of a 
deposit, where no previous tender of such amount has be en made] as soon as the mortgagor or 
such other person as aforesaid has done all that has to be done by him to enable the mortgagee 
to take such amount out of Court, 2[and the notice required by section 83 has been served on 
the mortgagee:  
Provided that, w here the mortgagor has deposited such amount without having made a 
previous tender thereof and has subsequently withdrawn the same or any part thereof, interest 
on the principal money shall be payable from the date of such withdrawal .] 
Nothing in this sect ion or in section 83 shall be deemed to deprive the mortgagee of his 
right to interest when there exists a contract that he shall be entitled to reasonable notice 
before payment or tender of the mortgage -money 3[and such notice has not been given before 
the making of the tender or deposit, as the case may be].  
4Suits for Foreclosure, Sale or Redemption  
85.[Parties to suits for foreclosure, sale and redemption .] Rep. by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 
(5 of 1908), s. 156 and V Schedule.  
Foreclosure and Sale4 
86. [Decree of foreclosure suit .] Rep. by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908),   
s. 156 and V Schedule.  
87. [Procedure in case of payment of amount due .] Rep. by s . 156 and the fifth Schedule , 
ibid. 
88. [Decree of sale .] Rep. by s . 156 and V Schedule , ibid. 
89. [Procedure when defendant pay amount due .] Rep. by s . 156 and V Schedule , ibid. 
90. [Recovery of balance due on mortgage .] Rep. by s . 156 and V Schedule , ibid. 
Redemption  
5[91. Persons who may sue for redemption .—Besides the mortgagor, any of the following persons 
may redeem, or institute a suit for redemption of, the
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 35]
 the mortgagor, any of the following persons 
may redeem, or institute a suit for redemption of, the mortgaged property, namely: —  
(a) any person (other than the mortgagee of the interest sought to be redeemed) who has any 
interest in, or charge upon, the property mortgaged or in or upon the right to redeem the same;  
(b) any surety for the payment of the mortgage -debt or any part thereof; or  
(c) any creditor of the mortgagor who has in a suit for the administration of his estate obtained a 
decree for sale of the mortgaged property.]  
6[92. Subrogation .—Any of the persons referred to in section 91 (other than the mortgagor) and 
any co -mortgagor shall, on redeeming property subject to the mortgage, have, so far as regards 
redemption, foreclosure or sa le of such property, the same rights as the mortgagee whose mortgage he 
redeems may have against the mortgagor or any other mortgagee.  
The right conferred by this section is called the right of subrogation, and a person acquiring the same 
is said to be subrogated  to the rights of the mortgagee whose mortgage he redeems.  
                                                      
1. Ins. by  Act 20 of 1929, s. 45 . 
2. Subs. by s. 45, ibid., for “as the case may be”.  
3. Added by s. 45, ibid. 
4. For the repealed provisions, as re -enacted , see (Act 5 of 1908), Sch. I, Order XXXIV . 
5. Subs. by Act 20 of 1929, s. 46,  for s.  91. 
6. Ins. by s. 47, ibid. Original ss. 92 to 94 were rep. by Act 5 of 1908, s. 156 and the fifth Schedule.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 36]
36 
 A person who has advanced to a mortgagor money with which the mortgage has been redeemed 
shall be subrogated to the rights of the mortgagee whose mortgage has been redeemed, if the 
mortgagor  has by a registered instrument agreed that such persons shall be so subrogated.  
Nothing in this section shall be deemed to confer a right of subrogation on any person unless 
the mortgage in respect of which the right is claimed has been redeemed in full.  
93. Prohibition of tacking .—No mortgagee paying off a prior mortgage, whether with or 
without notice of an intermediate mortgage, shall thereby acquire any priority in respect of his 
original security; and, except in the case provided for by section 79, no  mortgagee  making a 
subsequent advance to the mortgagor, whether with or without notice of an intermediate mortgage, 
shall thereby acquire any priority in respect of his security for such subsequent advance.  
94. Rights of mesne  mortgagee .—Where a property is mortgaged for successive debts to successive 
mortgagees, a mesne  mortgagee has the same rights against mortgagees posterior to himself as he has 
against the mortgagor.]  
1[95. Right of redeeming co -mortgagor to expenses .—Where one of several mortgagors 
redeems the mortgaged property, he shall, in enforcing his right of subrogation under section 92 
against his co -mortgagors, be entitled to add to the mortgage -money recoverable from them such 
proportion of the expenses properly incurred in such redemption a s is attributable to their share in the 
property. 
96. Mortgage by deposit of title -deeds.—The provisions hereinbefore contained which apply to a 
simple mortgage shall, so far as may be, apply to a mortgage by deposit of title -deeds.]  
297. [Application of proceeds. ] Rep. by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), s. 156 and V 
Schedule.  
 Anomalous Mortgages   
98. Rights and liabilities of parties to anomalous mortgages .—In the case of 3[an anomalous 
mortgage] the rights
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 36]
 liabilities of parties to anomalous mortgages .—In the case of 3[an anomalous 
mortgage] the rights and liabilities of the parties shall be determined by their contract as evidenced 
in the mortgage -deed, and, so far as such contract does not extend, by local usage.  
99. [Attachment of mortgaged property. ] Rep. by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), s. 
156 and V Schedule . 
Charges 
100. Charges .—Where immoveable property of one person is by act of parties or operation of law 
made security for the payment of money to another, and the transaction does not amount to a mortgage, 
the latter person is said to have a charge on the prop erty; and all the provisions hereinbefore contained 
4[which apply to a simple mortgage shall, so far as may be, apply to such charge].  
Nothing in this section applies to the charge of a trustee on the trust property for expenses 
properly incurred in the ex ecution of his trust, 5[and, save as otherwise expressly provided by any 
law for the time being in force, no charge shall be enforced against any property in the hands of a 
person to whom such property has been transferred for consideration and without notice of the 
charge].  
6[101. No merger in case of subsequent encumbrance. —Any mortgagee of, or person having 
a charge upon, immoveable property, or any transferee from such mortgagee or charge -holder, may 
purchase or otherwise acquire the rights in the pr operty of the mortgagor or owner, as the case may 
be, without thereby causing the mortgage or charge to be merged as between himself and any 
subsequent mortgagee of, or person having a subsequent charge upon, the same property; and no 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 20 of 1929, s. 48,  for s . 95. Original s. 96 was rep. by Act 5 of 1908, s. 156 and Sch. V.  
2. For the repealed provisions, as re -enacted, see (Act 5 of 1908), Sch. I, Order XXXIV, rules 12 and 13.  
3. Subs. by Act 20 of 1929, s. 49, for certain wor
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 36]
of 1908), Sch. I, Order XXXIV, rules 12 and 13.  
3. Subs. by Act 20 of 1929, s. 49, for certain words.  
5. Subs. by Act 20 of 1929, s . 50, for certain words.  
6. Added by s. 50, ibid.  
7. Subs. by s. 51, ibid., for s.  101.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 37]
37 
 such subsequent mortg agee or charge -holder shall be entitled to for  close or sell such property 
without redeeming the prior mortgage or charge, or otherwise than subject thereto.] 
Notice and Tender  
102. Service or tender on or to agent. —Where the person on or to whom any notic e or tender  
is to be served or made under this Chapter does not reside in the district in which the mortgaged 
property or some part thereof is situate, service or tender on or to an agent holding a general 
power -of-attorney from such person or otherwise du ly authori sed to accept such service or tender 
shall be deemed sufficient.  
1[Where no person or agent on whom such notice should be served can be found or is known] to 
the person required to serve the notice, the latter person may apply to any Court in whi ch a suit 
might be brought for redemption of the mortgaged property, and such Court shall direct in what 
manner such notice shall be served, and any notice served in compliance with such direction shall 
be deemed sufficient:  
2[Provided that, in the case of  a notice required by section 83, in the case of a deposit, the application 
shall be made to the Court in which the deposit has been made.]  
3[Where no person or agent to whom such tender should be made can be found or is  
known] to the person desiring to make the tender,  the latter person may deposit  4[in any Court  in which a 
suit might be brought for redemption of the mortgaged property] the amount sought to be tendered, and 
such deposit shall have the effect of a tender of such amount.  
103. Notice, etc.,  to or by person incompetent to contract .—Where, under the provisions of 
this Chapter, a notice is to be served on or by, or a tender or deposit made or accepted or taken out 
of Court by, any person incompetent to contract, such notice may be served 5[on o r by], or tender or 
deposit made, accepted or taken by , the legal curator of the property of such person; but where there 
is no such cura
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 37]
ted or taken by , the legal curator of the property of such person; but where there 
is no such curator, and it is requisite or desirable in the interests of such person that a notice should 
be served or a tender or dep osit made under the provisions of this Chapter, application may be made 
to any Court in which a suit might be brought for the redemption of the mortgage to appoint a 
guardian ad litem for the purpose of serving or receiving service of such notice, or makin g or 
accepting such tender, or making or taking out of Court such deposit, and for the performance of all 
consequential acts which could or ought to be done by such person if he were competent to contract; 
and the provisions of 6[Order XXXII in the First S chedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 
1908)] shall, so far as may be, apply to such application and to the parties thereto and to the 
guardian appointed thereunder.  
104. Power to make rules .—The High Court may, from time to time, make rules consistent 
with this Act for carrying out, in itself and in the Courts of Civil Judicature subject to its 
superintendence, the provisions contained in this Chapter.  
CHAPTER V  
OF LEASES OF IMMOVEABLE PROPERTY  
105. Lease defined .—A lease of immoveable proper ty is a transfer of a right to enjoy such property, 
made for a certain time, express or implied, or in perpetuity, in consideration of a price paid or promised, 
or of money, a share of crops, service or any other thing of value, to be rendered periodically  or on 
specified occasions to the transferor by the transferee, who accepts the transfer on such terms.  
Lessor, lessee, premium and rent defined .—The transferor is called the lessor, the transferee is 
called the lessee, the price is called the premium, and  the money, share, service or other thing to be so 
rendered is called the rent.  
  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 20 of 1929, s. 52, for certain words.  
2. Ins. by s. 52,
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 37]
                          
1. Subs. by Act 20 of 1929, s. 52, for certain words.  
2. Ins. by s. 52, ibid.  
3. Subs. by Act 20 of 1929, s. 52, for certain words.  
4. Subs. by s. 52, ibid., for “in such Court as last aforesaid”.  
5. Ins. by s. 53, ibid.  
6. Subs. by s. 53, ibid., for “Chapter XXXI of the Code of Civil Procedure”.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 38]
38 
 1[106. Duration of certain leases in absence of written contract or local usage .—(1) In the 
absence of a contract or local law or usage to the contrary, a lease of immovable property for agricultural 
or manufacturing purposes shall be deemed to be a lease from year to year, terminable, on the part of 
either lessor or lessee, by s ix months’  notice; and a lease of immovable property for any other purpose 
shall be deemed to be a lease from month to month, terminable, on the part of either lessor or l essee, by 
fifteen days ’ notice.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the period 
mentioned in sub -section ( 1) shall commence from  the dat e of receipt of notice.  
(3) A notice under sub -section ( 1) shall not be deemed to be invalid merely because the period 
mentioned therein falls short of the period specified under that sub -section, where a suit or proceeding is 
filed after the expiry of  the period  mentioned in that sub -section.  
(4) Every notice under sub -section (1) must be in writing, signed by or on behalf of the person giving 
it, and either be sent by post to the party who is intended to be bound by it or be tendered or delivered 
personal ly to such party, or to one of his family or servants at his residence, or (if such tender or delivery 
is not practicable) affixed to a con spicuous part of the property.]  
107. Leases how made .—A lease of immoveable property from year to year, or for any term 
exceeding one year, or reserving a yearly rent, can be made only by a registered instrument.  
2[All other leases of immoveable property may be made either by a registered instrument or by oral 
agreement accompanied by delivery of possession. 
3[Where a lease of immoveable property is made by a registered instrument, such 
instrument or, where there are more instruments than one, each such instrument shall be 
executed by both the lessor and the lessee:] 
Provided that the State Government may
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 38]
ument shall be 
executed by both the lessor and the lessee:] 
Provided that the State Government may, 4*** from tim e to time, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, direct that leases of immoveable property, other than leases from year to year, 
or for any term exceeding one year, or reserving a yearly rent, or any class of such leases, may 
be made by unregistered ins trument or by oral agreement without delivery of possession.]  
108. Rights and liabilities of lessor and lessee .— In the absence of a contract or local 
usage to the contrary, the lessor and the lessee of immoveable property, as against one another, 
respecti vely, possess the rights and ar e subject to the liabilities mentioned in the rules next 
following, or such of them as are applicable to the property leased: — 
(A) Rights and liabilities of the lessor  
(a) the lessor is bound to disclose to the lessee any material defect in the property, with reference 
to its intended use, of which the former is and the latter is not aware, and which the latter could not 
with ordinary care discover:  
(b) the lessor is bound o n the lessee ’s request to put him in possession of the property:  
(c) the lessor shall be deemed to contract with the lessee that, if the latter pays the rent 
reserved by the lease and performs the contracts binding on the lessee, he may hold the 
property d uring the time limited by the lease without interruption.  
The benefit of such contract shall be annexed to and go with the lessee ’s interest as such, and may 
be enforced by every person in whom that interest is for the whole or any part thereof from time t o 
time vested;  
(B) Rights and Liabilities of the Lessee  
(d) if during the continuance of the lease any accession is made to the property, such accession 
(subject to the law relating to alluvion for the time being in force) shall be deemed to be comprised in 
the lease:  
(e) if by fire, tempest or flood, or violence of an army or of a mob, or other irresistible
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 38]
lease:  
(e) if by fire, tempest or flood, or violence of an army or of a mob, or other irresistible 
force, any material part of the property be wholly destroyed or rendered substantially and 
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2003, s. 2, for s . 106 (w.e.f. 31 -12-2002).  
2. Subs. by Act 6 of 1904, s. 5, for the Second paragraph.  
3. Ins. by Act 20 of 1929, s. 55 . 
4. The words “with the previous sanction of the Governor General in Council” omitted by A. O. 1937.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 39]
39 
 permanently unfit for the purposes for which it was let, th e lease shall, at the option of the 
lessee, be void:  
Provided that, if the injury be occasioned by the wrongful act or default of the lessee, 
he shall not be entitled to avail himself of the benefit of this provision:  
(f) if the lessor neglects to make, within a reasonable time after notice, any repairs which 
he is bound to make to the property, the lessee may make the same himself, and deduct the 
expense of such repairs with interest from the rent, or otherwise recover it from the lessor:  
(g) if the lessor neglects to make any payment which he is bound to make, and which , if not 
made by him, is recoverable from the le ssee or against the property, the  lessee may make such 
payment himself, and deduct it with interest from the rent, or otherwise recover it from the 
lessor:  
(h) the lessee may 1[even after the determination of the lease] remove, at any time 2[whilst he is 
in possession of the property leased but not afterwards] , all things which he has attached to the earth: 
provided he leaves the property in the state in which he received it:  
(i) when a lease of uncertain duration determines by any means except the fault of the lessee, he 
or his legal representative is entitled to all the crops planted or sown by the lessee and growing upon 
the property whe n the lease determines, and to free ingress and egress to gather and carry them:  
(j) the lessee may transfer absolutely or by way of mortgage or sub -lease the whole or any part of 
his interest in the property, and any transferee of such interest or part ma y again transfer it. The lessee 
shall not, by reason only of such transfer, cease to be subject to any of the liabilities attaching to the 
lease:  
nothing in this clause shall be deemed to authori se a tenant having an un -transferable right of 
occupancy, the  farmer of an estate in respect of which default has been made in paying revenue, or 
the lessee of an estate 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 39]
 an estate in respect of which default has been made in paying revenue, or 
the lessee of an estate under the management of a Court of Wards, to assign his interest as such 
tenant, farmer or lessee:  
(k) the lessee is bound to disclose to the lesso r any fact as to the nature or extent of the interest 
which the lessee is about to take, of which the lessee is, and the lessor is not, aware, and which 
materially increases the value of such interest:  
(l) the lessee is bound to pay or tender, at the prope r time and place, the premium or rent to the 
lessor or his agent in this behalf:  
(m) the lessee is bound to keep, and on the termination of the lease to restore, the property 
in as good condition as it was in at the time when he was put in possession, subj ect only to the 
changes caused by reasonable wear and tear or irresistible force, and to allow the lessor and his 
agents, at all reasonable times during the term, to enter upon the property and inspect the 
condition thereof and give or leave notice of any defect in such condition; and, when such 
defect has been caused by any act or default on the part of the lessee, his servants or agents, he 
is bound to make it good within three months after such notice has been given or left:  
(n) if the lessee becomes awa re of any proceeding to recover the property or any part 
thereof, or of any encroachment made upon, or any interference with, the lessor ’s rights 
concerning such property, he is bound to give, with reasonable diligence, notice thereof to the 
lessor:  
(o) the lessee may use the property and its products (if any) as a person of ordinary prudence 
would use them if they were his own; but he must not use, or permit another to use, the property 
for a purpose other than that fo r which it was leased, or fell 1[or sell] timber,  pull down or 
damage buildings 1[belonging to the lessor , or] work mines or quarries not open when the lease 
was granted, or commit any other act which is destructive or p
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 39]
 or quarries not open when the lease 
was granted, or commit any other act which is destructive or permanently injurious thereto:  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 20 of 1929, s. 56.  
2. Subs. by s. 56, ibid., for “during the continuance of the lease”.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 40]
40 
 (p) he must not, without the lessor ’s cons ent, correct  on the property any permanent structure, 
except for agricultural purposes:  
(q) on the determination of the lease, the lessee is bound to put the lessor into possession of the 
property.  
109. Rights of lessor ’s transferee. —If the lessor transfer s the property leased, or any part thereof, or 
any part of his interest therein, the transferee, in the absence of a contract to the contrary, shall possess all 
the rights and, if the lessee so elects, be subject to all the liabilities of  the lessor as to the property or part 
transferred so long as he is the owner of it; but the lessor shall not, by reason only of such transfer, cease 
to be subject to any of the liabilities imposed upon him by the lease, unless the lessee elects to treat the 
transferee as t he person liable to him:  
Provided that the transferee is not entitled to arrears of rent due before the transfer, and that, 
if the lessee, not having reason to believe that such transfer has been made, pays rent to the 
lessor, the lessee shall not be liabl e to pay such rent over again to the transferee.  
The lessor, the transferee and the lessee may determine what proportion of the premium or 
rent reserved by the lease is payable in respect of the part so transferred, and, in case they 
disagree, such determination may be made by any Court having jurisdiction to entertain a suit for 
the possession of the property leased.  
110. Exclusion of day on which term commences .—Where the time limited by a lease of 
immoveable property is expressed as commencing fro m a particular day, in computing that time such 
day shall be excluded. Where no day of commencement is named, the time so limited begins from the 
making of the lease.  
Duration of lease for a year .—Where the time so limited is a year or a number of years, i n 
the absence of an express agreement to the contrary, the lease shall last during the whole 
anniversary of the day from which
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 40]
 agreement to the contrary, the lease shall last during the whole 
anniversary of the day from which such time commences.  
Option to determine lease .—Where the time so limited is expressed to be terminable before its 
expiration, an d the lease omits to mention at whose option it is so terminable, the lessee, and not the 
lessor, shall have such option.  
111. Determination of lease .—A lease of immoveable property determines — 
(a) by efflux of the time limited thereby:  
(b) where such time  is limited conditionally on the happening of some event —by the happening 
of such event:  
(c) where the interest of the lessor in the property terminates on, or his power to dispose of 
the same extends only to, the happening of any event —by the happening of  such event:  
(d) in case the interests of the lessee and the lessor in the whole of the property become vested at 
the same time in one person in the same right:  
(e) by express surrender; that is to say, in  case the lessee yields up his interest under the lease to 
the lessor, by mutual agreement between them:  
(f) by implied surrender:  
(g) by forfeiture; that is to say, ( 1) in case the lessee breaks an express condition which provides 
that, on breach thereof,  the lessor may re -enter 1***; or ( 2) in case the lessee renounces his character 
as such by setting up a title in a third person or by claiming title in himself; 2[or ( 3) the lessee is 
adjudicated an insolvent and the lease provides that the lessor may re -enter on the happening of such 
                                                      
1. The words “or the lease shall become void” omitted by Act 20 of 1929, s. 57.  
2. Ins. by s. 57, ibid.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 41]
41 
 event]; and in 1[any of these cases] the lessor or his transferee 2[gives notice in writing to the lessee 
of] his intention to determine the lease:  
(h) on the expiration of a notice to determine the lease, or to quit, or of i ntention to quit, the 
property leased, duly given by one party to the other.  
Illustration to clause ( f) 
A lessee accepts from his lessor a new lease of the property leased, to take effect during the 
continuance of the existing lease. This is an implied surrender of the former lease, and such lease 
determines thereupon.  
112. Waiver of forfeiture. —A forfeiture under section 111, clause ( g) is waived by 
acceptance of rent which has become due since the forfeiture, or by distress for such rent, or by 
any oth er act on the part of the lessor showing an intention to treat the lease as subsisting:  
Provided that the lessor is aware that the forfeiture has been incurred:  
Provided also that, where rent is accepted after the institution of a suit to eject the lessee on the 
ground of forfeiture; such acceptance is not a waiver.  
113. Waiver of notice to quit. —A notice given under section 111, clause (h), is waived, with the 
express or implied consent of the person to whom it is given, by any act on the part of the person giving 
it showing an intention to treat the lease as subsisting.  
Illustrations  
(a) A, the lessor, gives B, the lessee, notice to quit the property leased. The notice expires . B tenders, and A 
accepts, rent which has become due in respect of the prop erty since the expiration of the notice. The notice is 
waived.  
(b) A, the lessor, gives B, the lessee, notice to quit the property leased. The notice expires, and B 
remains in possession. A gives to B as lessee a second notice to quit. The first notice is waived.  
114. Relief against forfeiture for non -payment of rent. —Where  a lease of immoveable 
property has determined by forfeiture for non -payment of rent, and the lessor sues to eject the 
lessee,
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 41]
rty has determined by forfeiture for non -payment of rent, and the lessor sues to eject the 
lessee, if, at the hearing of the suit, the lessee pays or tenders to the lessor the rent in arrear, 
together with interest thereon and his full costs of the suit, or gives such security as the Court 
thinks sufficient for making such payment within fifteen days, the Court may, in lieu of making a 
decree for ejectment, pas s an order relieving the lessee against the forfeiture; and thereupon the 
lessee shall hold the property leased as if the forfeiture had not occurred.  
3[114A. Relief against forfeiture in certain other cases .—Where a lease of immoveable property 
has determ ined by forfeiture for a breach of an express condition which provides that on breach thereof 
the lessor may re -enter, no suit for ejectment shall lie unless and until the lessor has served on the lessee 
a notice in writing —  
(a) specifying the particular breach complained of; and  
(b) if the breach is capable of remedy, requiring the lessee to remedy the breach;  
and the lessee fails, within a reasonable time from the date of the service of the notice, to remedy the 
breach, if it is capable of remedy.  
Nothing in this section shall apply to an express condition against the assigning, under -
letting, parting with the possession, or disposing, of the property leased, or to an express 
condition relating to forfeiture in case of non -payment of rent.]  
115. Eff ect of surrender and forfeiture on under -leases.—The surrender, express or implied, 
of a lease of immoveable property does not prejudice an under -lease of the property or any part 
thereof previously granted by the lessee, on terms and conditions substantia lly the same (except as 
regards the amount of rent) as those of the original lease; but, unless the surrender is made for the 
purpose of obtaining a new lease, the rent payable by, and the contracts binding on, the under -lessee 
shall be respectively payabl e to and enforc
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 41]
le by, and the contracts binding on, the under -lessee 
shall be respectively payabl e to and enforceable by the lessor.  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 20 of 1929, s. 57, for “either case”.  
2. Subs . by s. 57, ibid., for “does some act showing”.  
3. Ins. by s. 58, ibid. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 42]
42 
 The forfeiture of such a lease annuls all such under -leases, except where such forfeiture has been 
procured by the lessor in fraud of the under -lessees, or relief against the forfeiture is granted under           
section 114.  
116. Effect of holding over. —If a lessee or under -lessee of property remains in possession 
thereof after the determination of the lease granted to the lessee, and the lessor or his legal 
representative accepts rent from the lessee or under -lessee, or  otherwise assents to his continuing in 
possession, the lease is, in the absence of an agreement to the contrary, renewed  from year to year, or 
from month to month, according to the purpose for which the property is leased, as specified in                     
section 106.  
Illustrations  
(a) A lets a house to B for five years. B underlets the house to C at a monthly rent of Rs. 100. The five years 
expire, but C continues in possession of the house and pays the rent to A. C's lease is renewed from month to 
month.  
(b) A lets a farm to B for the life of C. C dies, but B continues in possession with A's assent. B's lease is renewed from 
year to year.  
117. Exemption of leases for agricultural purposes .—None of the provisions of this 
Chapter apply to leases for a gricultural purposes, except in so far as the State Government 
1*** may by notification published in the Official Gazette, declare all or any of such 
provisions to be so applicable 2[in the case of all or any such leases], together with, or subject 
to, tho se of the local law, if any, for the time being in force.  
Such notification shall not take effect until the expiry of six months from the date of its 
publication.  
CHAPTER VI  
OF EXCHANGES  
118. “Exchange ” defined. —When two persons mutually transfer the ownership of one 
thing for the ownership of another , neither thing or both things being money only, the 
transaction is called an “exchange ”. 
A transfer of property in completion of an exchange can 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 42]
the 
transaction is called an “exchange ”. 
A transfer of property in completion of an exchange can be made only in manner 
provided for the transfer of such pr operty by sale.  
3[119. Right of party deprived of thing received in exchange .—If any party to an 
exchange or any person claiming through or under such party is by reason of any defect in the 
title of the other party deprived of the thing or any part of the  thing received by him in 
exchange, then, unless a contrary intention appears from the terms of the exchange, such other 
party is liable to him or any person claiming through or under him for loss caused thereby, or 
at the option of the person so deprived,  for the return of the thing transferred, if still in the 
possession of such other party or his legal representative or a transferee from him without 
consideration.]  
120. Rights and liabilities of parties .—Save as otherwise provided in this Chapter, 
each p arty has the rights and is subject to the liabilities of a seller as to that which he 
gives, and  has the rights and is subject to the liabilities of a buyer as to that which he 
takes.  
121. Exchange of money .—On an exchange of money, each party thereby warr ants 
the genuineness of the money given by him.  
  
                                                      
1. The words “with the previous sanction of the Governor General in Council” omitted by Act 38 of 1920, s. 2 and I 
Schedule.  
2. Ins. by Act 6 of 1904, s. 6.  
3. Subs. by Act 20 of 1929, s. 59, for s . 119. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 43]
43 
 CHAPTER VII  
OF GIFTS 
122. “Gift” defined .—“Gift ” is the transfer of certain existing moveable or 
immoveable property made voluntarily and without consideration, by one person, called 
the donor, to another, called the donee, and accepted by or on behalf of the donee.  
Acceptance when to be made .—Such acce ptance must be made during the lifetime of 
the donor and while he is till capable of giving,  
If the donee dies before acceptance, the gift is void.  
123. Transfer how effected. —For the purpose of making a gift of immoveable 
property, the transfer must be ef fected by a registered instrument signed by or on behalf of 
the donor, and attested by at least two witnesses.  
For the purpose of making a gift of moveable property, the transfer may be effected  
either by a registered instrument signed as aforesaid or by delivery.  
Such delivery may be made in the same way as goods sold may be delivered.  
124. Gift of existing and future property. —A gi ft comprising both existing and future 
property is void as to th e latter.  
125. Gift to several, of whom one does not accept .—A gift of a thing to two or more 
donees, of whom one does not accept it, is void as to the interest which he would have 
taken had he accepted.  
126. When gift may be suspended or revoked .—The dono r and done e may agree that 
on the happening of any specified event which does not depend on the will of the donor a 
gift shall be suspended or revoked; but a gift which the parties agree shall be revocable 
wholly or in part , at the mere w ill of the donor , is void wholly or in part, as the case may 
be. 
A gift  may also be revoked in any of the cases (save want or failure of consideration) in 
which, if it were a contract, it might be rescinded.  
Save as aforesaid, a gift cannot be revoked.  
Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to affect the rights of transferees for 
consideration without notice.  
Illustrations  
(a) A gives a field to B, reserving to hims
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 43]
ees for 
consideration without notice.  
Illustrations  
(a) A gives a field to B, reserving to himself, with B’s assent, the right to take back the field in case B 
and his descendants dies before A . B dies without descendants in A’s lifetime. A may take back the field.  
(b) A gives a lakh of rupees to B, reserving to himself, with B’s assent, the right to take back at 
pleasure Rs. 10,000 out of the lakh. The gift holds good as to Rs. 90,000, but is vo id as to Rs.10,000, which 
continue to belong to A.  
127. Onerous gifts. —Where a gift is in the form of a single transfer to the same person 
of several things of which one is, and the others are not, burdened by an obligation, the 
donee can take nothing by the gift unless he accepts it fully.  
Where a gift is in the form of two or more separate and independent transfers to the 
same person of several things, the don ee is at liberty to accept one of them and refuse the 
others, although the former may be beneficial and the latter onerous.  
Onerous gift to disqualified person .—A don ee not competent to contract and 
accepting property burdened by any obligation is not bound by his acceptance. But if, after 
becoming competent to contract and being  aware of the obligation, he retains the property 
given, he becomes so bound.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 44]
44 
 Illustrations  
(a) A has shares in X, a prosperous joint stock company, and also shares in Y, a joint stock company, in 
difficulties. Heavy calls are expected in respect of the s hares in Y. A give s B all his shares in joint stock 
companies. B refuses to accept the shares in Y. He cannot take the shares in X.  
(b) A, having a lease for a term of  years of a house at a rent which he and his representatives are bound 
to pay during the  term, and which is more than the house can be let for, given to B the lease, and also, as a 
separate and independent transaction, a sum of money. B refuses to accept the lease. He does not by his 
refusal forfeit the money.  
128. Universal donee. —Subject to  the provisions of section 127, where a gift consists 
of the donor’s whole property, the done is personally liable for all the debts due by 1[and 
liabilities of] the donor at the time of the gift to the extent of the property comprised 
therein.  
129. Saving of donations mortis causa  and Muhammadan law. —Nothing i n this 
Chapter related to gifts of moveable property made in contemplation of death, or shall be 
deemed to affect any rule of Muhammadan law  2***. 
3[CHAPTER VIII 
OF TRANSFERS OF ACTIONABLE   CLAIMS  
130. Transfer of actionable claim .—(1) The transfer of an actionable claim 4[whether with  
or without consideration] shall be effected only by the execution of an instrument in writing 
signed by the transferor or his duly authorised agent, 5*** shall be complete and effectual upon 
the execution of such instrument, and thereupon all the rights and remedies of the transferor, 
whether by way of damages or otherwise, shall vest in the transferee, whether such notice of the 
transfer as is hereinafter provid ed be given or not:  
Provided that every dealing with the debt or other actionable claim by the debtor or other 
person from or against whom the transferor would, but for such instrument of transfer as 
aforesaid, have been entitled to recover or enf
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 44]
feror would, but for such instrument of transfer as 
aforesaid, have been entitled to recover or enforce such  debt or other actionable claim, shall 
(save where the debtor or other person is a party to the transfer or has received express notice 
thereof as hereinafter provided) be valid as against such transfer.  
(2) The transferee of an actionable claim may, upon the execution of such instrument of 
transfer as aforesaid, sue or institute proceedings for the same in his own name without 
obtaining the transferor's consent to such suit or proceedings and without making him a party 
thereto.  
Exception. —Nothing in this s ection applies to the transfer of a marine or fire policy of 
insurance 6[or affects the provisions of section 38 of the Insurance Act, 1938 (4 of 1938)].  
Illustrations  
(i) A owes money to B, who transfers the debt to C. B then demands the debt from A, who,  not having 
received notice of the transfer, as prescribed in section 131, pays B. The payment is valid, and C cannot sue A for 
the debt.  
(ii) A effects a policy on his own life with an Insurance Company and assigns it to a Bank for securing the 
payment of an existing or future debt. If A dies, the Bank is entitled to receive the amount of the policy and to sue on 
it without the concurrence of A's  executor, subject to the proviso in sub -section ( 1) of section 130 and to the 
provisions of section 132 . 
7[130A . Transfer of policy of marine insurance. ] Rep. by the Marine Insurance Act, 1963 (11 of 
1963), s. 92 (w .e.f. 1-8-1963).  
                                                      
1. Ins. by Act 20 of 1929, s. 60.  
2. The words and figures “or, save as provided by s . 123, any rule of Hindu or Buddhist law” omitted by Act 20 of 1929, 
s. 61.  
3. Subs. by Act 2 of 1900, s. 4, for the original Chapter VIII.  
4. Ins. by Act 20 of 1929, s. 62.  
5. The words and figures “and notwithstanding anything contained in section 123” ins. by Act 38 of 1925, s. 2, omitted 
by Act 20 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 44]
notwithstanding anything contained in section 123” ins. by Act 38 of 1925, s. 2, omitted 
by Act 20 of 1929, s. 62.  
6. Added by Act 4 of 1938, s. 121 (w.e.f. 1 -7-1939).  
7. Ins. by Act 6 of 1944, s. 2.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 45]
45 
 131. Notice to be in wr iting, signed. —Every  notice of transfer of an actionable claim shall 
be in writing, signed by the transferor or his agent duly authori sed in this behalf, or, in case the 
transferor refuses to sign, by the  transferee or his agent, and shall state the name and address of 
the transferee.  
132. Liability of transferee  of actionable claim. —The transferee of an actionable claim shall 
take it subject to all the liabilities and equities to which the transferor was subject in respect 
thereof at the date of the trans fer. 
Illustrations  
(i) A transfers to C a debt due to him by B, A being then indebted to B. C sues B for the debt 
due by B to                    A.  In such suit B is entitled to set off the debt due by A to him; 
although C was unaware of it at the date of such transfer.  
(ii) A executed a bond in favour  of B under circumstances entitling the former to have it 
delivered up and cancelled. B assigns the bond to C for value and without notice of such 
circumstances. C cannot enforce the bond against A.  
133. Warranty of solvency of debtor .—Where the transferor  of a debt warrants the solvency of 
the debtor, the warranty, in the absence of a contract to the contrary, applies only to his solvency at 
the time of the transfer, and is limited, where the transfer is made for consideration, to the amount or 
value of su ch consideration.  
134. Mortgaged debt .—Where a debt is transferred for the purpose of securing an existing or 
future debt, the debt so transferred, if received by the transferor or recovered by the transferee, is 
applicable, first, in payment of the costs of such recovery : secondly, in or towards satisfaction of the 
amount for the time being secured by the transfer; and the residue, if any, belongs to the transferor 
or other person entitled to receive the same.  
1[135. Assignment of  rights under pol icy of in surance against fire. —Every assignee by 
endorsement or other writing, of a policy of 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 45]
ol icy of in surance against fire. —Every assignee by 
endorsement or other writing, of a policy of insurance against fire, in whom the property in the subject 
insured shall be absolutely vested at the date of the assignment, shall have transferred and vested in him 
all rights of suit as if the contract contained in the policy had been made with himself.]  
2[135A. [Assignment of rights under policy of marine insurance. ] Rep. by the Marine Insurance Act, 
1963 (11 of 1963), s. 92 (w.e.f. 1-8-1963).  
136. Incapacity of officers con nected with Courts of Justice. —No Judge, legal practitioner or 
officer connected with any Court of Justice shall buy or traffic in, or stipulate for, or agree to receive any 
share of, or interest in, any actionable claim, and no Court of Justic e shall enforce, at his instance, or at 
the instance of any person claiming by or through him, any actionable claim so dealt with by him as 
aforesaid.  
137. Saving of negotiable instruments, etc .—Nothing in the foregoing sections of this 
Chapter applies to stocks, shares or debentures, or to instruments which are for the time being, by 
law or custom, negotiable, or to any mercantile document of title to goods.  
Explanation. —The expression “mercantile document of title to goods ” includes a bill of lading, 
dock -warrant, warehouse  keeper's certificate, railway receipt, warrant or order for the delivery of 
goods, and any other document used in the ordinary course of business as proof of the possession or 
control of goods, or authori sing or purporting to authori se, either by endorsement or by delivery, the 
possessor of the document to transfer or receive goods thereby represented.]  
  
                                                      
1. Subs. by Act 6 of 1944, s.  3, for s . 135.  
2. Ins. by s. 4, ibid.  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882.pdf - page 46]
46 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(a) STATUTES  
Year and Chapter  Subject  Extent of repeal  
27 Hen Year VIII, c.  10 Uses.   .   . The whole.  
13 Eliz.,  c. 5..   .  .    Fraudulent conveyances  The whole.  
27 Eliz.,  c. 4..    .    . Fraudulent conveyances  The whole.  
4  Mm., and Mary, c. 16  Clandestine mortgages  The whole.  
(b) ACTS OF THE GOVERNOR  GENERAL IN COUNCIL  
Number and year  Subject  Extent of repeal  
IX of 1842 ……  Lease and release .   The whole.  
XXXI of 1854….  Modes of conveying 
land. Section  17. 
XI of 1855…  Mesne profits and 
improvements.  Section 1; in the title, the words 
“to mesne profits and” , and  in 
the preamble “to limit the 
liability for mesne profitand”.  
XXVII of 1866…..  Indian Trustee Act  Section 31.  
IV of 1872…… Punjab Laws Act  So far as it relates
 to Benga l 
Regulations I of 1798 and XVII of 
1806.  
XX of 1875 …. Central Provinces Laws 
Act  So far as it relates  to
 Bengal Regulations I of 
1798 and XVII of 1806.  
XVIII of 1876 …..  Oudh Laws Act  So far as it
 relates  to Benga l 
Regulation XVII of 1806.  
I of 1877 ……  Specific Relief  In sections 35 and 36, the word “in 
writing”.   
(c) REGULATIONS  
Number and year  Subject  Extent of repeal  
Bengal Regulation I of 
1798  
 Conditional sales  
 The whole Regulation.  
Bengal Regulation 
XVII of 1806.  
 Redemption  
 The whole Regulation.  
 
Bombay Regulation V  
of 1827.  Acknowledgment of 
debts; Interest; 
Mortgagees in 
possession.  Section  15. 
 
 
_____________  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE UNORGANISED WORKERS’ SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2008.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE UNORGANISED WORKERS’  SOCIAL  SECURITY ACT, 2008  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
SOCIAL  SECURITY  BENEFITS  
3. Framing of scheme . 
4. Funding of Central Government Schemes . 
CHAPTER III  
NATIONAL  SOCIAL  SECURITY  BOARD FOR  UNORGANISED WORKERS  
5. National Social Security Board  
CHAPTER IV  
STATE  SOCIAL  SECURITY BOARD FOR  UNORGANISED WORKERS  
6. State Social Security Board . 
7. Funding of State Government Schemes . 
8. Record keeping by District Administration . 
9. Workers facilitation centres . 
CHAPTER V  
REGISTRATION  
10. Eligibility for registration and social security benefits.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
11. Power of Central Government to give directions . 
12. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings . 
13. Power to make rules by Central Government . 
14. Power to make rules by State Government . 
15. Laying of rules . 
16. Saving of certain laws . 
17. Power to remove difficulties . 
SCHEDULE I.  
SCHEDULE II.  
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE UNORGANISED WORKERS’ SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2008.pdf - page 2]
2 
 THE UNORGANISED WORKERS’  SOCIAL  SECURITY ACT, 2008  
ACT NO. 33 OF 2008  
[30th December , 2008.]  
An Act to provide for the social security and welfare of unorganised workers and for other 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -ninth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short ti tle, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be  called the Unorganised Workers’  
Social Security Act, 2008.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the contex t otherwise requires, — 
(a) “employer ” means a person or an association of persons, who has engaged or employed an 
unorganised  worker either directly or otherwise for remuneration;  
(b) “home -based worker ” means a person engaged in the production of goods or services for an 
employer in his or her home or other premises of his or her choice other than the workplace of the 
employer,  for remuneration, irrespective of whether or not the employer provides the equipment, 
materials or other inputs;  
(c) “identity card ” means a card, document or certificate issued to an unorganised worker by the 
District Administration under sub -section ( 3) of section 10;  
(d) “National Board ” means the National Social Security Board for unorganised workers 
constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 5;  
(e) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(f) “organised sector'' means a n enterprise which is not an unorganised sector;  
(g) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act by the Central Government or the 
State Government, as the case may be;  
(h) “registered worker ” means an unorganised work er registered under sub -section (3) of section 
10; 
(i) “Schedule ” means the Schedule annexed to the Act;  
(j) “State B
<|CHUNK|>
[THE UNORGANISED WORKERS’ SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2008.pdf - page 2]
 -section (3) of section 
10; 
(i) “Schedule ” means the Schedule annexed to the Act;  
(j) “State Board ” means the (name of the State) State Social Security Board for unorganised 
workers constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 6;  
(k) “self-employed worker ” means any person who is not employed by an employer, but engages 
himself or herself in any occupation in the unorganised sector subject to a monthly earning of an 
amount as may be notified by the Central Government or the State Gov ernment from time to time or 
holds cultivable land subject to such ceiling as may be notified by the State Government;  
(l) “unorganised sector ” means an enterprise owned by individuals or self -employed workers and 
engaged in the production or sale of goods  or providing service of any kind whatsoever, and where 
the enterprise employs workers, the number of such workers is less than ten;  
                                                           
1. 16th May, 2009, vide notification N o. S.O. 1220(E) , dated 14 th May, 2009, s ee Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 
3(ii). 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE UNORGANISED WORKERS’ SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2008.pdf - page 3]
3 
 (m) “unorganised worker ” means a home -based worker, self -employed worker or a wage worker 
in the unorganised sector and inc ludes a worker in the organised sector who is not covered by any of 
the Acts mentioned in Schedule II to this Act; and  
(n) “wage worker ” means a person employed for remuneration in the unorganised sector, directly 
by an employer or through any contractor, irrespective of place of work, whether exclusively for one 
employer or for one or more employers, whether in cash or in kind, whether as a home -based worker, 
or as a temporary or casual worker, or as a migrant worker, or workers employed by households 
including domestic workers, with a monthly wage of an amount as may be notified by the Central 
Government and State Government, as the case may be.  
CHAPTER II  
SOCIAL  SECURITY  BENEFITS  
3. Framing of scheme. —(1) The Central Government shall formulate and notify, from time to time, 
suitable welfare schemes for unorganised  workers on matters relating to — 
(a) life and disability cover;  
(b) health and maternity benefits;  
(c) old age protection; and  
(d) any other ben efit as may be determined by the Central Government.  
(2) The schemes included in the Schedule 1 to this Act shall be deemed to be the welfare schemes 
under sub -section ( 1). 
(3) The Central Government may, by notification, amend the Schedules annexed to thi s Act.  
(4) The State Government may formulate and notify, from time to time, suitable welfare schemes for 
unorganised workers , including schemes relating to — 
(a) provident fund;  
(b) employment injury benefit;  
(c) housing;  
(d) educational  schemes for children;  
(e) skill upgradation of workers;  
(f) funeral assistance; and  
(g) old age homes.  
4. Funding of Central Government Schemes .—(1) Any scheme notified b y the Central 
Government may be — 
(i) wholly funded by the Central Government; or  
(ii) partly funded by the Central Government and partly funded by the State Government
<|CHUNK|>
[THE UNORGANISED WORKERS’ SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2008.pdf - page 3]
ernment; or  
(ii) partly funded by the Central Government and partly funded by the State Government; or  
(iii) partly  funded by the Central Government, partly funded by the State Government and partly 
funded through contributions collected from the beneficiaries of the scheme or the employers as may 
be prescribed in the scheme by the Central Government.  
(2) Every scheme notified by the Central Government shall provide for such matters that are 
necessary for the efficient implementation of the scheme including the matters rel ating to,— 
(i) scope of the scheme;  
(ii) beneficiaries of the scheme;  
(iii) resources of the scheme ; 
(iv) agency or agencies that will implement the scheme;  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE UNORGANISED WORKERS’ SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2008.pdf - page 4]
4 
 (v) redressal of grievances; and  
(vi) any other relevant matter.  
CHAPTER III  
NATIONAL  SOCIAL  SECURITY  BOARD FOR  UNORGANISED WORKERS  
5. Na tional Social Security Board .—(1) The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute a 
National Board to be known as the National Social Security Board to exercise the powers conferred on, 
and to perform the functions assigned to, it under this Act.  
(2) The National Board shall consist of the following me mbers, namely: — 
(a) Union Minister for Labour and Employment -Chairperson, ex officio ; 
(b) the Director General (Labour Welfare) -Member -Secretary, ex officio ; and  
(c) thirty -four members to be nominated by the C entral Government, out of whom — 
(i) seven repr esenting unorganised sector workers;  
(ii) seven representing employers of unorganised sector;  
(iii) seven representing eminent persons from civil society;  
(iv) two representing members from Lok Sabha and one from Rajya Sabha;  
(v) five  representing Central Government Ministries and Departments concerned; and  
(vi) five representing State Governments.  
(3) The Chairperson and other members of the Board shall be from amongst persons of eminence in 
the fields of labour welfare, management, f inance, law and administration.  
(4) The number of persons to be nominated as members from each of the categories specified in 
clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2), the term of office and other conditions of service of members, the procedure 
to be followed in the discharge of their functions by, and the manner of filling vacancies among the 
members of, the National Board shall be such as may be prescribed:  
Provided that adequate representation shall be given to persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, 
the Schedul ed Tribes, the Minorities and Women.  
(5) The term of the National Board shall be three years.  
(6) The National Board shall meet at least thrice a year, at such time and place and shall observe such 
rules of procedure relat
<|CHUNK|>
[THE UNORGANISED WORKERS’ SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2008.pdf - page 4]
meet at least thrice a year, at such time and place and shall observe such 
rules of procedure relating to the transaction of business  at its meetings, as may be prescribed.  
(7) The members may receive such allowances as may be prescribed for attending the meetings of the 
National Board.  
(8) The National Board shall perform the follow ing functions, namely: — 
(a) recommend  to the Central Government suitable schemes for different sections of unorganised 
workers;  
(b) advise the Central Government on such matters arising out of the administration of this Act as 
may be referred to it;  
(c) monitor such social welfare schemes for  unorganised workers as are administered by the 
Central Government;  
(d) review the progress of registration and issue of identity cards to the unorganised workers;  
(e) review the record keeping functions performed at the State level;  
(f) review  the expenditure from the funds under various schemes; and  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE UNORGANISED WORKERS’ SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2008.pdf - page 5]
5 
 (g) undertake such other functions as are assigned to it by the Central Government from time to 
time.  
CHAPTER IV  
STATE  SOCIAL  SECURITY BOARD FOR  UNORGANISED WORKERS  
6. State Social  Security Board. —(1) Every State Government shall, by notification, constitute a 
State Board to be known as (name of the State) State Social Security Board to exercise the powers 
conferred on, and to perform the functions assigned to it, under this Act.  
(2) The State Board  shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(a) Minister of Labour and Em ployment of the concerned State —Chairperson, ex officio ; 
(b) the Principal Secreta ry or Secretary (Labour) —Member—Secretary, ex officio ; and  
(c) twenty -eight members to be nominated by th e State Government, out of whom — 
(i) seven representing the unorganised workers;  
(ii) seven representing employers of unorganised workers;  
(iii) two representing members of Legislative Assembly of the concerned State;  
(iv) five  representing eminent persons from civil society; and  
(v) seven representing State Government Departments concerned.  
(3) The Chairperson and other members of the Board shall be from amongst persons of eminence in 
the fields of labour welfare, management, f inance, law and administration.  
(4) The number of persons to be nominated as members from each of the categories specified in 
clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2), the term of office and other conditions of service of members, the procedure 
to be followed in the discharge of their functions by, and the manner of filling vacancies among the 
members of, the State Board shall be such as may be prescribed:  
Provided that adequate representation shall be given to persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, 
the Scheduled Tribes, the Minorities and Women.  
(5) The term of the State Board shall be three years.  
(6) The State Board shall meet atleast once in a quarter at such time and place and shall observe such 
rules of procedure relating to
<|CHUNK|>
[THE UNORGANISED WORKERS’ SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2008.pdf - page 5]
east once in a quarter at such time and place and shall observe such 
rules of procedure relating to the transaction of business at its  meetings, as may be prescribed.  
(7) The members may receive such allowances as may be prescribed for attending the meetings of the 
State Board.  
(8) The State Board shall perform t he following functions, namely: — 
(a) recommend the State Government in formu lating suitable schemes for different sections of the 
unorganised sector workers;  
(b) advise the State Government on such matters arising out of the administration of this Act as 
may be referred to it;  
(c) monitor such social welfare schemes for unorganise d workers as are administered by the State 
Government;  
(d) review the record keeping functions performed at the District level;  
(e) review the progress of registration and issue of cards to unorganised sector workers;  
(f) review  the expenditure from the funds under various schemes; and  
(g) undertake such other functions as are assigned to it by the State Government from time to 
time.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE UNORGANISED WORKERS’ SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2008.pdf - page 6]
6 
 7. Funding  of State Government Schemes. —(1) Any scheme notified  by the State Government may 
be— 
(i) wholly funded by the State Government; or  
(ii) partly funded by the State Government, partly funded through contributions collected from 
the beneficiaries of the scheme or the employers as may be prescribed in the scheme by the State 
Government.  
(2) The State Government may seek financial assistance from the Central Government for the 
schemes formulated by it.  
(3) The Central Government may provide such financial assistance to the State Governments for the 
purpose of schemes for such period and on such  terms and conditions as it may deem fit.  
8. Record keeping by District Administration .—The record keeping functions for the purpose of 
this Act shall be performed by the District Administration:  
Provided that the State Government may direct that the reco rd keeping  function shall be performed 
by— 
(a) the District Panchayat in rural areas; and  
(b) the Urban Local Bodies in urban areas.  
9. Workers facilitation centres. —The State Government may set up such Workers' facilitation 
centres  as may be considered necessary from time to time to perform the following f unctions, namely: — 
(a) disseminate information on available social security schemes for the unorganised workers;  
(b) facilitate the filling, processing and forwarding of applicatio n forms for registration of 
unorganised workers;  
(c) assist unorganised worker to obtain registration from the District Administration;  
(d) facilitate the enrollment of the registered unorganised workers in social security schemes.  
CHAPTER V  
REGISTRATION  
10. Eligibility for registration and social security benefits .—(1) Every unorganised worker shall be 
eligible for registration subject to the fulfilment of th e following conditions, namely: — 
(a) he or she shall have completed fourteen years of age; and  
(b) a self -declaration by him or her confirming that he or she is an unorganised
<|CHUNK|>
[THE UNORGANISED WORKERS’ SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2008.pdf - page 6]
ears of age; and  
(b) a self -declaration by him or her confirming that he or she is an unorganised worker.  
(2) Every eligible unorganised worker shall make an application in the prescribed form to the District 
Administration for registration.  
(3) Every unorganised worker shal l be registered and issued an identity card by the District 
Administration which shall be a smart card carrying a unique identification number and shall be portable.  
(4) If a scheme requires a registered unorganised worker to make a contribution, he or she  shall be 
eligible for social security benefits under the scheme only upon payment of such contribution.  
(5) Where a scheme requires the Central or State Government to make a contribution, the Central or 
State Government, as the case may be, shall make the  contribution regularly in terms of the scheme.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE UNORGANISED WORKERS’ SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2008.pdf - page 7]
7 
 CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
11. Power of Central G overnment to give directions .—The Central Go vernment may give 
directions to — 
(i) the National Board; or  
(ii) the Government of a State or the State Board of that State,  
in respect of matters relating to the implementation of the provisions of this Act.  
12. Vacancies, etc., n ot to invalidate proceedings .—No proceedings of the National Board or any 
State Board shall b e invalid on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy or defect in the 
constitution of the National Board or, as the case may be, the State Board.  
13. Power to make  rules by Central Government .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification, make  rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the contributions to be collected from the benef iciaries of the scheme or the employers under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 4;  
 (b) the number of persons to be nominated, the term of office and other conditions of service of 
members, the procedure to be followed in the discharge of functions by, and the ma nner of filling 
vacancies of, the National Board under sub - section ( 4) of section 5;  
(c) the rules of procedure relating to the transaction of the business at the meeting of the National 
Board under sub -section ( 6) of section 5;  
(d) the allowances for att ending the meetings of the National Board under sub -section ( 7) of 
section 5;  
(e) the form for making an application for registration under sub -section ( 2) of section 10; and  
(f) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
14. Power to  make rules by State Government .—(1) The State Government may, by notification, 
make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
pro
<|CHUNK|>
[THE UNORGANISED WORKERS’ SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2008.pdf - page 7]
) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the number of persons to be nominated, the term of office and other conditions of service of 
members, the procedure to be followed in the discharge of functions by, and the manner of filling 
vacancies of, the State Board  under sub -section ( 4) of section 6;  
(b) the rules of procedure relating to the transaction of business at the meetings of the State Board 
under sub -section ( 6) of section 6;  
(c) the allowances for attending the meetings of the State Board under sub -sectio n (7) of section 
6; 
(d) the contributions to be collected from the beneficiaries of the scheme or the employers under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 7;  
(e) the form in which the application for registration shall be made under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 10; and 
(f) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE UNORGANISED WORKERS’ SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2008.pdf - page 8]
8 
 15. Laying of rules .—(1) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in ma king any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule.  
(2) Every rule made under this Act by State Government shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
notified, before the State Legislature.  
16. Saving of certain laws. —Nothing c ontained in this Act shall affect the operation of any 
corresponding law in a State providing welfare schemes which are more beneficial to the unorganised 
workers than those provided for them by or under this Act.  
17. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessa ry for re moving the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period of two years 
from the commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, befo re each 
House of Parliament.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE UNORGANISED WORKERS’ SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2008.pdf - page 9]
9 
  
SCHEDULE I  
[See sections 2( i) and (3)]  
SOCIAL SECURITY  SCHEMES FOR THE  UNORGANISED  WORKERS  
S. No.  Name of the Scheme  
1. Indira Gandhi National Old Age Pension Scheme.  
2. National Family Benefit Scheme.  
3. Janani Suraksha Yojana.  
4. Handloom Weavers’  Comprehensive Welfare Scheme.  
5. Handicraft Artisans’  Comprehensive Welfare Scheme.  
6. Pension to Master craft persons.  
7. National Scheme for Welfare of Fishermen and Training and Extension.  
8. Janshree Bima Yojana.  
9. Aam Admi Bima Yojana . 
10. Rashtriya S wasthya Bima Yojana.  
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE UNORGANISED WORKERS’ SOCIAL SECURITY ACT, 2008.pdf - page 10]
10 
 SCHEDULE II  
[See section 2( m)] 
  
S. No.  Name of the Act  
1. The Workmen’ s Compensation Act, 1923 (8 of 1923) . 
2. The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947).  
3. The Employees’  State Insurance Act, 1948 (34 of 1948).  
4. The Employees’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 (19 of 1952).  
5. The Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 (53 of 1961).  
6. The Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 (39 of 1972).  
 
 
____  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WASTE LANDS (CLAIMS) ACT, 1863.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE WASTE  LANDS (CLAIMS) ACT, 1863  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
 
PREAMBLE . 
SECTIONS.  
1. Provision for inquiry into claims to land, or objections to sale of same.  
2. Procedure in such cases.  
3. Pending enquiry, sale &c., to be postponed . 
4. Sale to be stopped if claim appear to be established,  but may afterwards be proceeded  with.  
5. Procedure after passing of order in the case, Report to Revenue Board, Decision of Board.  
6. Local Government may, with in Twelve months, order suit to be brought to try claim admitted by 
Collector.  
7. Special Court for trying claims.  
8. Notice  of constitution of Special Courts. Claims not cognizable in other  Courts.  
9. Special Court where to be held.  
10. Plaintiff and defendant in suit under section V, Proviso, Plaintiff and defen dant in suits under 
section VI.  
Proviso.  
11. Regulation of Proceedings . 
12. Procedure before hearing of suit.  
13. Procedure on hearing.  
14. No appeal or revision.  
15. Reference of question of law, etc., to High Court etc. when  reference obligatory in certain cases . 
16. Court may proceed notwithstanding reference.  
17. Records of cases where to be deposited.  
18. Limitation as to claims to land sold or dealt with . Provision for such claims if preferred within 
time.  
19. If claim established, possession not to be given, but compensation.  
20. When land has not been absolutely sold, or has been otherwise dealt with.  
21. Award under  the two last Sections to be in full satisfaction.  
22. Government not barred from awarding compensation for land absolutely sold, though claim be 
not preferred in time.  
23. Compen sation for land sold subject to condition, if claim proved, though not preferred in time.  
23A. Exercise of power of the State Government by the Board of Revenue or the Financial 
Commissioner . 
24. [Repealed .] 
 
 
 
 
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WASTE LANDS (CLAIMS) ACT, 1863.pdf - page 2]
2 
  
 
1[THE WASTE  LANDS (CLAIMS) ACT, 1863 ] 
ACT NO. XXIII OF 18632. 
__________  
PASSED BY THE GOVERNER  - GENERALOF  INDIAIN  COUNCIL . 
(Received the assent of the Governor - General on the 10thMarch, 1863 .) 
____________  
An Act to provide for the adjudication of claims to waste lands.  
Preamble. —WHEREAS  it is expedient to make special provision for the speedy adjudication 
of claims which may be preferred to waste lands proposed to be sold, or otherwise dealt with, on 
account of  3[the Provincial  Government ], and of objections taken to the sale or other di sposition 
of such lands ; It is enacted as follows :— 
I. Provision for inquiry into claims to land, or objections to sale of same .—When any claim shall 
be preferred to any waste land proposed to be sold, or otherwise dealt with, on account of 3[the State 
Government ], or when any objection shall be taken to the sale or other disposition of such land, the 
Collector of the District in which such land is situate, or other Officer performing the duties of a Collector 
of Land Revenue in such District by whatever name his Office is designated, shall, if the claim or 
objection be preferred within the period mentioned  in the advertisement to be issued for the sale or other 
disposition of such land,  which period shall not be less than three months, proceed to make an enquiry 
into the claim or objection.  
                                                           
 1. Short title given by the Indian Short Titles Act, 1897 (14 of 1897).  
 2. This Act has been declared to be in force in all part A States except the Scheduled Districts, by the Laws Local Extent Ac t, 1874                                      
(15 of 1874), s. 3.  
It has been declared by notification under s. 3(a) of the Schedule d Districts Act, 1874 (14 of 1874), to be in force in the following Scheduled 
Districts, namely : — 
West Jalpaiguri  .          .         .       .      .  See Gazette of 
India, P. 1.  Pt. I,  
The D
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WASTE LANDS (CLAIMS) ACT, 1863.pdf - page 2]
West Jalpaiguri  .          .         .       .      .  See Gazette of 
India, P. 1.  Pt. I,  
The Districts of Hazaribagh, Lohardaga (now the Ranchi District, see 
Calcutta Gazette , 1899, Pt. 1, p. 44 ), and Manbhum and Paragana 
Dhalbhum and the Kolhan in the District of Singbhum  Ditto  1881, Pt. I, p. 504.  
The Porahat Estate in the Singbhum District.   .    .     .    .    .  Ditto  1897, Pt. I, p. 1059 . 
Kumaon and Garhwal .   .   .   .   .   .   .  .  Ditto  1876, Pt. I, p. 605.  
The Scheduled portion of the Mirzapur District .   .    .   .    .  Ditto  1879, Pt. I, p 383.  
Jaunsar Bawar .    .    .    .    .  Ditto  1879, Pt. I, p. 382.  
The District of Lahaul  .    .     .     .   1886, Pt. I, p. 301  
The District of Kamrup, Naugong Darrang, Sibsagar, Lakhimpur, 
Goalpara (excluding the Eastern Duars) and Cachar (excluding the 
North Cachar Hills) .     .    .    .     .  Ditto  1878, Pt. I, p. 533.  
It has been de clared under s. 3 (b) of the same Act not to be in force in the Scheduled Districts in Ganjam and Vizagapatam, see Gazette of 
India, 1898, Pt. I, 872.  
It has been extended, by notification under s. 5 of the last -mentioned Act, to the following Scheduled Di stricts, namely : — 
Western Duars  Gazette of India,  1875, Pt. I, p. 497.  
The Tarai of the Province of Agra  Ditto  1876, Pt. I, p. 505.  
It has been repealed in Bombay by the Waste Lands (Claims) (Bombay Repeal) Act, 1943 (Bom. 9 of 1943).  
This Act has been extended to the new Provinces and Merged States by the Merged States (Laws) Act, 1949 (59 of 1949) and to the States 
of Manipur, Tripura and Vindhya Pradesh by the Part C States (Laws) Act, 1950 (30 of 1950).   
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1937 for “Govt.”  
 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WASTE LANDS (CLAIMS) ACT, 1863.pdf - page 3]
3 
 II. Procedure in such cases. —The Collector or other Officer as aforesaid, shall call upon the claimant 
or objector to produce any evidence or documents, upon which he may rely in proof of his claim or 
objection ; and a fter considering the same, and making any further enquiry that may appear proper, shall 
dispose of the case by an order for the admission or rejection of the claim or objection ; and if the land is 
proposed to be sold, for the sale of the same subject to a ny condition or reservation which, to such 
Collector or other Officer as aforesa id, shall appear to be proper. I f the land is ordered to be sold subject 
to any condition or reservation, such condition or reservation shall be notified to intending purchaser s at 
the time of sale.  
III. Pending an enquiry, sale &c., to be postponed. —Pending an enquiry into any claim or objection 
under the last preceding Section, the Collector or other Officer as aforesaid shall postpone the sale or 
other disposition of the land ;  
and, if he shall order that such claim or objection be rejected, he shall further postpone the sale or 
other disposition of the land, to allow the claimant or objector to contest the order of rejection in the 
manner hereinafter provided.  
IV. Sale to be stopped if claim appear to be established,  but may afterwards be proceeded                      
with. —If the Collector or other officer as aforesaid shall consider the claim or objection to be established, 
and that the sale or other disposition of the land should not take place, he shall stop the sale or other 
disposition of the land:  
but such sale or other disposition of the land may afterwards be proceeded with, if, on an order 
issued  by the Local Government to try to claim or objection, as provided in section VI  of this Act, the 
claimant or objector shall fail to establish the same.  
V. Procedure aft er passing of order in the case,  Report to Revenue Board, Decision of Board. —If 
the Collector or other O
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WASTE LANDS (CLAIMS) ACT, 1863.pdf - page 3]
ing of order in the case,  Report to Revenue Board, Decision of Board. —If 
the Collector or other Officer as aforesaid shall order that the claim or objection be rejected, or that the 
land be sold subject to any condition or reservation, or that it be otherwise dealt with, he shall cause a 
copy of such order to be delivered to the claimant or objector ;  
order when final. —and if such claimant or objector shall not, within one week from the delivery of 
such copy, or within such further time as the Collector or other Officer as aforesaid, for any special reason 
to be recorded, shall see fit to grant, give notice i n writing to such Collector or other Officer as aforesaid, 
that he intends to contest such order, the order shall be final.  
Report to Board. —If the claimant or objector shall, within the time allowed, give such notice, the 
Collector or other Officer as afo resaid shall immediately make a report t o the 1[Board of Revenue , or 
other ] superior Revenue Authority  ; 2[to which he is immediately subordinate]  and shall forward with 
such Report a copy of his order, stating fully all the circumstances of the case, and the evidence adduced 
in support, or otherwise, of the claim or objection;   
Decision of Board. —and such  3[Board, or other ] authority, on the receipt of such Report, and after 
calling for any further information whi ch it may consider necessary,  may confirm, modify or reverse , the 
order of the Collector or other officer as aforesaid.  
                                                           
1. The words “Board of Revenue or other” rep. by Act 4 of 1914, Schedule, Pt. I.  
2. Ins.,  ibid.,  
3. The words “Board or other” rep., ibid. 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WASTE LANDS (CLAIMS) ACT, 1863.pdf - page 4]
4 
  
If the Board or other Authority as aforesaid confirm the order of the Collector or other Officer as 
aforesaid, or modify such order in such to manner as to leave any part of such  order in force adverse to 
the claimant or objector, the Collector or other Officer as aforesaid shall certify such order to the Court 
constituted as hereinafter provided;   
and such Court shall forthwith give notice to the claimant or objector; a nd if such  claimant or                       
objector ;  
and if such claimant or objector shall not, 1[within thirty days from the delivery of such notice from 
the Court ], institute a sui t in such Court to establish his claim or objection, the order of the 2[Board or 
other ] authority aforesaid shall be final.  
VI. Local Government may, with in Twelve months, order suit to  be brought to try claim 
admitted by Collector .—The Local  Government may, within twelve months after the date on which the 
claim of any claimant of waste land, or the objection of any objector, as aforesaid, shall have been 
admitted under this Act by the Collector or other Officer as aforesaid, direct a suit to be brought to try the 
claim or objection of the claimant or objector, in a Court constituted as hereinafter provided.  
VII. Special Court for trying claims .—For the investigation and trial of claims under this Act, the 
Local  Government shall constitute, in every District in which there may be any waste lands capable of 
being sold, or otherwise dealt  with, on account of  Government, a Court consisting of an uneven number 
of persons, not less than three ; of whom the Judge of the District, or the Officer presidi ng in the principal 
Civil Court of original jurisdiction in the District, by whatever name his office may be designated, shall 
be one.  Any one or more of the members of which such Court shall consist shall have power to make all 
such orders in the case as may be necessary prior to the hearing of the suit:  Provided that, whenever t
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WASTE LANDS (CLAIMS) ACT, 1863.pdf - page 4]
 orders in the case as may be necessary prior to the hearing of the suit:  Provided that, whenever the 
Collector, or other Officer, by whom the original enquiry was held, is the fficer presiding in the principal 
Civil Court of original Jurisdiction in the District, such Officer s hall not be a member of such Court.  
VIII.  Notice of constitution of Special Courts . Claims not cognizable in other                                
Courts. —When ever any Court is constituted under this Act, notice thereof shall be given by a written 
proclamation, copies of which shall be affixed in the several Courts, and in the offices of the several 
Collectors and Magistrates of the District:  and from the date of the issue of such proclamation , no other 
Court shall be competent to entertain any claim or objection , belonging to the class of claims or 
objections for the trial and determination of which such Court is constituted.  
IX. Special Court s where to be held.—The Courts constituted under this Act shall be held at such 
place, or places, within the limits of their respective jurisdictions, as shall be considered most convenient.  
X.  Plaintiff and defendant in suit under section V, Plaintiff and defendant in suits under section 
VI.—In every  suit i nstituted under Section V  of this Act, the claimant of the waste land, or objector to the 
sale or other disposition of such land, shall appear as plaintiff; and the Collector, or other Officer 
aforesaid, shall appear as defendant on the part of  3[The State  Government ]  
Either party may appear by pleader or by agent .  
                                                           
 1. The words “within thirty days from the delivery of such notice from the Court” rep. by Act 9 of 1871. For Limitation,  see 
now the Indian Limitation Act, 1908 (9 of 1908).  
   2. The words “Board or other” rep., by Act 4 of 1914, Schedule, Pt. I.  
   3. subs. By the A.O. 1937 for “Govt.”  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WASTE LANDS (CLAIMS) ACT, 1863.pdf - page 4]
 Pt. I.  
   3. subs. By the A.O. 1937 for “Govt.”  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WASTE LANDS (CLAIMS) ACT, 1863.pdf - page 5]
5 
 Proviso.—Provided that if such other officer as aforesaid be the presiding officer of the principal Civil 
Court of original jurisdiction in the district, the Local Government  shall appoint some other Officer to 
appear as defendant in the case on its behalf.  
 In any suit ordered to be instituted by the Local Government under section VI  of this Act,                             
1[the State  Government ], by any officer, to be appointed for the purpose, shall appear as plaintiff; and the 
claimant or objector as aforesaid shall appear as defendant.  
XI. Regulation of Proceedings .—In suits instituted under this Act, except as hereinafter provided, the 
proceed ings shall be regulated, so far as they can be, by the Code of Civil Procedure.  
XII. Procedure before hearing  of suit .—The Court shall fix a day for the appearance of the                   
parties , and for the hearing of the suit, of which due notice shall  be given to the parties or their agents;  
and on the day so fixed, the parties or their agents shall bring their witnesses into Court, together with any 
documents on which they may intend to rely in support of their respective statements. If either party 
require the assistance of the Court to procure the attendance of a witness on such day, he shall apply to 
the Court in sufficient time , before the day fixed for the hearing of the suit; and the Court shall issue a 
subpoena requiring such witness to attend t he Court on that day  It shall be competent to the Court to 
require the personal attendance of the claimant of the waste land, or objector, as aforesaid, on the day 
fixed for the hearing, or at any subsequent stage of the suit.  
XIII . Procedure on hearing .—On the day fixed for the hearing of the suit, or as soon after as may be 
practicable, the Court shall proceed to examine the claimant of the waste land, or the objector, or his 
agent (when his personal attendance is not required), and the witnesses of the p arties;  and upon 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WASTE LANDS (CLAIMS) ACT, 1863.pdf - page 5]

agent (when his personal attendance is not required), and the witnesses of the p arties;  and upon such 
examination, and after inspecting the documents of the parties, and making any further enquiry that may 
appear necessary, shall proceed to pass such order in the case as it may consider just and proper.  
 XIV.  No appeal or revision .—No appeal shall lie from any decision or order passed under this Act, 
nor shall any such decision or order be open to revision.  
XV. Reference of quest ion of law, etc., to High Court etc. when  reference obligatory in certain 
cases .—If, on the trial of any suit under this Act, any question of to  law, or of usage having the force of 
law, or the construction of a document affecting the merits of the case, shall arise, on which the Court 
shall entertain reasonable doubts, the Court may, either of its own motion, or on the application of any of 
the parties to the suit, draw up a statement of the case and submit it, with its own opinion, for the opinion 
of the High Court of Judicature, or of the highest Civil Court of Appeal and Revision in  the territory in 
which the land is situate:  Provided that it shall be the duty of every Court held under this Act , to make 
such reference to such High Court, or Court of Appeal, if, in any suit under this Act, any question shall 
arise involving any princi ple of general importance, or the rights of a class.  
XVI. Court may proceed notwithstanding reference .—The Court may proceed in the case 
notwithstanding a reference to the High Court, or other highest Civil Court of Appeal as aforesaid; and 
may pass an order contingent upon the opinion of the High Court, or other Court as aforesaid, on the point 
referred;  but no final order for the sale or other disposition of the land in question in the suit, or for the 
admission or rejection of any claim or objection w hich shall be before the Court in such suit, shall be 
passed, until the receipt of the order of the said High Court, or 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WASTE LANDS (CLAIMS) ACT, 1863.pdf - page 5]
the Court in such suit, shall be 
passed, until the receipt of the order of the said High Court, or highest Civil Court of Appeal.  
XVII.  Records of cases where to be deposited .—The record of cases disposed of by Courts 
constituted under  this Act , shall be deposited amongst the records of the principal Civil Court of original 
jurisdiction in the District in which the property in dispute is situate.  
XVIII.  Limitation as to claims to land sold or dealt with , Provision for such claims if pre ferred 
with in time. —No claim to any land, or to compensation or damages in respect of any land, sold or 
                                                           
 1. subs. by the A.O. 1937 for “Govt.”  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WASTE LANDS (CLAIMS) ACT, 1863.pdf - page 6]
6 
 otherwise dealt with on account  of 1[the State Government ] as waste land, shall be received after the 
expiration of three years from the date on which such land shall have been delivered by                                
the Government  to the purchaser, or otherwise dealt with . 
If within three years after any land s have been delivered by the Government  to the purchaser, or 
otherwise dealt with, any claimant or objector shall prefer a claim to the land so delivered, or otherwise 
dealt with, or an objection to such sale, or to compensation or damages in respect there of, in the Court 
constituted under this Act for the District in which the land is situate; and shall show good and sufficient 
reason for not having preferred his claim or objection to the Collector or other Officer as aforesaid, within 
the period limited u nder Section I  of this Act; such Court shall file the claim or objection, making the 
claimant or objector plaintiff, and the Collector of the District or other Officer as aforesaid (with the like 
provision as aforesaid if such other Officer be the presiding officer of the principal Civil Court of original 
jurisdiction in the District), the defendant in the suit;   
and the foregoing provisions of this Act shall be applicable to the trial and determination of the suit.  
The report of the Officer employed to give delivery, or to take possession, on the part of 1[the State 
Government] , of the land sold or otherwise dealt with, shall be conclusive evidence as to the date on 
which such delivery was made, or possession was taken.  
XIX. If claim e stablished,  possession not to be given, but compensation .—In any case in which the 
land has been sold, if the Court shall be of opinion that the claim of the claimant is established, the Court 
shall not award the claimant possession of the land in dispute ; but shall order him to receive from                   
2[the State Government]  Treasury, by way of compensation, a sum equal to th
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WASTE LANDS (CLAIMS) ACT, 1863.pdf - page 6]
from                   
2[the State Government]  Treasury, by way of compensation, a sum equal to the price at which the land 
was sold, in addition to the costs of suit.  
XX. When land has not been  absolutely  sold, or has been  otherwise dealt with .—If the land shall 
have been sold subject to any condition reservation, or shall not have been sold, but shall have been 
otherwise dealt with on account of the 2[the State Government] , and the Court shall be of opinion that the 
claim to such land, or the objection of an objector, is established, the Court shall award the claimant or 
objector to receive such sum, in respect of his interest in such land, as shall be awarded in that behalf 
under the provisions of  3Act VI  of 1857 ( for the  acquisition of lands for public purposes ). 
and thereupon the State  Government shall proceed under the said Act  to obtain an a ward of the value 
of such interest.  
XXI.  Award under the two last Sections to be in full satisfaction. —An award under any of the 
provisions of the two last preceding Sections shall be in full satisfaction of the claim of the claimant or 
objector; and shall bar any future claim on his part, in respect to the land in suit resting on the same cause 
of action, or on a cause of action which existed prior to the date of the sale or other disposition of the land 
on account of 1[the State Government ]. 
XXII.  Government not barred from awarding compensation for land absolutely sold, though 
claim be not preferred in ti me.—Nothing in this Act sha ll be held to prevent 1[the State  Government ] 
from awarding, to any claimant of waste land sold on account of Government, on proof to the satisf action 
of the State  Government of the claim of such claimant (notwithstanding that he may not have preferred 
his claim either to the Collector or other Officer as aforesaid, or to the proper Court constituted under this 
Act, within the period prescribed by this Act), such am ount as compensation for the sa
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WASTE LANDS (CLAIMS) ACT, 1863.pdf - page 6]
 under this 
Act, within the period prescribed by this Act), such am ount as compensation for the said land, within the 
limit as to amount mentioned in Section XIX of this Act, if the land have been sold not subject to any 
condition or reservation, as to such State  Government may seem proper.  
                                                           
 1. Subs. by the A.O. 1937 for “Govt.”.  
 2. Subs. ibid., for “the Govt.”.   
 3. see now the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (1 of 1894), s. 2.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WASTE LANDS (CLAIMS) ACT, 1863.pdf - page 7]
7 
 XXIII. Compensation for land so ld subject to condition, if claim proved, though not preferred in 
time .—If the land have been sold subject to any condition or reservation, or have been otherw ise disposed 
of, on account of  1[the State Government ], and any claim to such land, or objection to the sale or other 
disposition of the land, shall be proved to the satisfaction of the 1[the State Government ], although not 
preferred to the Collector or other Officer as aforesaid, or to the Court constituted under this Act, within 
the period prescribed by this Act, 1[the State Government ] may award to such claimant or objector such 
amount as to such State  Government  may appear to be the value of the interest of such claimant or 
objector in such land.  
2[XXIIIA. Exercise of power of the State Government by the Board of Revenue or the Financial 
Commissioner. —In a State for which there is a Board of Revenue or a Financial Commissioner, the 
powers and duties of the State Government under sections 6, 10, 22 and 23 m ay be exercised by such 
Board or Financial Commissioner, as the case may be.]  
XXIV. [Interpretation -clause.  Number. Gender .]—Rep. by Repealing and Amending Act , 1914 (10 of 
1914), s. 3 and Sch. II.  
 
__________  
                                                           
  1. Subs. by the A.O. 1937 for “Govt.”.  
  2. Ins. by Act 4 of 1914, Sch., Pt. I. S. 23 -A has been omitted in its application to the U.P., see the U.P. Board of Revenue Act, 
1922 (U.P. 12 of 1922).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS (FIXATION OF RATES OF WAGES) ACT, 1958.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE WORKING JOURNALISTS (FIXATION OF RATES  OF WAGES) ACT, 1958  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Constitution of Committee . 
4. Functions of Committee . 
5. Powers of Committee . 
6. Power of Central Government to enforce recommendations of Committee . 
7. Working journalists entitled to wages at rates not less than those specified in the order . 
8. [Omitted. ]  
9. Recovery of money due to working journalists . 
10. Authentication of orders, letters, etc., of the Committee . 
11. Effect of Act on Working Journalists Act, etc . 
12. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Committee.  
  12A. Penalty.  
13. Power to make rules.  
14. [Repealed ]. 
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS (FIXATION OF RATES OF WAGES) ACT, 1958.pdf - page 2]
2 
 THE WORKING JOURNALISTS (FIXATION OF RATES  OF WAGES) ACT, 1958  
ACT NO. 29 OF 1958  
[16th September , 1958.]  
An Act to provide for the fixation of rates of wages in respect of working journalists and for 
matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows: ― 
1. Short title .―This Act may be called the Working Journalists (Fixation of Rates of Wages)  
Act, 1958.  
2. Definitions .―In this Act, unless the context otherwise  requires, ― 
(a) “Committee ” means the Committ ee constituted under section 3;  
(b) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(c) “Wage Board ” means the Wage Board constituted under the Working Journalists Act by 
notification No. S.R.O. 1075 of the Government of India in the Ministry of L abour, dated the 2nd 
May, 1956;  
(d) “Wage Board decision ” means the decisions of the Wage Board published in the Gazette of 
India Extraordinary, Part II, Secti on 3, dated the 11th May, 1957;  
(e) “Wages ” means wages as defined in the Industrial D isputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947);  
(f) “Working Journalists Act ” means the Working Journalists (Conditions of Service) and 
Miscellaneous Pro visions Act, 1955 (45 of 1955);  
(g) words and expressions used but not defined in this Act, and defined in the Working 
Journalists Act, shall have the meanings respectivel y assigned to th em in that Act.  
3. Constitution of Committee .―(1) For the purpose of enabling the Central Government to fix rates 
of wages in respect of working journalists in the light of the Judgment of the Supreme Court, dated the 
19th day of March, 1958, relating to the Wage Board decision, and in the light of all other relevant 
circumstances, the Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a 
Committee consisting of the following persons, nam ely:― 
(i) an officer of the Ministry of Law  not below the rank of Joint Secretary, nominated by the 
Central Governmen
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS (FIXATION OF RATES OF WAGES) ACT, 1958.pdf - page 2]
r of the Ministry of Law  not below the rank of Joint Secretary, nominated by the 
Central Government, who shall be  the Chairman of the Committee,  
(ii) three persons nominated by the Central Government from among the officers of each of the 
Ministries of Home Affairs, Labour and Em ployment an d Information and Broadcasting,  
(iii) a chartered accountant nomin ated by the Central Government.  
(2) If for any reason a vacancy (other than a vacancy by reason of temporary absence) occurs in the 
office of the Chairman or any other member of t he Committee, the Central Government may appoint 
another person in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 1) to fill the vacancy, and the inquiry 
before the Committee may be continued from the stage which had been reached when the vacancy arose.  
(3) The Central Government may appoint a Secretary to the Committee, and may also provide the 
Committee with such o ther staff as may be necessary.  
(4) The Secretary shall perform such functions of a ministerial or other nature as the Committee or the 
Chairma n thereof  may assign or delegate to him.  
4. Functions of Committee .―(1) The Committee shall, by notice published in such manner as it 
thinks fit, call upon newspaper establishments and working journalists and other persons interested in the 
Wage Board deci sion to make such representations as they may think fit as respects the Wage Board 
decision and the rates of wages which may be fixed under this Act in respect of working journalists.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS (FIXATION OF RATES OF WAGES) ACT, 1958.pdf - page 3]
3 
 (2) Every such representation shall be in writing and shall be made with in such period not exceeding 
thirty days, as the Committee may specify i n the notice, and shall state — 
(a) the specific grounds of objection, if a ny, to the Wage Board decision,  
(b) the rates of wages which, in the opinion of the person making the representation, would be 
reasonable, having regard to the capacity of the employer to pay the same or to any other 
circumstance, whichever may seem relevant to the person making the representation in rela tion to his 
representation,  
(c) the alterations or m odifications, if any, which, in the opinion of the person making the 
representation, should be made in the Wage Board dec ision and the reasons therefor.  
(3) The Committee shall take into account the representations  aforesaid, if any, and after examining 
the materials placed before the Wage Board and such further materials as have since been obtained by or 
made available to it under this Act, make such recommendations, as it thinks fit, to the Central 
Government for the fixation of rates of wages in respect of working journalists, whether by way of 
modification or otherwise, of the Wage Board decision; and any such recommendation may specify, 
whether prospectively or retropectively, the date from which the rat es of wages should take effect.  
(4) In making any recommendations to the Central Government, the Committee shall have regard to 
all the matters set out in sub -section ( 1) of section 9 of the Working Journalists Act.  
(5) The Committee may, if it thinks fit, take up for consideration separately groups or cl asses of 
newspaper establishments, whether on the basis of regional classification or on any other basis, and make 
recommendations from time to time in rega rd to each such group or class.  
5. Powers of Committee .―(1) Subject to the provisions contained in sub-section ( 2), the Committee 
may exercise all or any of the powers which an industrial tribunal, 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS (FIXATION OF RATES OF WAGES) ACT, 1958.pdf - page 3]
ub-section ( 2), the Committee 
may exercise all or any of the powers which an industrial tribunal, constituted under the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), exercises for the adjudication of an industrial dispute referred to it and 
shall, subject t o the provisions contained in this Act and the rules, if any, made thereunder, have power  to 
regulate its own procedure.  
(2) Any representations made to the Committee and any documents furnished to it  by way of 
evidence, shall be open to inspection on paym ent of such fee as may be prescribed, by any p erson 
interested in the matter.  
(3) If in th e course of any inquiry it appe ars to the Committee that it is necessary to examine any 
accounts or documents or obtain any statements from any person, the Committee may authorise any 
officer of the Central Government (hereinafter referred to as the authorised officer) in that behalf; and the 
authorised officer shall, subject to the directions of the Committee, if any, examine the accounts or 
documents or obtain the st atements from the person.  
(4) The authorised officer may, subject to the directions of the Committee, if any, exercise all or any 
of the powers which an industrial tribunal may exercise under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) of  
section 11 of the Industr ial D isputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947).  
(5) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) of section 54 of the Indian Income -tax Act, 1922 (11 of 1922), or in 
any corresponding provision in any other law for the time being in force relating to the levy of any tax 
shall apply to  the disclosure of any of the particulars referred to therein in any report made to the 
Comm ittee by an authorised officer.  
(6) Any information obtained by an authorised  officer in the exercise of any of his powers and any 
report made by him shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, be treated as confidential, but 
nothing in this sub -section shall apply to the disclosure of any such information or re
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS (FIXATION OF RATES OF WAGES) ACT, 1958.pdf - page 3]
ntial, but 
nothing in this sub -section shall apply to the disclosure of any such information or report to t he Central 
Government or to a court in relation to any matter concer ning the execution of this Act.  
(7) The authorised officer shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
6. Power of Centra l Government to enforce  recommendations of Committee .―(1) As soon as 
may be, after the receipt of the recommendations of the Committee, the Central Government shall make 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS (FIXATION OF RATES OF WAGES) ACT, 1958.pdf - page 4]
4 
 an order in terms of the recommendations or subject to such modifications, if any, as it thinks fit, being 
modifications which, in the opinion of the Central Government, do not effect important alterations in the 
character of the recommendations.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Central Gove rnment may, if it th inks 
fit,― 
(a) make such modifications in the recommendations, not being modifications of the nature 
referred to in sub -section ( 1),as it thinks fit:  
Provided that before making any such modifications, the Central Government shall cause notice 
to be given to all persons likely to be affected thereby in such manner as may be prescribed, and shall 
take into account any representations which they may ma ke in this behalf in writing,  or 
(b) refer the recommendations or any part thereof to the Committee, in which  case the Central 
Government shall consider its further recommendations and make an order either in terms of the 
recommendations or with such modifications of the nature referred to in su b-section ( 1) as it thinks 
fit. 
(3) Every order made by the Central Government shall be published in the Official Gazette together 
with the recommendations of the Committee relating to the order, and the order shall come into operation 
on the date of publication or on such date, whether pr ospectively or retrospectively, as may be specified 
in the order.  
7. Working journalists entitled to wages at rates not less than  those specified in the 
order .―Subject to the provisions contained in section 11, on the coming into operation of an order of the 
Central Government, every working journalist shall be entitled to be paid by his employer wages at a rate 
which shall in no case be less than the rate o f wages specified in the order.  
8. [Review of  order of Central Government .]―Omitted by the Working J ournalists (Amendment) Act , 
1962  (65 of 1962) , s. 10 (w.e.f.  15-1-1963.).  
9. Recovery of mon ey due to 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS (FIXATION OF RATES OF WAGES) ACT, 1958.pdf - page 4]
 (Amendment) Act , 
1962  (65 of 1962) , s. 10 (w.e.f.  15-1-1963.).  
9. Recovery of mon ey due to working journalists .―(1) Where any amount is due under this Act to 
a working  journalist from an employer, 1[the working journalist himself, or any other person authorised 
by him in writing in this behalf  or in the cas e of the death of the working journalist, any member of his 
family may], without prejudice to any other mode of recovery, make an application to t he State 
Government for the recovery of the money due to him, and if the State Government, or such authority as 
the State Government may specify in this behalf, is satisfied that any money is so due, it shall issue a 
certificate for that amount to the Coll ector, and the Collector shall proceed to recover that amount in the 
same manne r as an arrear of land revenue.  
2[(2) If any question arises as to the amount due under this Act to a working journalist from his 
employer, the State Government may, on its own motion or upon application made to it, refer the question 
to any Labour Court constituted by it under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947) or under any 
corresponding law relating to investigation and settlement of industrial disputes in force in the State and 
the said Act or law shall have effect in relation to the Labour Court as if the question so referred were a 
matter referred to the Labour Court for adjud ication under that Act or law.]  
(3) The decision of the Labour  Court shall be forwarded by it to the State Government which made 
the reference, and any amount found due by the Labour Court may be recovered in the mann er provided 
in sub -section ( 1). 
10. Authentication of orders, le tters, etc., of the Committee .―All no tices, letters, authorisations, 
orders or other documents to be issued or made by the Committee under this Act may be authenticated by 
the Chairman or the Secretary thereof or any other officer authorised by the Committee in this behalf and 
any no
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS (FIXATION OF RATES OF WAGES) ACT, 1958.pdf - page 4]
or the Secretary thereof or any other officer authorised by the Committee in this behalf and 
any notice, let ter, authorisation, order or other document so authenticated shall be presumed to have been 
duly i ssued or made by the Committee.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 65 of 1962, s. 10, for “the working journalist may” (w.e.f. 15 -1-1963).  
2. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 15 -1-1963).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS (FIXATION OF RATES OF WAGES) ACT, 1958.pdf - page 5]
5 
 11. Effect of Act on  Working Journalists Act, etc .―(1) Sections 8, 10, 11, 12 and 13 of the 
Working Journalists Act shall have  no effec t in relation to the Committee.  
(2) The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith in the 
terms of any award, agreement or contract of service, whether made before or afte r the commencement of 
this Act : 
Provided that where under any such award, agreement, contract of service or otherwise, a working 
journalist is entitled to benefits in respect of any matter which are more favourable to him than those to 
which he would be entitled under this Act, the wor king journalist shall continue to be entitled to the more 
favourable benefits in respect of that matter, notwithstanding that he receives benefits in respect o f other 
matters under this Act.  
(3) Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed to preclude any working journalist from entering 
into any agreement with an employer for granting him rights or privileges in respect of any matter which 
are more favourable to him than those to which he wo uld be entitled under this Act.  
12. Vacancies, etc., not to in validate proceedings of Committee .―No act or proceeding of the 
Committee shall be invalid merely by reason of the existence of any vacancy among its members or any 
defect in the constitution thereof.  
1[12A. Penalty .―(1) Any employer who contravenes the provisions of section 7 shall be punishable 
with fine which ma y extend to two hundred rupees.  
(2) Whoever, having been conv icted of any offence under sub -section ( 1), is again convicted of an 
offence under that sub -section, shall be punishable with fine wh ich may  extend to five hundred rupees.  
(3) Where an offence has been committed by a company, every person who, at the time the offence 
was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of 
the company, as w ell as the company, shall be deem
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS (FIXATION OF RATES OF WAGES) ACT, 1958.pdf - page 5]
 the company for the conduct of the business of 
the company, as w ell as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this  section if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence . 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 3), where an offence under this section has 
been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or that the commission of the offence is attributable, to any gross negligence on the part of 
any director, manager, secretary or other offi cer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or 
other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of such offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst 
and punished accordingly.  
(5) For the purposes of this section, ― 
(a) “company ” means any bo dy corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ” in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.]  
13. Power to make rules .―(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powe r, such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the manner in which notices u nder this Act may be published;  
(b) the procedure to be followed by the Committee in the exerci se of its power s under this Act;  
(c) the powers and functions of the Committee which may be d elegated to any of its members;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 65 of 1965, s. 10 (w.e.f. 15 -1-1963).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS (FIXATION OF RATES OF WAGES) ACT, 1958.pdf - page 5]
963).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS (FIXATION OF RATES OF WAGES) ACT, 1958.pdf - page 6]
6 
 (d) the fees to be paid for inspection of docume nts furnished to the Commit tee. 
1[(3) Every rule made under this Act, shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and  if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have eff ect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.]  
14. [Repeal and saving .].―Rep. by the Repe aling and Amending Act , 1960 (58 of 1960), s. 2 and 
the First Schedule  (w.e.f . 26-12-1960). 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 15 -5-1986).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS AND OTHER NEWSPAPER.pdf - page 1]
1 
 THE WORKING JOURNALISTS AND OTHER NEWSPAPER  
EMPLOYEES (CONDITIONS OFSERVICE) AND  
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS ACT, 1955  
________ __ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and extent . 
2. Definitions . 
CHAPTER II  
WORKING  JOURNALISTS  
3. Act 14 of 1947 to apply to working journalists.  
4. Special provisions in respect of cert ain cases of retrenchment.  
5. Payment of gratuity . 
5A. Nomination by working journalist . 
6. Hours of work . 
7. Leave . 
8. Fixation or revision of rates of wages . 
9. Procedure for fixing and revising rates of wages . 
10. Recommendation by Board . 
11. Powers and procedure of the Board . 
12. Powers of Central Government to enforce recommendations of the Wage Board . 
13. Working journalists entitled to wages at rates not less than those specified in t he order.  
13A. Power of Government to fix interim rates of wages . 
13AA. Constitution of Tribunal for fixing or revising rates of wages in respect of working journalists . 
CHAPTER IIA  
NON-JOURNALIST  NEWSPAPER  EMPLOYEES  
 13B. Fixation or revision of rates of wages of non -journalist newspaper employees . 
13C. Wage Board for fixing or revising rates of wages in respect of non -journalist newspaper 
employees.  
13D. Application of certain provisions . 
13DD. Constitution of Tribunal for fixing or revising rates of wage s in respect of non -journalist 
newspaper employees . 
CHAPTER III  
APPLICATION OF CERTAIN ACTS TO NEWSPAPER EMPLOYEES  
14. Act 20 of 1946 to apply to newspaper establishments . 
15. Act 19 of 1952 to apply to newspaper establishments . 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS AND OTHER NEWSPAPER.pdf - page 2]
2 
 CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
16. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with this Act . 
      16A. Employer not to dismiss, discharge, etc., newspaper employees . 
17. Recovery of money due from an employer.  
17A. Maintenance of registers, records, and muster -rolls.  
17B. Inspectors . 
18. Penalty . 
19. Indemni ty. 
19A. Defects in appointments not to invalidate acts . 
19B. Saving . 
20. Power to make rules . 
21. [Repealed. ] 
THE SCHEDULE . 
 
  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS AND OTHER NEWSPAPER.pdf - page 3]
3 
 THE WORKING JOURNALISTS AND OTHER NEWSPAPER  
EMPLOYEES (CONDITIONS OFSERVICE) AND  
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS ACT, 1955  
ACT NO. 45 OF 19551 
[20th December , 1955.]  
An Act to regulate certain conditions of service of working journalists and other persons 
employ ed in newspaper establishments.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and extent .—(1) This Act may be called the 2[Working Journalists and other 
Newspaper Employees] (Conditions of Service) and Misc ellaneous Provisions Act, 1955.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India 3***. 
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requires, — 
4[(a) “Board ” means— 
(i) in relation to working journalists, the Wage Board c onstituted under section 9; and  
(ii) in relation to non -journalist newspaper employees, the Wage Board constituted under 
section 13C;]  
(b) “newspaper ” means any printed periodical work containing public news or comments on 
public news and includes such other class of printed periodical work as may, from time to time, be 
notified in this behalf by the Central Gove rnment in the Official Ga zette;  
(c) “newspaper employee ” means any working journalist, and includes any other person 
employed to do any work in, or in relation t o, any newspaper establishment;  
(d) “newspaper establishment ” means an establishment under the control of any person or body or 
persons, whether incorporated or not, for the production or publication of one or more newspapers or 
for conducting any news agency or syndicate ; 
5[and includes newspaper establishments spe cified as one es tablishment under the Schedule.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, — 
(a) different departments, branches and centres of newspaper establishments shall be treated 
as parts th ereof;  
(b) a printing press shall be deemed to be a newsp aper establishment if the principal business 
thereof is to print newspa
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS AND OTHER NEWSPAPER.pdf - page 3]
all be deemed to be a newsp aper establishment if the principal business 
thereof is to print newspaper;]  
6[dd) “non-journalist newspaper employee ” means a person employed to do any work in, or in 
relation to, any newspaper establishment, but does no t include any such person who — 
(i) is a working journalist, or  
(ii) is employed mainly in a managerial  or administrative capacity, or  
                                                           
1. Extended to Goa,  Daman and Diu by Reg.  11 of 1963, s. 3 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 1 -2-1965) and to Pondicherry by Act 26 of 
1968, s. 3 and the Schedule.  
2. Subs. by Act 60 of 1974, s. 2, for “Working Journalists ” 
3. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 51 of 1970, s. 2 and the Schedule.  
4. Subs. by Act 60 of 1974, s. 3, for clause ( a). 
5. Ins. by Act 31 of 1989, s. 2 (retrospectively).  
6. Ins. by Act 60 of 1974, s. 3.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS AND OTHER NEWSPAPER.pdf - page 4]
4 
 (iii) being employed in a supervisory capacity, performs, either by the nature of the duties 
attached to his office or by reason of the powers vested in him, functions mainly of a managerial 
nature;]  
(e) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this A ct; 
1[(ee) “Tribunal ” means, — 
(i) in relation to working journalists, the Tribunal constitute d under section 13AA; and  
(ii) in relation to non -journalist newspaper employees, the Tribunal c onstituted under section 
13DD;]  
2[(eee) “wages ” means all remuneration capable of being expressed in terms of money, which 
would, if the terms of employment, expressed or implied, were fulfilled, be payable to a newspaper 
employee in respect of his employment or of work done in such employment, and inc ludes — 
(i) such allowances (including dearness allowance) as the newspaper employee is for the time 
being entit led to;  
(ii) the value of any house accommodation, or of supply of light, water, medical attendance or 
other amenity or of any service or of any concessional supply of  food-grains or other articles;  
(iii) any travelling con cession,  
but does not include — 
(a) any bonus;  
(b) any contribution paid or payable by the employer to any pension fund or provident fund or for 
the benefit of the newspaper employee under any law for the time being in force;  
(c) any gratuity payable on the termination of his service.  
Explanation .—In this clause, the term “wages ” shall also include new allowances, if any, of any 
descri ption fixed from time to time.]  
(f) “working journalist ” means a person whose principal avocatio n is that of a journalist and 
3[who is employed as such, either whole -time or part -time, in, or in relation to, one or more 
newspaper establishments], an d includes an editor, a leader -writer, news -editor, su b-editor, feature -
writer, copy -tester, reporter, correspondent, cartoonist, news  photographer and proof -reader, but does 
not include any such person who 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS AND OTHER NEWSPAPER.pdf - page 4]
ondent, cartoonist, news  photographer and proof -reader, but does 
not include any such person who — 
(i) is employed mainly in a managerial  or administrative capacity, or  
(ii) being employed in  a supervisory capacity, performs, either by the nature of the duties 
attached to his office or by reason of the powers vested in him, functions  mainly of a managerial 
nature;  
(g) all words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in th e Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947) shall have the meanings respectivel y assigned to them in that Act.  
CHAPTER II  
WORKING  JOURNALISTS  
3. Act 14 of 1947 to  apply to working journalists .—(1) The provisions of the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 1947, as in  force for the time being, shall, subject to the  modification specified in sub -section ( 2), 
apply to, or in relation to, working journalists as they apply to, or in relation to, workmen within the 
meaning of that Act.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 6 of 1979, s. 2 (w.e.f. 31 -1-1979).  
2. Ins. by Act 31 of 1989, s. 2 (retrospectively).  
3. Subs. by Act 36 of 1981, s. 2, for “who is employed as such in, or in relation to, any newspaper es tablishment”  
 (w.e.f. 13 -8-1980).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS AND OTHER NEWSPAPER.pdf - page 5]
5 
 (2) Section 25F of the aforesaid Act, in its application to working journalists, shall be construed as if 
in clause ( a) thereof, for the period of notice referred to therein in relation to the retrenchment of a 
workman, the following periods of notice in relation to the retrenchment of a worki ng journalist had been 
substituted, namely: — 
(a) six months , in the case of an editor, and  
(b) three months, in the case o f any other working journalist.  
4. Special provisions in respect of certain cas es of retrenchment .—Where at any time between the 
14th day of July, 1954, and the 12th day of March, 1955, any working journalist had been retrenched, he 
shall be entitled  to receive from the employer — 
(a) wages for one month at the rate to which he was entitled immediately before his retrenchment, 
unless he h ad been given one month's notice in writin g before such retrenchment; and  
(b) compensation which shall be equivalent to fifteen days ’ average pay for every completed year 
of service under that employer or any part t hereof in excess of six months.  
1[5. Payment of gratuity .—(1) Where — 
(a) any working journalist has been in continuous service, whether before or after the 
commencement of this Act, for not less than three years in any  newspaper establishment, and — 
(i) his services are terminated by the emplo yer in relation to that newspaper establishment for 
any reason whatsoever, otherwise than as a punishment inflicted by way of disciplinary action; or  
(ii) he retires from service on reachin g the age of superannuation; or  
(b) any working journalist has been in continuous service, whether before or after the 
commencement of this Act, for not less than ten years in any newspaper establishment, and he  
volun tarily resigns on or after the 1st day of July, 1961, from service in th at newspaper establishment 
on any ground whatsoever other than on the ground of conscience; or  
(c) any working journalist has been in continuous service
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS AND OTHER NEWSPAPER.pdf - page 5]
her than on the ground of conscience; or  
(c) any working journalist has been in continuous service, whether before or after the 
commencement of this Act for not less than three years in any newspaper es tablishment, and he 
voluntarily resigns on or after the 1st day of July, 1961, from service in that establishment on the 
ground of conscience; or  
(d) any working journalist dies while he is in service in any newspaper establishment ; the 
working journalist or, in the case of his death, his nominee or nominees or , if there is no nomination 
in force at the time of the death of the working journalist, his family, as the case may be, shall, 
without prejudice to any benefits or rights accr uing under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 
1947), be paid, on such termination, retirement, resignation or death, by the employer in relation to 
that establishment gratuity which shall be equivalent to fifteen days ’ average pay for every completed  
year of service or any part t hereof in excess of six months:  
Provided that in the case of a working journalist referred to in clause ( b), the total amount of gratuity 
that shall be payable to him shall not exceed twelve and half month ’s average pay:  
Provi ded further that where a working journalist is employed in any newspaper establishment wherein 
not more than six working journalists were employed on any day of the twelve months immediately 
preceding the commencement of this Act, the gratuity payable to a  working journalist employed in any 
such newspaper establishment for any period of service before such commencement shall not be 
equivalent to fifteen days ’ average pay for every completed year of service or any part thereof in excess 
of six mont hs but sha ll be equivalent to — 
(a) three days ’ average pay for every completed year of service or any part thereof in excess of 
six months, if the period of such past serv ice does not exceed five years;  
                                                 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS AND OTHER NEWSPAPER.pdf - page 5]
f such past serv ice does not exceed five years;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 65 of 1952, s. 3, for section 5 (w.e.f. 15 -1-1963).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS AND OTHER NEWSPAPER.pdf - page 6]
6 
 (b) five days ’ average pay for every completed year of service or any part thereof in excess of six 
months, if the period of such past service exceeds five years but  does not exceed ten years; and  
(c) seven days ’ average pay for every completed year of service or any part thereof in excess of 
six months, if the period  of such past service exceeds ten years.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -sectio n and sub -section ( 1) of section 17, “family ” 
means — 
(i) in the case of a male working journalist, his widow, children, whether married or unmarried, 
and his dependent  parents and the widow an d children of his deceased son:  
Provided that a widow shall not be deemed to be a member of the family of the working journalist 
if at the time of his death she was not legally en titled to be maintained by him;  
(ii) in the case of a female working journalist, her husband, children, whether married or 
unmarried, and the dependent parents of the working journalist or of her husband, and the widow an d 
children of her deceased son:  
Provided that if the working journalist has expressed h er desire to exclude her husband from the 
family, the husband and his dependent parents shall not be deemed to be a part of t he working 
journalist’s family,  
and in either of the above two cases, if the child of a working journalist or of a deceased son of a working 
journalist has been adopted by another person and if under the personal law of the adopter, adoption is 
legally recognised, such a child shall not be considered as a member of the fa mily of the working 
journalist.  
(2) Any dispute whether a working journalist has voluntarily resigned from service in any newspaper 
establishment on the ground of conscience shall be deemed to be an industrial dispute within the meaning 
of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947) or any corresponding law relating to investigation and 
settlement of industrial disputes in force in any State.  
(3) Where a 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS AND OTHER NEWSPAPER.pdf - page 6]
lating to investigation and 
settlement of industrial disputes in force in any State.  
(3) Where a nominee is a minor and the gratuity under sub -section ( 1) has become payable during his 
minority, it shall be paid to a person appointed under  sub-section ( 3) of section 5A:  
Provided that where there is no such person, payment shall be made to any guardian of the property of 
the minor appointed by a competent court or where no such guardian has been appointed, to either parent 
of the minor, or where neither parent is alive, to a ny other guardian of the minor:  
Provided further that where the gratuity is payable to two or more nominees, and either or any of 
them dies, the gratuity shall be paid to the  surviving nominee or nominees.  
5A. Nom ination by working journalist .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the 
time being in force, or in any disposition, testamentary or otherwise in respect of any gratuity payable to a 
working journalist, where a nomination made in the prescribed manner purports to confer on any person 
the right to receive payment of the gratuity for the time being due to the working journalist, the nominee 
shall, on the death of the working journalist, become entitled to the gratuity and to be paid the sum due in 
respect thereof to the exclusion of all other persons, unless the nomination is varied or canc elled in the 
prescribed manner.  
(2) Any nomination referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall become void if the nominee predeceases, or 
where there are two or more nominees, all the nominees predecease, the working journalist making the 
nomination.  
(3) Where the nominee is a minor, it shall be lawful for the working journalist making the nomination 
to appoint any person in the prescribed manner to receive the  gratuity in the event of his death durin g the 
minority of the nominee.  
6. Hours of work .—(1) Subject to any rules that may be made under this Act, no working journalist 
shall be required or allow
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS AND OTHER NEWSPAPER.pdf - page 6]
ject to any rules that may be made under this Act, no working journalist 
shall be required or allowed to work in any newspaper establishment for m ore than one hundred and 
forty -four hours during any period of four consecutive weeks, e xclusive of the time for meals.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS AND OTHER NEWSPAPER.pdf - page 7]
7 
 (2) Every working journalist shall be allowed during any period of seven consecutive days rest for a 
period of not less than twenty -four consecutive hours, the period between 10 P.M. and 6 A.M. being 
included therein.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “week ” means a period of seven days begi nning at 
mid-night on Saturday.  
7. Leave .—Without prejudice to such holidays, casual leave or other kinds of leave as may be 
prescribed, every working jo urnalist shall be entitled to — 
(a) earned leave on fu ll wages for not less than one -eleven th of the period spent on duty;  
(b) leave on medical certificate on one -half of the wages for not less than one -eighteenth of the 
period of service.  
1[8.Fixation or revision of rates of wages .—(1) The Central Government may, in the  manner 
hereinafter provided, — 
(a) fix rates of wages in respect of working journalists;  
(b) revise, from time to time, at such intervals as it may think fit, the rates of wages fixed under 
this section or specified in the order made under section 6 of the Working Journalists (Fixation of 
Rates of  Wages) Act, 1958 (29 of 1958).  
(2) The rates of wages may be fixed or revised by the Central Go vernment in respect of working 
journalists fo r time work and for piece work.  
9. Procedure for fixin g and revising rates of wages .—For the purpose of fixing or revising rates of 
wages in respect of working journalists under this Act, the Central Government shall, as and when 
necessary, constitute a Wage Board whic h shall consist of — 
(a) 2[three persons ] representing employers in relati on to newspaper establishments;  
(b) 2[three persons ] representing working journalists;  
(c) 3[four independent persons ], one of whom shall be a person who is, or has been, a Judge of a 
High Court or the Supreme Court and who shall be appointed by that Gove rnment as the Chairman 
thereof.  
10. Recommendation by Board .—(1) The Board shall, by notice published in such manner 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS AND OTHER NEWSPAPER.pdf - page 7]
n 
thereof.  
10. Recommendation by Board .—(1) The Board shall, by notice published in such manner as it 
thinks fit, call upon newspaper establishments and working journalists and other persons interested in the 
fixation or revision of rates of wages of working journalists to make such representation s as they may 
think fit as respects the rates of wages which may be fixed or revised under this Act in respect of working 
journalists.  
(2) Every such representation shall be in writing and shall be made within such period as the Board 
may specify in the no tice and shall state the rates of wages which, in the opinion of the person making the 
representation, would be reasonable, having regard to the capacity of the employer to pay the same or to 
any other circumstance, whichever may seem relevant to the perso n making the representation in relation 
to his representation.  
(3) The Board shall take into account the representations aforesaid, if any, and after examining the 
materials placed before it make such recommendations as it thinks fit to the Central Governm ent for the 
fixation or revision of rates of wages in respect of working journalists; and any such recommendation 
may specify, whether prospectively or retrospectively, the date from which the rat es of wages should take 
effect.  
(4) In making any recommenda tions to the Central Government, the Board shall have regard to the 
cost of livin g, the prevalent rates of wages for comparable employment, the circumstances relating to the 
                                                           
1. Subs. b y Act 65 of 1962, s. 4, for sections 8 to 13 (w.e.f. 15 -1-1963).  
2. Subs. by Act 34 of 1996, s. 2, for “two persons” (w.e.f. 28 -9-1996).  
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “three independent persons” (w.e.f. 28 -9-1996).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS AND OTHER NEWSPAPER.pdf - page 8]
8 
 newspaper industry in different regions of the country and to any other circumstan ces which to the Board 
may seem relevant.  
1[Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that nothing in this sub -section shall 
prevent the Board from making recommendations for fixation or revision of rate s of wages on all India 
basis.]  
11. Powe rs and procedure of the Board .—(1) Subject to the provisions contained in sub -section 
(2), the Board may exercise all or any of the powers which an Industrial Tribunal constituted under the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), exercises for the adjudication of an industrial dispute referred 
to it and shall, subject to the provisions contained in this Act, and the rules, if any, made thereunder, have 
power  to regulate its own procedure.  
(2) Any representations made to the Board and any documen ts furnished to it by way of evidence 
shall be open to inspection on payment of such fee as may be prescribed, by any p erson interested in the 
matter.  
(3) If, for any reason, a vacancy occurs in the office of Chairman or any other member of the Board, 
the Central Government shall fill the vacancy by appointing another person thereto in accordance with the 
provisions of section 9 and any proceeding may be continued before the Board so reconstituted from the 
stage  at which the vacancy occurred.  
12. Powers of Central Government to enforce reco mmendations of the Wage Board .—(1) As 
soon as may be, after the receipt of the recommendations of the Board, the Central Government shall 
make an order in terms of the recommendations or subject to such modifications, if a ny, as it thinks fit, 
being modifications which, in the opinion of the Central Government, do not effect important alterations 
in the ch aracter of the recommendations.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Central Gove rnment may, if it thinks 
fit,— 
(a) make such modifications in the recommendations, not b
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS AND OTHER NEWSPAPER.pdf - page 8]
tral Gove rnment may, if it thinks 
fit,— 
(a) make such modifications in the recommendations, not being modifications of  the nature 
referred to in sub -section ( 1), as it thinks fit:  
Provided that before making any such modifications, the Central Government shall cause notice 
to be given to all persons likely to be affected thereby in such manner as may be prescribed, and shall 
take into account any representations which they may mak e in this behalf in writing; or  
(b) refer the recommendations or any part thereof to the Board, in which case, the Central 
Government shall consider its further recommendations and make an order either in terms of the 
recommendations or with such modifications of the nature referred to in su b-section ( 1) as it thinks 
fit. 
(3) Every order made by the Cen tral Government under this section shall be published in the Official 
Gazette together with the recommendations of the Board relating to the order and the order shall come 
into operation on the date of publication or on such date, whether prospectively or retrospectively, as  may 
be specified in the order.  
13. Working journalists entitled to wages at rates not less tha n those specified in the order .—On 
the coming into operation of an order of the Central Government under section 12, every working 
journalist shall be entitled to be paid by his employer wages at the rate which shall in no case be less than 
the rate o f wages specified in the order.  
13A. Power of Government to fix interim rates of wages .—(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in this Act, where t he Central Government is of opinion that it is necessary so to do, it may, 
after consultation with the Board, by notification in the Official Gazette, fix interim rates of wages in 
respect of working journalists.  
                                                           
1. The Explanation  added by Act 31 of 1989, s. 3.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS AND OTHER NEWSPAPER.pdf - page 8]
 Act 31 of 1989, s. 3.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS AND OTHER NEWSPAPER.pdf - page 9]
9 
 (2) Any interim rates of wages so fixed sha ll be binding on all employers in relation to newspaper 
establishments and every working journalist shall be entitled to be paid wages at a rate which shall, in no 
case, be less than the interim ra tes of wages fixed under sub -section ( 1). 
(3) Any interim rates of wages fixed under sub -section ( 1) shall remain in force until the order of the 
Central Government under section 12 comes into operation.]  
1[13AA. Constitution of Tribunal for fixing or revising rates of wages in r espect of working 
journalists .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where the Central Government is of 
opinion that the Board constituted under section 9 for the purpose of fixing or revising rates of wages in 
respect of working journalists under this Act has not been able to function (for any reason whatsoever) 
effectively, and in the circumstances, it is necessary so to do, it may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, constitute a Tribunal, which shall consist of a person who is, or has been, a Judge of a High 
Court or  the Supreme Court, for the purpose of fixing or revising rates of wages in respect of work ing 
journalists under this Act.  
(2) The provisions of sections 10 to 13A shall apply to, and in relation to, the Tribunal constituted 
under sub -section ( 1) of this section, the Central Government and working journalists, subj ect to the 
modifications that — 
(a) the references to the Board therein, wherever they occur, shall be construed  as references to 
the Tribunal;  
(b) in s ub-section ( 3) of section 11, — 
(i) the refer ence to the office of Chairman or any other member of the Board shall be 
construed as a reference to the office of the person  constituting the Tribunal; and  
(ii) the reference to section 9 shall be construed as a reference to sub -section ( 1) of this 
sectio n; and  
(c) the references in section 13 and section 13A to section 12 shall be construed as references to 
sectio
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS AND OTHER NEWSPAPER.pdf - page 9]
e references in section 13 and section 13A to section 12 shall be construed as references to 
section 12 read with this section.  
(3) The Tribunal, in discharging its functions under this Act, may act on, the evidence recorded by the 
Wage Board or partly recorded by the Wage Board  and partly recorded by itself:  
Provided that if the Tribunal is of opinion that further examination of any of the witnesses whose 
evidence has already been recorded is necessary in the interests of justice, it may re -summon any such 
witness, and after s uch further examination, cross -examination and re -examination, if any, as it may 
permit, t he witness shall be discharged.  
(4) On the constitution of a Tribunal under sub -section ( 1), the Board constituted under section 9 and 
functioning immediately before such constitution shall cease to exist and the members constituting that 
Board shall be deemed  to have vacated their offices:  
Provided that any interim rates of wages fixed by the Central Government under section 13A in 
respect of working journalists and in force immediately before the constitution of the Tribunal shall 
remain in force until the order of the Central Government under section 12 read with this section comes 
into operation.]  
2[CHAPTER IIA  
NON-JOURNALIST  NEWS PAPER  EMPLOYEES  
13B. Fixation or revision of rates of wages of non -journalist newspaper employees .—(1) The 
Central Government may, in the  manner hereinafter provided, — 
(a) fix rates of wages in respect of non -journalist newspaper employees; and  
(b) revise, from time to time, at such intervals as it may think fit, the rates of wages fixed under 
this section.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 6 of 1979, s. 3. (w.e.f. 31 -1-1979).  
2. Ins. by Act 60 of 1974, s. 4.  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS AND OTHER NEWSPAPER.pdf - page 10]
10 
 (2) The rates of wages may be fixed or revised by the Central Government in respect of non -journalist 
newspaper employees fo r time work and for  piece work.  
13C. Wage Board for fixing or revising rates of wages in respect of non -journalist newspaper 
employees .—For the purpose of fixing or revising rates of wages in respect of non -journalist newspaper 
employees under this Act, the Central Governmen t shall, as and when necessary, constitute a Wage  Board 
which shall consist of — 
(a) 1[three persons ] representing employers in relati on to newspaper establishments;  
(b) 1[three persons ] representing non -journalist newspaper employees; and 
(c) 2[four independent persons ], one of whom shall be a person who is, or has been, a Judge of a 
High Court or the Supreme Court and who shall be appointed by that Gove rnment as the Chairman 
thereof.  
13D. Appl ication of certain provisions .—The provisions of sections 10 to 13A shall apply to, and in 
relation to, the Board constituted under section 13C, the Central Government and non -journalist 
newspaper employees, subje ct to the modifications that — 
(a) the references to the Board and working journalists therein, wherever they occur, shall be 
construed respectively as references to the Board constituted under section 13C and to non -journalist 
newspaper employees;  
(b) the references in sub -section ( 3) of section 11 to section 9 shall be construe d as a reference to 
section 13C; and  
(c) the references in section 13 and section 13A to section 12 shall be construed as references to 
section 12 read with this section.]  
3[13DD. Constitution of Tribunal for fixing or revising rates of wages in respect of  non-
journalist newspaper employees .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where the 
Central Government is of opinion that the Board constituted under section 13C for the purpose of fixing 
or revising rates of wages in respect of non-journalist newspaper employees under this Act
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS AND OTHER NEWSPAPER.pdf - page 10]
f fixing 
or revising rates of wages in respect of non-journalist newspaper employees under this Act has not been 
able to function (for any reason whatsoever) effectively, and in the circumstances, it is necessary so to do, 
it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a Tribunal, which shall  consist of a person who 
is, or has been, a Judge of a High Court or the Supreme Court, for the purpose of fixing or revising rates 
of wages in respect of non -journalist newspaper employees under this Act . 
(2) The provisions of sections 10 to 13A shall app ly to, and in relation to, the Tribunal constituted 
under sub -section ( 1) of this section, the Central Government and non -journalist newspaper employees, 
subject to the modifications that — 
(a) the references to the Board and working journalists therein, wh erever they occur, shall be 
construed respectively as referen ces to the Tribunal and to non -journalist newspaper employees;  
(b) in s ub-section ( 3) of section 11, — 
(i) the reference to the office of Chairman or any other member of the Board shall be 
constru ed as a reference to the office of the person  constituting the Tribunal; and  
(ii) the reference to section 9 shall be construed as a reference to sub -section ( 1) of this 
section; and  
(c) the references in section 13 and section 13A to section 12 shall be c onstrued as references 
to sec tion 12 read with this section.  
(3) The Tribunal, in discharging its functions under this Act, may act on the evidence recorded by the 
Wage Board or partly recorded by the Wage Board  and partly recorded by itself:  
Provided that  if the Tribunal is of opinion that further examination of any of the witnesses whose 
evidence has already been recorded is necessary in the interests of justice, it may re -summon any such 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 34 of 1996, s. 3, for “two persons” (w.e.f. 28 -9-1996).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “three inde
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS AND OTHER NEWSPAPER.pdf - page 10]
 34 of 1996, s. 3, for “two persons” (w.e.f. 28 -9-1996).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “three independent persons” (w.e.f. 28 -9-1996).  
3. Ins. by Act 6 of 1979, s. 4 (w.e.f. 31 -1-1979).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS AND OTHER NEWSPAPER.pdf - page 11]
11 
 witness, and after s uch further examination, cross -examination and re-examination, if any, as it may 
permit, t he witness shall be discharged.  
(4) On the constitution of a Tribunal under sub -section ( 1), the Board constituted under section 13C 
and functioning immediately before such constitution shall cease to exist and the members constituting 
that Board shall be deemed  to have vacated their offices:  
Provided that any interim rates of wages fixed by the Central Government under section 13A read 
with section 13D in respect of non -journalist newspaper employees and in forc e immediately before the 
constitution of the Tribunal shall remain in force until the order of the Central Government under section 
12 read with this  section comes into operation.]  
CHAPTER III  
APPLICATION OF CERT AIN ACTS TO NEWSPAPER EMPLOYEES  
14. Act 20 of 1946 to appl y to newspaper establishments .—The provisions of the Industrial 
Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946, as in force for the time being, shall apply to every newspaper 
establishment wherein twenty or more newspaper employees are employed or w ere employed on any day 
of the preceding twelve months as if such newspaper establishment were an industrial establishment to 
which the aforesaid Act has been applied by a notification under sub -section ( 3) of section 1 thereof, and 
as if a newspaper emplo yee were a workman within the meaning of that Act.  
15. Act 19 of 1952 to appl y to newspaper establishments .—The Employees ’ Provident Funds 1[and 
Miscellaneous Provisions] Act, 1952, as in force for the time being, shall apply to every newspaper 
establishment in which twenty or more persons are employed on any day, as if such newspaper 
establishment were a factory to which the aforesaid Act had been applied by a notification of the Central 
Government under sub -section ( 3) of section 1 thereof, and  as if a newspaper employee were an employee 
within the meaning of that Act.  
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLA
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS AND OTHER NEWSPAPER.pdf - page 11]
as if a newspaper employee were an employee 
within the meaning of that Act.  
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
16. Effect of laws and agreemen ts inconsistent with this Act .—(1) The provisions of this Act shall 
have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law or in the terms of 
any award, agreement or contract of service, whether made before or after the commencement of this Act:  
Provided that where under any such award, agreement, contract of service or otherwise, a newspap er 
employee is entitled to benefits in respect of any matter which are more favourable to him than those to 
which he would be entitled under this Act, the newspaper employee shall continue to be entitled to the 
more favourable benefits in respect of that m atter, notwithstanding that he receives benefits in respect o f 
other matters under this Act.  
(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed to preclude any newspaper employee from 
entering into an agreement with an employer for granting him rights or  privileges in respect of any matter 
which are more favourable to him than those to which he would be entitled under this Act.  
2[16A. Employer not to dismiss, discharge, etc.,  newspaper employees .—No employer in relation 
to a newspaper establishment shall , by reason of his liability for payment of wages to newspaper 
employees at the rates specified in an order of the Central Government under section 12, or under section 
12 read with section 13AA or section 13DD, dismiss, discharge or retrench any newspaper  employee.]  
3[17. Recovery of money due from an employer .—(1) Where any amount is due under this Act to a 
newspaper employee from an employer, the newspaper employee himself, or any person authorised  by 
him in writing in this behalf, or in the case of the death of the employee, any member of his family may, 
without prejudice to any other mode of recovery, make an application to the State Government for the 
recovery of the amo
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS AND OTHER NEWSPAPER.pdf - page 11]
any other mode of recovery, make an application to the State Government for the 
recovery of the amount due to him, and if the  State Government, or such authority, as the State 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 99 of 1976, s. 17, for “and Family Pension Fund”  (w.e.f. 1 -8-1976).  
2. Ins. by Act 36 of 1981, s. 3 (w.e.f. 13 -8-1980).  
3. Subs. by Act 65 of 1962, s. 5, for section 17 (w.e.f. 15 -1-1963).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS AND OTHER NEWSPAPER.pdf - page 12]
12 
 Government may specify in this behalf, is satisfied that any amount is so due, it shall issue a certificate 
for that amount to the Collector, and the Collector shall proceed to recover that amount in the s ame 
manne r as an arrear of land revenue.  
(2) If any question arises as to the amount due under this Act to a newspaper employee from his 
employer, the State Government may, on its own motion or upon application made to it, refer the question 
to any Labour Court constituted by it under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947) or under any 
corresponding law relating to investigation and settlement of industrial disputes in force in the State and 
the said Act or law shall have effect in relation to the L abour Court as if the question so referred were a 
matter referred to the Labour Court for adju dication under that Act or law.  
(3) The decision of the Labour Court shall be forwarded by it to the State Government which made 
the reference and any amount foun d due by the Labour Court may be recovered in the manne r provided in 
sub-section ( 1). 
17A. Maintenance of registers, records, an d muster -rolls .—Every employer in relation to a 
newspaper establishment shall prepare and maintain such registers, records and muster -rolls and in su ch 
manner as may be prescribed.  
17B. Inspectors .—(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint 
such persons as it thinks fit to be Inspectors for the purposes of this Act and may define the local limit s 
within which they shall exercise their functions.  
(2) Any Inspector appointed under sub -section ( 1) may for the purpose of ascertaining whether any of 
the p rovisions of this Act or of the Working Journalists (Fixation of Rates of Wages) Act, 1958 (29 of 
1958) have been complied with in respect of a newspaper establishment — 
(a) require an employer to furnish such informatio n as he may consider necessary;  
(b) at any reasonable time enter any newspaper establish
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS AND OTHER NEWSPAPER.pdf - page 12]
nformatio n as he may consider necessary;  
(b) at any reasonable time enter any newspaper establishment or any premises connected 
therewith and re quire any one found in charge thereof to produce before him for examination any 
accounts, books, registers and other documents relating to the employment of persons or the payment  
of wages in the establishment;  
(c) examine with respect to any matter relevant to any of the purposes aforesaid, the employer, his 
agent or servant or any other person found in charge of the newspaper establishment or any premises 
connected therewith or any person whom the Inspector has reasonable cause to believe to be or t o 
have been an  employee in the establishment;  
(d) make copies of or take extracts from any book, register or other documents maintained in 
relation to the newspaper establishment;  
(e) exercise such oth er powers as may be prescribed.  
(3) Every Inspector shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of the Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 1860).  
(4) Any person required to produce any document or thing or to give information by an Inspector 
under sub -section ( 2) shall be legally bound to do so.]  
18. Penalty .—1[(1) If any employer contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or any rule or order 
made thereunder, he shall be punishable with fine which ma y extend to two hundred rupees.  
(1A) Whoever, having been convicted of any offence un der this Act, is again convicted of an offence 
involving the contravention of the same provision, shall be punishable with fine which may  extend to five 
hundred rupees.  
(1B) Where an offence has been committed by a company, every person who, at the time th e offence 
was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of 
the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded ag ainst and punished acco rdingly:  
                                
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS AND OTHER NEWSPAPER.pdf - page 12]
ll be liable to be 
proceeded ag ainst and punished acco rdingly:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 65 of 1962, s. 6, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 15 -1-1993).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS AND OTHER NEWSPAPER.pdf - page 13]
13 
 Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this section if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(1C) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1B), where an offence under this section has 
been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or that  the commission of the offence is attributable to, any gross negligence on the part of 
any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or 
other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of such offence an d shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst 
and punished accordingly.  
(1D) For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ” in relation to a fir m means a part ner in the firm.]  
(2) No Court inferior to that of a Presidency Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first class shall try any 
offence  punishable under this section.  
(3) No Court shall take cognizance of an offence under this section, unless the complaint the reof is 
made within six months of the date on which the offence is alleged to have been committed.  
19. Indemnity .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Chairman or any 
other member of the Board 1[or the pers on con tributing the Tribunal] 2[or an Inspector appointed under 
this Act] for anything which is in good fai th done or intended to be done.  
3[19A. Defects in appointmen ts not to invalidate acts .—No act or proceeding of the Board shall be 
questioned on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or defect in  the constitution of the 
Board.  
19B. Saving .—Nothing in this Act or the Working Journalists (Fixation of Rates of Wag
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS AND OTHER NEWSPAPER.pdf - page 13]
the 
Board.  
19B. Saving .—Nothing in this Act or the Working Journalists (Fixation of Rates of Wages) Act, 
1958 (29 of 1958) shall apply to 4[any newspaper employee] who is an employee of the Government to 
whom the Fundamental and Supplementary Rules, Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) 
Rules, Civil Services (Temporary Service) Rules, Revised Leave Rules, Civil Service Regulations, 
Civilians in Defence Servic es (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules or the Indian Railway 
Establishment Code or any other rules or regulations that may be notified in this behalf by the Central 
Government i n the Official Gazette, apply.]  
20. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the purposes of th is Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) payment of gratuity to working journalists;  
(b) hours of work of working journalists;  
(c) holidays, earned leave, leave on medical certificate, casual leave or any other kind of leave 
admissible to working journalists;  
5[(d) the procedur e to be followed by the Boa rd 6[or, as the case may be, the Tribunal,] in the 
discharge of its functions under this Act;  
(e) the form of nominations, and the manner in  which nominations may be made;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 6 of 1979, s. 5 (w.e.f. 31 -1-1979).  
2. Ins. by Act 65 of 1962 , s. 7 (w.e.f. 15 -1-1963).  
3. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -1-1963).  
4. Subs. by Act 60 of 1974, s. 5.  
5. Subs. by Act 65 of 1962, s. 9, for clause s (d), (e) and ( f) (w.e.f. 15 -1-1963).  
6. Ins. by Act 6 of 1979, s. 6 (w.e.f. 31 -1-1979).  
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS AND OTHER NEWSPAPER.pdf - page 14]
14 
 (f) the manner in which any person may be appointed for the purposes of  sub-section ( 3) of 
section 5A;  
(g) the variation or cancellation of nominations;  
(h) the manner of giving notice under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 2) of section 12;  
(i) the registers, records and muster -rolls to be prepared and maintained by newspaper 
establishments, the forms in which they should be prepared and maintained and the particulars to be 
entered therein;  
(j) the powers that ma y be exercised by an Inspector;  
(k) any other matter which has  to be, or may be, prescribed.]  
1[(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which ma y be co mprised in one 
session 2[or in two or more successive sessions], and if before th e expiry of the session 3[immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid], both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agre e that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything pr eviousl y done under that rule.]  
21. [Repeal of Act 1 of 1955 ].—Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1960 (58 of 1960 ), s. 2 and 
the First Schedule .  
_____  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 65  of 1962, s. 9, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 15 -1-1963).  
2. Subs. by Act 60 of 1974, s. 6, for “or in two successive sessions”.  
3. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “in which it is so laid or the session immediately following” . 
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS AND OTHER NEWSPAPER.pdf - page 15]
15 
 1[THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 2( d)] 
1. For the purpose s of clause ( d) of section 2, — 
(1) two or more newspaper establishments under common control shall be deemed to be one 
newspaper establishment;  
(2) two or more newspaper establishments owned by an individual and his or her spouse shall be 
deemed to be one newspaper establishment unless it  is shown that such spouse is a sole proprietor or 
partner or a shareholder of a corporate body on the basis of h is or her own individual funds;  
(3) two or more newspaper establishments publishing newspapers bearing the same or similar 
title and in the same language in any place in India or bearing the same or similar title but in different 
languages in the same State or Union territory shall be deem ed to be one newspaper establishment.  
2. For the purposes of paragraph 1 ( 1), two or more establishments shall be deem ed to be under 
common control — 
(a) (i) where the newspaper establishments are owned by a co mmon individual or individuals;  
(ii) where the newspaper establishments are owned by firms, if such firms have a substan tial number 
of common partners;  
(iii) where the newspaper establishments are owned by bodies corporate, if one body corporate is a 
subsidiary of the other body corporate, or both are subsidiaries of a common holding company or a 
substantial number of their equity shares are owned by the same person or group of person s, whether 
incorporated or not;  
(iv) where one establishment is owned by a body corporate and the other is owned by a fir m, if a 
substantial number of partners of the firm together hold a substantial number of equit y shares of the body 
corporate;  
(v) where one is owned by a body corporate and the other is owned by a firm having bodies corporate 
as its partners if a substanti al number of equity shares of such bodies corporate are owned, directly or 
indirectly, by the same person or group of persons, whether incorporated or not, or  
(b) where there i
<|CHUNK|>
[THE WORKING JOURNALISTS AND OTHER NEWSPAPER.pdf - page 15]
irectly, by the same person or group of persons, whether incorporated or not, or  
(b) where there is functional integrality between concerned newspaper establishments.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 31 of 1989, s. 4.  
<|CHUNK|>
